TOLEDO, OREGON - MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
Toledo, Oregon 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 4, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 

PREFACE 
    The Toledo, Oregon Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1996, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
    Beginning with Supplement 4, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
    During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Renee L. Ballinger, city recorder, Michael G. Dowsett, city manager, and Jim Ruggeri, city attorney. 
    The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
    In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 4, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
    A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
    This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 1377, passed July 5, 2017. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
    This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
    The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
    A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
    Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
    Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
    There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
    At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
    The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
    When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
    As of Supplement No. 4, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
    To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
    If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
    The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
    Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
    When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 4, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). 
Electronic Submission. 
    In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
    If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 1335  6- 7-2010 Include 5 1336  6- 2-2010 Omit 5 1337  7- 7-2010 Omit 5 1338  1- 5-2011 Omit 5 1338A  3- 2-2011 Include 5 1339  3- 2-2011 Include 5 1340  6- 1-2011 Omit 5 1341  8- 3-2011 Omit 5 1342 11- 2-2011 Include 5 1343  2-15-2012 Omit 5 1344  4- 4-2012 Omit 5 1345 11- 7-2012 Include 5 1346 11- 7-2012 Omit 5 1347 11-21-2012 Include 5 1348  2- 6-2013 Omit 5 1349  7- 3-2013 Include 5 1350  7- 3-2013 Include 5 1351  9- 4-2013 Include 5 1352 12- 4-2013 Include 6 1353  2-19-2014 Include 6 1354  4- 2-2014 Include 6 1355  9-17-2014 Include 6 1356 10-29-2014 Include 6 1357 11-19-2014 Include 6 1358 11-19-2014 Include 6 1359 12-16-2015 Include 6 1360  2- 3-2016 Include 6 1361  4-20-2016 Omit 6 1362  7- 6-2016 Include 6 1363  7- 6-2016 Include 6 1364 11- 2-2016 Include 6 1365 Not used 6 1366 Not used 6 1367 Not used 6 1368 Not used 6 1369 Not used 6 1370 Not used 6 1371 Not used 6 1372 Not used 6 1373 Not used 6 1374  9- 7-2016 Omit 6 1375  4-19-2017 Omit 6 1376  5-17-2017 Omit 6 1377  7- 5-2017 Include 6  
CHARTER - CITY OF TOLEDO, OREGON 
CHAPTER I - NAME AND BOUNDARIES 
    Section 1 Title of Enactment. This enactment may be referred to as the Toledo Charter of 1993. 
    Section 2 Name of City. The municipality of Toledo, Lincoln County, Oregon, shall continue to be a municipal corporation with the name "City of Toledo." 
    Section 3 Boundaries. The City shall include all territory encompassed by its boundaries as they now exist or hereafter are modified pursuant to law. The custodian of City records shall keep an accurate, up-to-date description of the boundaries and make copies of this charter and the boundary descriptions available for public inspection. 
CHAPTER II - POWERS 
    Section 4 Powers of the City. Except that this charter provides otherwise, the City has all powers that the constitution, statutes, and common law of the United States and of this state expressly or impliedly grant or allow municipalities, as fully as though this charter specifically enumerated each of those powers. 
    Section 5 Construction of Powers. In this charter, no mention of a specific power is exclusive or restricts the authority that the City would have if the specific power were not mentioned. The charter shall be liberally construed, so that, within the limits imposed by the charter or the constitution or laws of the United States or the State of Oregon, the City has all powers necessary or convenient for conducting its affairs, including all powers that cities may now or hereafter assume under the home rule provisions of the constitution and laws of the State of Oregon. The powers are continuing powers. 
CHAPTER III - FORM OF GOVERNMENT 
    Section 6 Where Powers Vested. Except as this charter provides otherwise, all powers of the City are vested in the council. 
    Section 7 Council. The council shall be composed of a mayor and six councilors elected from the City at large. 
    Section 8 Councilors. The term of office of each councilor in office when this charter is adopted shall continue until the expiration of the term for which he or she was elected or appointed. At the first biennial general election after the adoption of this charter three councilors shall be elected for a term of four years, and such additional number shall be elected to fill unexpired terms as may be necessary to bring the number of elected councilors to six. Three councilors shall be elected biennially for a term of four years. 
    Section 9 Mayor. At each biennial general election a mayor shall be elected for a term of two years. 
    Section 10 Other Officers. The council shall appoint a city manager. Other additional officers of the City may be a city attorney, municipal judge, and other officers the council considers necessary, each of whom the council shall appoint any may remove by majority vote of all members of the council. The council may combine any two or more appointive offices, except the offices of city manager and municipal judge or city attorney and municipal judge. In such combination, the municipal judge shall not be subject in judicial functions to supervision by any other officer. The council shall supervise all officers appointed by the council, except as supervision may otherwise be authorized by a majority of all members of council. For positions supervised by the council, except the city manager, job duties and responsibilities of such positions shall be established by a resolution adopted by the council. 
    Section 11 Salaries. The maximum compensation for the services of each city officer and employee shall be the amount fixed by the council. 
    Section 12 Qualifications of Officers. 
(1)  To be eligible for an elective city office, a person at the time of election must be a qualified elector within the meaning of the state constitution and have resided in the City during the twelve months immediately preceding the election. For purposes of this subsection, City means all area included in the incorporated limits as of the date of the election. 
(2)  No elective officeholder of this City may be employed by the City in a position that is not substantially volunteer in nature. Any question about whether employment is substantially volunteer in nature shall be made by the municipal court. 
(3)  No person may be a nominee for the office of mayor and councilor at the same election. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2) of this section, the council is the final judge of the qualifications and election of its own members. 
CHAPTER IV - COUNCIL 
    Section 13 Meetings. The council shall hold a regular meeting at least twice a month in the City at a time and at a place that it designates. Other meetings of the council may be held, but only in accordance with procedures prescribed by the council. The council shall adopt rules for the government of its members and proceedings. 
    Section 14 Quorum. A majority of the incumbent members of the council shall constitute a quorum for its business, but a smaller number may meet and compel the attendance of absent members in a manner provided by ordinance. 
    Section 15 Record of Proceedings. A record of council proceedings shall be kept and authenticated in a manner prescribed by the council. 
    Section 16 Mayor's Functions at Council Meetings. The mayor shall preside over council deliberations and shall have a vote on all questions before the council. The mayor shall preserve order, enforce the rules of the council, and determine the order of business under the rules of the council. 
    Section 17 President of the Council. At its first meeting after this charter takes effect and thereafter at its first meeting of each odd-numbered year, the council shall elect a president from its membership. In the mayor's absence from a council meeting, the president shall preside. When the mayor is unable to perform the functions of the office, the president shall act as mayor. 
    Section 18 Vote Required. Except as this charter otherwise provides, the concurrence of a majority of members of the council voting when a quorum of the council is present shall decide any question before it. 
CHAPTER V - POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS 
    Section 19 Mayor. The mayor shall appoint the council committees provided by the rules of the council, shall sign all records of proceedings approved by the council, shall sign all ordinances passed by the council, and after the council approves a bond of a city officer or a bond for a license, contract or proposal, shall endorse the bond. 
    Section 20 City Manager. 
(1)  Qualifications. The city manager: 
(a)  Shall be the administrative head of the city government. 
(b)  Shall be chosen by a majority vote of all members of the council without regard to political considerations and solely with reference to executive and administrative qualifications. 
(c)  Need not be a resident of the City or of the state at the time of appointment. 
(2)  Before taking office, the manager shall give a bond in an amount and with such surety as in approved by the council. The premiums on the bond shall be paid by the City. 
(3)  Term. The manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term and may be removed only by a majority vote of all members of the council. If a vacancy occurs in the office of manager after the first appointment under this charter, the council, at its next meeting, shall adopt a resolution of its intention to appoint another manager. The council shall appoint a manager to fill the vacancy as soon as practical, but in no case shall the office of city manager be left vacant for more than twelve months. 
(4)  Powers and Duties. The manager shall: 
(a)  Attend all meetings of the council unless excused by the council or the mayor. 
(b)  Keep the council advised of the affairs and needs of the City. 
(c)  Make annual reports, or more frequently if requested by the council, about the affairs and departments of the City. 
(d)  Be responsible for the enforcement of all ordinances. 
(e)  See that all franchises, leases, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the City are observed. 
(f)  Appoint, discipline and remove personnel, except appointees of the mayor or council. 
(g)  Supervise and control the city manager's appointees in their service to the City. 
(h)  Organize and, as necessary, disband and reorganize the various city departments. 
(i)  Prepare the annual budget for transmittal to the council. 
(j)  Supervise all purchasing. 
(k)  Supervise the operation of all City-owned public utilities and City-owned property. 
(l)  Perform such other duties as the council directs. 
(5)  The city manager may not supervise or regulate: 
(a)  The council. 
(b)  The Municipal Judge in the Judge's judicial functions. 
(c)  Except as the council authorizes, appointive personnel of the City whom the city manager does not appoint. 
(6)  Seats at Council Meetings. The manager and other officers designated by the council are entitled to sit with the council but have no vote on questions before it. The manager may take part in all council discussions. 
(7)  Manager Pro Tem. If the office of city manager becomes vacant, the council shall appoint a manager pro tem as soon as practical. If the city manager is temporarily absent from the City or temporarily disabled from acting as manager, the council may appoint a manager pro tem. The appointment and removal of a manager pro tem shall be made by the majority of all members of the council. A manager pro tem shall possess the powers and duties of city manager, except that the manager pro tem may appoint or remove personnel only with the approval of the majority of all members of the council. 
(8)  Interference in Administration and Elections. A member of the council shall not directly or indirectly, by suggestion or otherwise, attempt to influence the manager in making an appointment or in removal of an officer or employee or in purchasing supplies; or attempt to exact a promise relative to an appointment from any candidate for manager; or discuss directly or indirectly with the manager for the matter of specific appointments to any city office or employment. A violation of this subsection forfeits the office of the offending member of the council, who may be removed by the council or a court of competent jurisdiction. The council may, however, in open session, discuss with or suggest to the manager anything pertinent to City affairs or the interests of the City. Further, a councilor may, at time, request and receive information to which a private citizen is entitled. 
    Section 21 Municipal Court. 
(1)  The municipal judge shall hold within the City a court known as the municipal court for the City of Toledo, Lincoln County, Oregon. The court shall be open for judicial business at times specified by the council. All area within the City and, as provided by law, territory outside the City, is within the territorial jurisdiction of the court. All proceedings of the municipal court are governed by the general laws of the state for justices of the peace and justice courts except as this charter or City ordinance prescribe to the contrary. The municipal court has original jurisdiction over all offenses defined and made punishable and over all actions to recover or enforce forfeiture or penalties defined or authorized by City ordinance. 
(2)  A municipal judge may: 
(a)  Render judgments and impose sanctions for enforcement of judgments on persons and property within its jurisdiction. 
(b)  Cause the arrest of a person accused of an offense against the City. 
(c)  Commit to jail pending trial a person accused of an offense against the City. 
(d)  Issue and compel obedience to subpoenas. 
(e)  Compel witnesses to appear and testify or jurors to serve in the trial of any cause before the municipal court. 
(f)  Punish witnesses and others for contempt of court. 
(g)  Issue any process necessary to carry into effect the judgment of the municipal court. 
(h)  Issue search warrants. 
(i)  Perform other judicial or quasi-judicial functions as the council prescribes by general ordinance. 
(3)  The council may authorize the municipal judge to appoint municipal judges pro tem for terms of office set by the judge or the council. 
(4)  Notwithstanding this section, the council may transfer some or all of the functions or the municipal court to an appropriate state court. 
CHAPTER VI - PERSONNEL 
    Section 22 Merit and Fitness and Employee Political Rights and Responsibilities. 
(1)  Subject to council approval, the city manager shall prescribe rules and procedures governing recruitment, selection, promotion, transfer, demotion, suspension, lay-off and dismissal of city employees on the basis of merit and fitness. Contrary provisions of contracts or collective bargaining agreements entered into by the City and applicable employees shall prevail over rules or procedures promulgated under authority of this section. 
(2)  The council, by ordinance, may affirm the rights of city employees to participate in political activities and may impose limits necessary to maintain orderly and effective operation of city government. 
CHAPTER VII - ELECTIONS 
    Section 23 Regulations of Elections Generally. Except as this charter provides otherwise and as the council provides otherwise by ordinance, the general laws of the state apply to city elections. 
    Section 24 Tie Votes. In the event of a tie vote for candidates for an elective office, the successful candidate shall be determined by a public drawing of lots in a manner prescribed by the council. 
    Section 25 Commencement of Terms of Office. The term of office of a person elected to a city office at a regular city election commences at the first council meeting of the year immediately following the election. 
    Section 26 Oath of Office. Before commencing the duties of office, each officer shall take an oath or shall affirm faithful performance of the duties of the office and support for the constitutions and laws of the United States and the State of Oregon. 
    Section 27 Nominations. A person possessing the qualifications required by this charter may be nominated for an elective city office. The council, by general ordinance, shall prescribe the method and form of nomination. 
CHAPTER VIII - VACANCIES IN OFFICE 
    S ection 28 Vacancies: Occurrence. The office of a member of the council becomes vacant: 
(1)  Upon the incumbent's: 
(a)  Death, 
(b)  Adjudicated incompetence, or 
(c)  Recall from the office, or 
(2)  Upon declaration by the council of the vacancy in case of the incumbent's: 
(a)  Failure, following election or appointment to the office, to qualify for the office within ten days after the time for his or her term of office to begin, 
(b)  Absence from the City for 30 days without the council's consent or from all meetings of the council within a 45-day period or from seventy-five percent (75%) of all meetings of the council within a six-month period, 
(c)  Ceasing to reside in the City, 
(d)  Ceasing to be a qualified elector under state law, 
(e)  Conviction of a public offense punishable by loss of liberty, or 
(f)  Resignation from the office. 
    Section 29 Vacancies: Filling. Vacant elective city offices shall be filled by appointment by a majority vote of the remaining members of the council. The appointee's term of office begins immediately on appointment and continues throughout the unexpired term of the predecessor. During the temporary disability of an officer or during an officer's temporary absence from the City for any cause, the office may be filled pro tem in the manner provided for filling vacancies in office. 
CHAPTER IX - ORDINANCES 
    Section 30 Adoption Clause. The adoption clause of all ordinances adopted under authority of this charter shall be, "The City of Toledo ordains as follows:". 
    Section 31 Mode of Adoption. 
(1)  Except as subsections (2) and (3) provide to the contrary, an ordinance shall, before adoption, be read fully and distinctly in open council meeting on two different days. 
(2)  Except as subsection (3) allows both readings by title only, an ordinance may be adopted at a single council meeting by unanimous vote of all councilors present after being read first in full and then by title. 
(3)  Any of the readings may be by title only if: 
(a)  No councilor present at the meeting requests that the ordinance be read in full, and 
(b)  A copy of the ordinance is provided for each councilor, three copies are provided for public inspection in the office of the custodian of City records not later than one week before the first reading of the ordinance, and notice of the availability of copies is given by written posting at the city hall and two other public places in the City or by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. 
(4)  An ordinance: 
(a)  Adopted after being read by title alone, under the provisions of subsection (3)(b), shall have no legal effect if it differs substantially from its terms as filed prior to the reading, unless each section incorporating such a difference is read fully and distinctly in open council meeting as finally amended prior to being approved by the council. 
(b)  May be amended at the time of adoption if the ordinance as amended deals with the same general subject. 
(5)  On the final vote on an ordinance, the ayes and nays of the members of the council shall be taken and entered in the record of proceedings. 
(6)  On the adoption of an ordinance, the custodian of City records shall endorse it with the date of adoption and the attestor's name and title of office. Upon passage, the mayor shall sign and date the ordinance over the title of "mayor." 
    Section 32 When Ordinances Take Effect. An ordinance takes effect on the thirtieth day after its adoption. However, when the council considers it advisable, an ordinance may provide a later effective date or, in an emergency, an ordinance may take effect immediately on adoption. 
CHAPTER X - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 
    Section 33 Improvements. The procedure for making, altering, vacating or abandoning a public improvement shall be governed by general ordinance or, to the extent not so governed, by applicable state laws. Action on a proposed public improvement, except a sidewalk or an improvement unanimously declared by the council to be needed at once because of an emergency, shall be suspended for six months on a remonstrance by the owners of two-thirds of the land to be specially assessed for the improvement. In this section "owner" means the record holder of legal title or, if land is being purchased under a land sale contract recorded or verified in writing by the record holder of legal title to the land, the purchaser. 
    Section 34 Special Assessment. The procedure for levying, collecting and enforcing payment of special assessments for public improvements or other services to be charged against real property shall be governed by ordinance. 
CHAPTER XI - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
    Section 35 Debt Limits. The City's indebtedness may not exceed the limits imposed on a city by state law. All city officials and employees who create or officially approve indebtedness in excess of this limitation shall be jointly and severally liable for the excess. 
    Section 36 Existing Ordinances Continues. All ordinances of the City consistent with this charter and in force when it takes effect remain in effect until amended or repealed. 
    Section 37 Repeal of Previously Enacted Provisions. All charter provisions of the City enacted prior to the time this charter takes effect are repealed. 
    Section 38 Severability. If any provision of this charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the charter shall not be affected. If the application of the charter or any of its provisions to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the application of the charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
    Section 39 Time of Effect of Charter. This charter is in effect November 15, 1993. 
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 

1.01.010 - Adoption. 
    The "Toledo Municipal Code" is adopted, as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. 
(Ord. 1253 § 1, 1996) 
1.01.020 - Title-Citation-Reference. 
    This code shall be known as the "Toledo Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the "Toledo Municipal Code" in any prosecution for any provision or violation thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Toledo Municipal Code." References may be made to titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "Toledo Municipal Code" and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code. 
(Ord. 1253 § 2, 1996) 
1.01.030 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
    Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Toledo Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Toledo, Oregon, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 1253 § 3, 1996) 
1.01.040 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
    Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
(Ord. 1253 § 4, 1996) 
1.01.050 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
    The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 1253 § 5, 1996) 
1.01.060 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
    The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance No. 1247, passed March 4, 1996. 
    The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 1247, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinance Nos. 1248, 1249, 1250, 1251, and 1252. 
    The "Toledo Municipal Code" shall also include the ordinance codified in this chapter, as adopted. 
(Ord. 1253 § 6, 1996) 
1.01.070 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
    The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. 
(Ord. 1253 § 7, 1996) 
1.01.080 - Constitutionality. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Ord. 1253 § 8, 1996) 
Chapter 1.08 - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED 
Sections: 

1.08.010 - Documents adopted. 
    The city of Toledo adopts the following documents as part of its land use plan and to complete requirements of periodic review: 
A.  The 2020 Vision for Toledo (The 2000 Toledo Comprehensive Land Use Plan) dated April 4, 2001, as amended November 7, 2012, by Ordinance 1345; amended December 4, 2013, by Ordinance 1352; and amended November 2, 2016, by Ordinance 1364, 
B.  The 2000 Toledo Comprehensive Land Use Plan and Zoning Map including the revised Urban Growth Boundary dated April 4, 2001, 
C.  The 2000 Toledo Comprehensive Land Use Plan Inventory dated April 4, 2001, including updated narrative information, maps, and referenced documents developed to fulfill the requirements of the 1995 order for periodic review, and as amended November 7, 2012, by Ordinance 1345, 
D.  The 1999 Toledo Buildable Lands Inventory dated April 4, 2001, 
E.  The 2000 Toledo Capital Facilities Plan dated April 4, 2001, and 
F.  The Toledo Transportation System Plan, dated December, 2013. 
(Ord. 1285 § 1, 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1345, §§ 20, 21, 11-7-2012; Ord. No. 1352, §§ 1, 2, 12-4-2013; Ord. No. 1364, § 1, 11-2-2016) 
1.08.030 - Information added to inventory. 
    New factual information may be added to the inventory at any time it becomes available without further action by the city council. 
(Ord. 1146 § 2, 1982) 
1.08.040 - Implementation of policies. 
    The policies in the plan text will be adhered to and will be implemented by relevant city ordinances or by specific procedures and standards outlined in the plan. 
(Ord. 1146 § 3, 1982) 
Chapter 1.12 - ELECTIONS 
Sections: 

1.12.010 - Methods of nomination. 
    Candidates for nominations to elective office may be nominated by either petition or declaration of candidacy. 
(Ord. 1161 § 1, 1984) 
1.12.020 - Petition method. 
    Any person qualified to hold an elective office in the city of Toledo may file with the city recorder a petition of nomination on forms prepared by the city recorder. The petition shall contain the signatures of at least twenty (20) qualified electors of the city. A separate petition must be filed for each candidate. 
(Ord. 1161 § 2, 1984) 
1.12.030 - Declaration of candidacy method. 
    As an alternative method of nomination, any person qualified to hold an elective office in the city of Toledo may file with the city recorder a declaration of candidacy on forms prepared by the city recorder. The person filing the declaration shall, at the time of filing, pay to the city recorder a fee set by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. 1161 § 3, 1984) 
1.12.040 - Time for filing. 
    All petitions and declarations must be filed with the city recorder not sooner than the fifteenth day after the date of the primary election and not later than the seventieth day before the date of the general election. 
(Ord. 1161 § 4, 1984) 
1.12.050 - Notice of nominations. 
    Not less than ninety (90) days before each general election, the City Recorder shall post in a public place a list of officers to be elected at the next general election. This notice shall remain posted until the nominations are closed. 
(Ord. 1161 § 5, 1984) 
Chapter 1.16 - RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTIONS 
Sections: 

1.16.010 - Application. 
    The procedures provided in this chapter shall apply to inspections made by officers and employees of the city of Toledo relative to fire, sanitation and structural safety of property and premises, existence of nuisances and the improper use of premises under ordinances for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public. The provisions of this chapter shall not include inspections involving permits or licenses where the inspection is a condition for obtaining or keeping such permit or license. 
(Ord. 852 § 1, 1968) 
1.16.020 - Amendment of ordinances. 
    This chapter, where applicable, shall be deemed to be an amendment of, and an addition to, all ordinances of the city of Toledo, regulating the construction, reconstruction, repair, maintenance and use of structures, buildings, property and premises including, but not limited to, ordinances relating to building, fire protection, electrical, sanitation and plumbing codes, dangerous buildings, nuisances and zoning. 
(Ord. 852 § 2, 1968) 
1.16.030 - Inspections. 
    In shall be the duty of the official or employee of the city charged with the enforcement of an ordinance or such other official or employee as may be designated by the city manager or city council to make routine and periodic inspections of properties and premises within the corporate limits of Toledo to determine whether there is compliance with the laws, rules and regulations which are designed for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public; and it shall also be the duty of such persons to make such inspections upon the receipt of complaints or specific or general information indicating the existence of hazardous conditions or noncompliance with such rules, regulations and laws. In the event that any authorized officer or employee of the city of Toledo shall be denied access to any property or premises for the purpose of making an inspection provided for in this chapter then, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, such officer or employee shall not inspect such premises unless and until he shall have obtained from the municipal judge of the city of Toledo a search warrant for the inspection of such premises. 
(Ord. 852 § 3, 1968) 
1.16.040 - Search warrants. 
    No search warrant shall be issued under the terms of this chapter for the inspection of any property or premises within the corporate limits of the city of Toledo unless and until there shall have been filed with the municipal court of the city of Toledo an affidavit showing probable cause for such inspection by stating the purpose and extent of the proposed inspection, whether it is a routine or periodic inspection or an inspection instituted by complaint or other specific or general information concerning the property or premises or the area in which it is situated. The search warrant issued by the court shall specify the purpose and extent of the inspection which is proposed to be made and the specific property or premises covered by such warrant. 
(Ord. 852 § 4, 1968) 
1.16.050 - Violation-Penalty. 
    It is unlawful for any person to hinder, delay or otherwise obstruct the inspection of property or premises when such inspection is authorized by a warrant or emergency as provided in the terms of this chapter. Violation of this chapter is a Class B infraction. 
(Ord. 1244 § 9, 1996: Ord. 852 § 6, 1968) 
Chapter 1.20 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 

1.20.010 - Applicability. 
    This chapter may be referred to as the civil infraction ordinance of the city of Toledo, Oregon. The procedures set forth in this chapter shall be applicable to all civil infractions so designated by existing ordinances of the city and all future ordinances designating a violation as a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 1243 § 1, 1996) 
1.20.020 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide a convenient and practical forum for a civil hearing and determination of cases arising out of violations of city ordinances denominated as civil infractions. 
(Ord. 1243 § 2, 1996) 
1.20.030 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise: 
    "Civil infraction" means a violation of a city ordinance designated as civil infraction. 
    "Forfeiture" means the penalty imposed for a civil infraction if a violation is found to have been committed. 
    "Person" means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association of persons. 
(Ord. 1243 § 3, 1996) 
1.20.040 - Enforcement authority/ issuance of citations. 
A.  The city attorney, city recorder, code enforcement officer, community development coordinator, public works director, library director, police chief and sergeant(s), fire chief and parks and recreation director are authorized to enforce violations of city ordinances designated as infractions. 
B.  The city attorney, city recorder, code enforcement officer, community development coordinator, public works director, library director, police chief and sergeant(s), fire chief and parks and recreation director, in enforcing ordinances designated as infractions pursuant to this chapter, may issue citations to any violator. If the person to be issued a citation is a firm, corporation or any other organization, issuance of a citation to any employee, agent or representative thereof shall be sufficient to confer jurisdiction upon the municipal court. 
(Ord. 1243 § 4, 1996) 
1.20.050 - Arrest or detention prohibited. 
    No person may be arrested or detained for violation of a city ordinance denominated as a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 1243 § 5, 1996) 
1.20.060 - Citation and complaint. 
A.  The citation and complaint issued for civil infractions should be in a form as approved by the city attorney and should contain: 
1.  The name of the city municipal court, the name of the city or city department in whose name the action is brought and the name of the defendant; 
2.  A statement or designation of the offense in such manner as can be understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so and the date, time and place of which the offense is alleged to have occurred; 
3.  The signature of the complainant and a statement that the complainant has reasonable grounds to believe that the person cited committed the offense contrary to law. 
B.  The citation and complaint shall be signed by the city attorney, city recorder, code enforcement officer, community development coordinator, public works director, library director, police chief or sergeant(s), fire chief or parks and recreation director. 
C.  Nothing prohibits the municipal court from amending the citation in its discretion, at any time. 
(Ord. 1243 § 6, 1996) 
1.20.070 - Forfeiture amounts. 
    Civil infractions designated by ordinances of the city are classified and the maximum forfeitures for commission of a civil infraction are as follows: 
A.  Class A infraction, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); 
B.  Class B infraction, five hundred dollars ($500.00); 
C.  Class C infraction, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); 
D.  Class D infraction, one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. 1243 § 7, 1996) 
1.20.080 - Response by defendant. 
A.  When a defendant is served with a civil infraction citation the defendant shall either appear in court at the time indicated in the summons or, prior to such time, deliver to the court the summons, together with a check or money order in the amount of the forfeiture set forth in the summons, and enclose therewith: 
1.  A request for hearing; 
2.  A statement of matters in explanation or mitigation of the events resulting in the charge of a violation; or 
3.  The executed appearance, waiver of hearing and admission appearing on the summons. A statement in explanation or mitigation may also be enclosed with the admission of a civil infraction. 
B.  In any case in which the defendant personally appears in court at the time indicated in the summons, if the defendant desires to admit the civil infraction and the judge decides to accept the plea, the judge shall hear any statement in explanation or mitigation that the defendant desires to make. 
C.  If the defendant has submitted to the court any written statement in explanation or mitigation, the statement constitutes a waiver of hearing and consent to judgment. The court may declare a forfeiture on the basis of the statement and any testimony or written statement of an authorized city enforcement officer or any other person which may be presented to the court. 
(Ord. 1243 § 8, 1996) 
1.20.090 - Discretionary powers of court. 
    The court, on its own motion, may direct that a hearing be held for any civil infraction and may enter the appropriate judgment, declare a forfeiture, and remit to the defendant any amount by which the forfeiture assessed is less than the amount posted by the defendant pursuant to Section 1.20.080. 
(Ord. 1243 § 9, 1996) 
1.20.100 - Hearings. 
A.  Hearing Notice. If the defendant requests a hearing under Section 1.20.080, or the court directs that a hearing be held, the court shall fix a date and time for the hearing and, unless notice is waived, shall, at least five days in advance of the hearing, mail to the defendant a notice of the date and time so fixed. 
B.  Requirements and Procedures. 
1.  Trial of a civil infraction shall be by the court without a jury. 
2.  Trial of a civil infraction shall not commence until the expiration of not less than seven days from the date of the citation or the infraction unless the defendant waives the seven-day period. 
3.  The city shall have the burden of proving the alleged civil infraction by a preponderance of the evidence. 
4.  The pretrial discovery rules of ORS Chapter 135 shall apply to civil infractions prescribed pursuant to this chapter. 
5.  The defendant may not be required to be a witness at a hearing of any infraction pursuant to this chapter. 
6.  Proof of culpable mental state is not an element of a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 1243 § 10, 1996) 
1.20.110 - City attorney involvement. 
A.  The city attorney shall have the authority to prosecute any violation of a city ordinance denominated as a civil infraction. 
B.  At any hearing involving a city infraction, the city attorney may aid in preparing evidence and obtaining witnesses but shall not appear unless counsel of the defendant appears. 
(Ord. 1243 § 11, 1996) 
1.20.120 - Exclusive procedure for imposing forfeiture. 
    The procedure prescribed by this chapter shall be the exclusive procedure for imposing forfeiture; however, this chapter shall not prohibit any other alternative remedies set forth in this code or the laws to the state, including but not limited to the abatement of nuisances. 
(Ord. 1243 § 12, 1996) 
1.20.130 - Additional remedies. 
    In addition to any other remedy provided in this chapter, the city attorney, city recorder, code enforcement officer, community development coordinator, public works director, library director, police chief and sergeant(s), fire chief or parks and recreation director may deny or revoke any city license or permit held or applied for by a person owing a forfeiture to the city assessed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 1243 § 13, 1996) 
1.20.140 - Delinquent forfeitures/lien. 
    In any case where a forfeiture assessed by the court is not paid, or where there is a default judgment, the city recorder shall enter it into the lien docket of the city and may enter it into the lien docket of Lincoln County, Oregon. The amount of the forfeiture against any real or personal property of the defendant within the city, and the forfeiture, after being filed as a lien, shall be collected in the same manner as other liens owing to the city or in any other manner allowed by law for the collection of a debt. 
(Ord. 1243 § 14, 1996) 
1.20.150 - Continuing violations. 
    When a civil infraction is of a continuing nature, a separate infraction will be deemed to occur on each calendar day that the civil infraction continues, and a separate citation may be issued for each such civil infraction. 
(Ord. 1243 § 15, 1996) 
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters: 
Chapter 2.04 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sections: 

2.04.010 - Created. 
A.  The Toledo planning commission is created by this chapter. The commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor of Toledo and of which not more than two members shall be nonresidents of the city of Toledo. The commission shall have the powers and duties set forth in this chapter, other ordinances, orders and the Charter of the city of Toledo, and the laws and the constitution of the state of Oregon. 
B.  The term of office for each of the members shall be four years or until their successors are appointed and qualified, and the terms shall be staggered so that the terms of not more than two commission members will expire in the same year. Any vacancy on the commission shall be filled by the council for the unexpired portion of the term after public announcement of the vacancy and solicitation of candidates in the community. 
C.  Members of the commission shall qualify by taking and subscribing an oath of office to uphold the Constitutions of the United States and of the state of Oregon, and to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of the office to the best of his or her ability. 
(Ord. 1109 § 1, 1980) 
2.04.020 - Organization. 
A.  The commission shall elect a president and vice-president each year at its regular July meeting, each of whom shall serve for one year or until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. 
B.  The city of Toledo shall provide at all meetings a secretary satisfactory to the commission. The secretary shall keep an accurate record of all proceedings of the commission and shall perform such duties as are imposed upon him or her by law, by this chapter, or by any other ordinance of the city of Toledo, or by the commission. 
(Ord. 1109 § 2, 1980) 
2.04.030 - Meetings. 
A.  Four members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. The commission shall meet at least once a month and the regular meeting place shall be the Toledo city hall. 
B.  The commission may make and amend its own governmental and procedural rules and regulations consistent with the laws and the Constitution of the state of Oregon and with the ordinances and Charter of the city of Toledo. 
(Ord. 1109 § 3, 1980) 
2.04.040 - Annual report to council. 
    The commission shall make and file with the council in July of each year a report, covering the preceding year, of the transactions of the commission and of the involvement of the citizens of Toledo in the work of the commission. The report shall also include actions and programs that the commission recommends to promote and increase that citizen involvement. 
(Ord. 1109 § 4, 1980) 
2.04.050 - General powers and duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the commission when requested and it shall have the power except as otherwise provided by law, to recommend and make suggestions to the council and to all other public authorities concerning the following matters within the city limits and within the urban growth boundary of the city of Toledo: 
A.  The laying out, vacation, widening, extending, parking on and location of streets, boulevards, sidewalks, and pedestrian, bicycle and other paths; 
B.  The relief of traffic congestion; 
C.  The betterment of housing and sanitation conditions; 
D.  The establishment of zones or districts limiting the use of premises, and the use, height, area and bulk of buildings and structures; 
E.  The establishment and alteration from time to time of building setback lines on private property adjacent to any alley, street or other public way; 
F.  Planning for the regulation of the future growth, development and edification of the municipality in respect to its public and private buildings and works, streets, parks, grounds, vacant lots and plans consistent with the future growth and development of the city in order to secure to the city and its inhabitants sanitation, proper services of all public utilities, harbor, shipping, and transportation facilities; 
G.  Advertisement of industrial advantages and opportunities of the municipality and the availability of real estate within the municipality for industrial settlement; 
H.  Encouraging industrial settlement within the municipality; 
I.  Making of economic surveys of the present and potential possibilities of the municipality with a view to ascertaining its industrial needs; 
J.  Studying the needs of existing local industries with a view to strengthening and developing those industries and stabilizing employment conditions; 
K.  Studying, conducting public hearings, and making recommendations on proposed land use actions within the urban growth boundary; and 
L.  Exercising any and all powers, functions and authority delegated to or conferred upon the commission by the laws of Oregon, the Charter of the city of Toledo, this chapter, or any other ordinance of this city; and in general to study and propose such measures as may be advisable for the promotion of the public interest, health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience, and welfare of the city. 
(Ord. 1109 § 5, 1980) 
2.04.060 - Specific duties. 
A.  In accordance with the terms of the zoning and land division ordinances of the city of Toledo and subject to the provisions for appeal in those ordinances, the commission's decisions on the following land use questions shall be final: 
1.  Request for exception to the requirements of the zoning ordinance; 
2.  Request for conditional use under the zoning ordinance; 
3.  Creation of a street or way under the land division ordinance; 
4.  A land division (major partition, subdivision, and planned development); and 
5.  Any other specific task assigned by the council for final decision. 
B.  The following matters shall be referred by the council to the commission for consideration and recommendation: 
1.  Amendment to the text or change in the map of the Toledo comprehensive land use plan; 
2.  Amendment to the text or change in the zoning map of the zoning ordinance; 
3.  Vacation of land; 
4.  Annexation of land to the city; and 
5.  Any other questions requiring commission consideration by law. 
(Ord. 1164, 1984: Ord. 1109 § 6, 1980) 
Chapter 2.08 - PUBLIC UTILITY COMMISSION 
Sections: 

2.08.010 - Created. 
A.  The Toledo public utility commission is created. The commission shall consist of the mayor, the city attorney and the city manager as ex officio members, and of five other members to be appointed by the mayor. All of the appointed members of the commission shall be residents of the city of Toledo. The mayor, the city attorney and the city manager shall have no vote on the commission. The commission shall have the powers and duties hereinafter set forth and such further and additional powers and duties as may be conferred upon the commission by the Constitution and laws of the state of Oregon and the Charter and ordinances of the city of Toledo. 
B.  The term of office of the appointed members shall be five years or until their successors are appointed and qualify, and their terms shall be staggered so that the term of office of not more than two will expire in the same year. Any vacancy in the commission shall be filled by appointment made by the mayor for the unexpired portion of the vacated term. 
C.  Members of the commission shall qualify by taking and subscribing an oath of office to uphold the Constitutions of the United States and of the state of Oregon, the Charter and ordinances of the city of Toledo and to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of the office to the best of their ability. The members of the commission shall receive no compensation. 
(Ord. 1198 § 1, 1990) 
2.08.020 - Organization. 
A.  The commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson from the members appointed by the mayor and each shall hold office at the pleasure of the commission. 
B.  The commission shall select a secretary, who need not be a member of the commission, to keep an accurate record of all proceedings of the commission and shall perform such duties as are imposed by law, this chapter, any other ordinance of the city of Toledo, or by the commission. Expenses of the commission may be paid as authorized by the city council. 
C.  Five members of the commission shall constitute a quorum; provided, however, at least three members appointed by the mayor shall at all times constitute a part of such quorum. 
D.  The commission shall meet as necessary and shall coordinate their duties from city hall. 
E.  The commission may make and amend its own governmental and procedural rules and regulations consistent with the laws and the Constitution of the state of Oregon and the ordinances and Charter of the city of Toledo. 
(Ord. 1198 § 2, 1990) 
2.08.030 - Annual report to council. 
    The commission shall, at the first September city council meeting of each year, file with the council a report of all proceedings of the commission for the preceding year. 
(Ord. 1198 § 3, 1990) 
2.08.040 - General powers and duties. 
    It is the duty of the commission, and it is charged with the following matters and to recommend to the council: 
A.  The feasibility of the city of Toledo granting franchises for the operation of public utilities within the city limits of Toledo; 
B.  Any change in the terms and provisions of existing franchises and any changes upon application for renewal by the franchise holder; 
C.  To investigate and process any complaints of city of Toledo residents regarding franchise holder's service; 
D.  To conduct hearings and perform all functions necessary to accomplish the duties of the commission. 
(Ord. 1198 § 4, 1990) 
Chapter 2.16 - CITY TREE BOARD 
Sections: 

2.16.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants within public rights-of-way and other public properties in the city of Toledo. 
(Ord. 1208 § 1, 1992) 
2.16.020 - Creation and establishment. 
    There shall be created a city tree board composed of the seven planning commission members and shall be known as the tree board. 
(Ord. 1208 § 2, 1992) 
(Ord. No. 1333, § 2, 2-3-2010; Ord. No. 1359, § 1, 12-16-2015) 
2.16.030 - Duties and responsibilities. 
A.  It shall be the responsibility of the board through study and investigation, to develop and/or update annually and administer a written plan, adopted by the city council: 
1.  For the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas; 
2.  For commercial forestry operations within the city, which shall be used in conjunction with the Forest Practices Act; and 
3.  For the removal and planting of trees on vacant lots as they are developed. 
B.  The plan shall be presented to the city council for adoption by resolution and upon adoption shall be the city's tree plan. The tree board shall prepare and present an annual report to the city council based on the city tree plan. 
C.  The board, when requested by the city council, shall investigate, consider, prepare findings and recommend and report upon any special matter or question. 
(Ord. 1208 § 3, 1992) 
2.16.040 - Definitions. 
    City Forester. The community development coordinator or other qualified person which the city manager shall designate, will serve as the city forester, assigned to carry out the enforcement of the community forest management strategies. 
    "Commercial forest" means any stand of trees with a density of at least two hundred (200) trees per acre. 
    "Landscaping" means any ornamental alteration or plantings. 
    "Park plants" means trees, shrubs and all other woody vegetation in public parks and all areas within the city limits owned by the city. 
    "Person(s)" means any individual, corporation, city department or business involved in, or affected by, the implementation of this chapter. 
    "Street plants" means trees, shrubs and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all public streets, avenues or ways within the city. 
    "Street/park tree" means any species of tree identified in the tree plan list of trees. 
(Ord. 1208 § 4, 1992) 
2.16.050 - Planting. 
A.  Tree Species to be Planted. The tree board shall develop and maintain a list of desirable trees for planting along streets in three size classes based on mature height: small (under twenty (20) feet), medium (twenty (20) to forty (40) feet) and large (over forty (40) feet). Trees not suitable for planting will also be listed by the tree board. Only those trees listed may be planted. 
B.  Spacing. The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in this section, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, fifteen (15) feet; medium trees, twenty (20) feet; and large trees, thirty (30) feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by the city forester. 
C.  Distance from Sidewalk. The distance street trees may be planted from sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in this section, and no trees may be planted closer to any sidewalk than the following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large trees, four feet. Streets without curbs and sidewalks must be reviewed by the city planner to determine the right-of-way width and possible future siting of sidewalks and curbs. 
D.  Distance from Street Corners and Fire Hydrants. No street plant which reaches more than a maximum height of thirty (30) inches shall be planted within thirty (30) feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street plant shall be planted within ten (10) feet of any fire hydrant, unless approved by the city forester. 
E.  Distance from Utilities. No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in subsection A of this section may be planted under or within ten (10) feet of any overhead utility wire. 
(Ord. 1208 § 5, 1992) 
2.16.060 - Public tree care. 
A.  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove street plants within the rights-of-way of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty, as set out in the tree plan, of such public grounds. 
B.  The city forester may order the removal of any street plants or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. 
(Ord. 1208 § 6, 1992) 
2.16.070 - Landowner responsibilities. 
A.  Permits Required. No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, prune, remove, cut above the ground or disturb any street/park tree on any street, park or other public place without obtaining a permit from the city forester. The person receiving the permit shall abide by the standards set forth in the city tree plan and this chapter. 
B.  Time Limit on Permit. Application for permits must be made at the planning department not less than twenty-four (24) hours in advance of when the work will be done. The city forester will issue the permit provided that the proposed work meets the standards set forth in city tree plan. All permits granted shall contain an expiration date by which work must be completed. Any permit shall be void if its terms are violated. 
(Ord. 1208 § 7, 1992) 
2.16.080 - Tree maintenance. 
A.  Tree Topping. No person will top any street/park tree on public property without review and approval of the city forester. "Topping" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the city forester. 
B.  Pruning, Corner Clearance, Visibility. Every property owner abutting a tree overhanging a street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that the branches shall not obstruct the light from any streetlamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of thirteen and one-half (131/2) feet above street surface or eight feet above the sidewalk surface. The city shall have the right to order the pruning of any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light, or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign or sight triangle at intersections. 
C.  Removal of Stumps. All stumps of street/park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
D.  Dead or Diseased Tree Removal. Persons responsible shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, broken or decayed limbs which constitute a hazard to public safety. 
    If any of the conditions as stated above in this section exist, the city forester may order the necessary work performed. The city forester will notify the person in writing by certified and first-class mail of the condition that needs to be remedied. The person shall, at their own expense, within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the notice, complete the work specified. If the person fails to comply with the notice, the city forester shall have the authority to cause the condition to be remedied. The city forester shall determine the total cost of the work performed, including an administrative cost of twenty (20) percent if the city performs the work, and assess that cost against the property. 
(Ord. 1208 § 8, 1992) 
2.16.090 - Utility franchise responsibilities. 
    Tree limbs that grow near high voltage electrical conductors shall be maintained clear of such conductors by the electric utility franchise in compliance with any applicable franchise agreements. A utility tree trimming policy must be reviewed by the utility franchisee end tree board and subsequently approved by the tree board prior to any trimming or removal of trees by the utility franchisee. 
(Ord. 1208 § 9, 1992) 
2.16.100 - Landscaping. 
A.  Subdivisions. In new subdivisions, the city forester will review landscaping plans and make recommendations to the planning commission who then may require landscaping within the subdivision. 
B.  Commercial and Multifamily. The city forester will review landscaping plans for all commercial and multifamily development. The city forester may require landscaping consistent with the standards as set forth in the tree plan within the development. 
(Ord. 1208 § 10, 1992) 
2.16.110 - Licensing. 
    It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of planting, cutting, trimming, pruning, removing, spraying, fertilizing or otherwise treating street/park plants within the city without first obtaining a city business license; however, no license shall be required of any public service company including electric utilities and their agents and contractors or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for bodily injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) property damage indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described. 
(Ord. 1208 § 11, 1992) 
2.16.120 - Interference with city tree board. 
    It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the tree board or city forester implementing this chapter. 
(Ord. 1208 § 12, 1992) 
2.16.130 - Review by city council. 
    A person may appeal any ruling or order of the city forester to the tree board, and any decision of the tree board to the city council. An appeal shall be made within fifteen (15) calendar days after the final decision of the city forester or tree board by filing written notice on a form provided by the city recorder. If an appeal is filed, the tree board/council shall receive a report from the appropriate city official and consider the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days of its filing. If no appeal is taken within the fifteen (15) calendar day period, the action of the city forester or the tree board is final. 
(Ord. 1208 § 13, 1992) 
2.16.140 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of this chapter shall be a Class A infraction. Each day or each tree is a separate violation. 
(Ord. 1244 § 20, 1996: Ord. 1208 § 14, 1992) 
Chapter 2.20 - MUNICIPAL COURT 
Sections: 

2.20.010 - Right to jury trial. 
    Every person charged with an offense which carries a possibility of the imposition of a jail sentence, as defined and made punishable by the Charter or any ordinance of this city, shall have the right to trial by jury in the municipal court. The jury shall consist of six persons selected as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1132 § 1, 1981: Ord. 719 § 1, 1959) 
2.20.020 - Jury list. 
    Immediately upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and on the first Monday in January of each year, commencing in the year 1960, a jury list shall be made from the persons in the city of Toledo competent under the laws of Oregon to serve as jurors in a circuit court, who shall serve as jurors in the municipal court until a new list is selected. The jury list shall be made and selected by lot in the same manner in which juries are selected for the circuit court, and such list shall contain the names of fifty (50) of such qualified persons. If for any reason the making of a jury list is omitted and neglected on the first Monday of any January, it may be done on the first Monday of any month following, to serve until the close of the year, and until another list is made. 
(Ord. 719 § 2, 1959) 
2.20.030 - Preparing jury list. 
    The municipal judge is authorized to select and make the jury list. If the municipal judge so desires, he may call to his aid two freeholders of the city qualified to serve as jurors therein, and such freeholders, together with the judge, may make such list. In preparing the jury list, names drawn of persons known or believed to be disqualified as jurors, or who are exempt from jury duty under the provisions of the laws of Oregon, or who are believed to be unavailable, shall be discarded. 
(Ord. 719 § 3, 1959) 
2.20.040 - Jury list information and box. 
    The jury list shall contain the first and surname, the place of residence and occupation of each person named therein and shall be certified by the municipal judge at the time the list is prepared. The municipal judge or, under his direction, his clerk, shall keep a secured jury box. After the jury list has been made, the municipal judge shall prepare and deposit in such box separate ballots or slips containing the name, place of residence and occupation of each person on the jury list. 
(Ord. 719 § 4, 1959) 
2.20.050 - Demand for jury trial. 
    No jury trial shall be granted any defendant unless the defendant or his attorney, not less than six days (excluding Sundays and holidays) before the time fixed for the trial, shall give notice in writing to the municipal judge of the desire for a jury trial. When a jury trial is demanded in municipal court, the jury shall be drawn and selected from the jury list. 
(Ord. 957 § 1, 1974: Ord. 719 § 5, 1959) 
2.20.060 - Selection of jury. 
    When a jury is selected, the municipal judge or, under his direction, his clerk shall draw from the jury box, in the presence of the defendant or his attorney and in the presence of the city attorney, twelve (12) ballots, or any greater number, if necessary, until the names of twelve (12) persons who are deemed able to attend at the time and place required are obtained. On motion of the defendant or his attorney, or on motion of the city attorney, or the court on its own motion, may direct that six additional names be drawn from the box from which alternates may be selected. 
(Ord. 719 § 6, 1959) 
2.20.070 - Excuse of prospective jurors. 
    When it appears to the municipal judge that the person whose name is drawn is dead or resides out of the city, the ballot shall be destroyed. If it appears to the municipal judge or he has good reason to believe that a person whose name is drawn is temporarily absent from the city, or is ill, or is so engaged as to be unable to attend at the time of the trial without great inconvenience, the ballot shall be laid aside, the name not placed on the jury list for the trial for which the jury is being selected, but such ballot shall be returned to the jury box after the drawing is completed. 
(Ord. 719 § 7, 1959) 
2.20.080 - Challenges. 
    When the drawing is completed, from the twelve (12) names drawn, the defendant and the city will select the jury by each striking from the list three names alternately, commencing with the defendant. The six names remaining shall be summoned as jurors in the case. In case either party does not exercise all his peremptory challenges, the jury may be summoned from among the names remaining. When six names are drawn from the jury box as alternates, each party shall strike two of such names. No peremptory challenges shall be allowed other than as provided in this section. No alternate juror shall be summoned to serve at the trial of the action, except when six principals are not available. 
(Ord. 719 § 8, 1959) 
2.20.090 - Verdicts. 
    All six of the jurors summoned to try any cause must concur to render a verdict. 
(Ord. 1132 § 2, 1981: Ord. 719 § 9, 1959) 
2.20.100 - Payment of jurors. 
    Jurors who appear at the trial and serve as jurors shall receive as compensation for such services the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) for each day of attendance upon the municipal court. 
(Ord. 957 § 3, 1974: Ord. 719 § 10, 1959) 
2.20.110 - Issuance of jury summons and contempt of court. 
    When a jury is drawn, summons therefor shall be issued by the municipal judge, and the notices to the jurors shall be served by the chief of police or any police officer. Any person notified to appear as a juror who disregards such notice may be adjudged in contempt of court by the municipal judge and be fined a sum not exceeding twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. 957 § 4 (part), 1974: Ord. 719 § 11, 1959) 
2.20.120 - Powers of municipal judge. 
    The municipal judge shall have all inherent and statutory powers and duties of a justice of the peace within the jurisdictional limits of the city of Toledo. The chief of police shall assist the judge in the serving of subpoenas, notices of jury duty, and such other orders of the court as are necessary for the proper conduct thereof. 
(Ord. 957 § 4 (part), 1974: Ord. 719 § 12, 1959) 
Chapter 2.24 - PUBLIC LIBRARY 
Sections: 

2.24.010 - Established. 
    A public library is established in the city of Toledo under the provisions of ORS 357.400 to 357.621, as constituted in the 1983 Replacement Part. 
(Ord. 1167 § 1, 1985: Ord. 846 § 1, 1968) 
2.24.020 - Library board-Terms of members. 
    The mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council, shall appoint a library board of five members. The members first appointed shall hold office: one for one year, one for two years, one for three years, and all others for four years, beginning on January 1, 1968. 
(Ord. 1145 § 2, 1982: Ord. 990 § 1, 1976: Ord. 846 § 2, 1968) 
2.24.030 - Library board-Residency of members. 
    Four of the five members of the library board shall be residents of the city of Toledo, and the remaining member may be either a resident or a non-resident of the city. 
(Ord. 1145 § 3, 1982: Ord. 846 § 3, 1968) 
2.24.040 - Library board- Organization- Responsibilities. 
    The city council shall by resolution provide for annual organization of the library board, determine the library board's responsibility and provide for the term of any library board member appointed hereafter to commence July 1st in the year of their appointment and to extend or shorten terms of present appointees to the board to conform to said July 1st commencement of term of appointment. 
(Ord. 990 § 3, 1976: Ord. 846 § 5, 1968) 
2.24.050 - Detention of library materials. 
    It is unlawful for any person wilfully or maliciously to detain any library materials belonging to the library for thirty (30) days after notice in writing from the librarian given after the expiration of time which, by regulations of the library, the materials may be kept. Notice shall bear upon its face a copy of this section of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Violation of this section shall not be construed to constitute payment for library material, nor shall such forfeiture relieve any person of any obligation to return to the library such material. 
(Ord. 1244 § 1, 1996: Ord. 990 § 4, 1976: Ord. 846 § 6, 1968) 
Chapter 2.28 - PUBLIC RECORDS 
Sections: 

2.28.010 - Adoption of standards. 
    In dealing with the retention and destruction of public records, the city adopts and shall comply with the provisions of Oregon Revised Statutes, Chapter 192 and 357, as constituted in the 1983 Replacement Part, and Oregon Administrative Rules, Chapter 166, September, 1980. 
(Ord. 1175 § 1, 1985) 
Chapter 2.32 - PUBLIC CONTRACTING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1377, §§ 1-12, adopted July 5, 2017, amended ch. 2.32 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 2.32, §§ 2.32.010-2.32.080 pertained to public contracts and derived from Ord. No. 1318, §§ 1-8, adopted Oct. 17, 2007. 

2.32.010 - Short title. 
    The provisions of this chapter and all rules adopted under this chapter may be cited as the city's "public contracting code." 
(Ord. No. 1377, § 2, 7-5-2017) 
2.32.020 - Purpose of purchasing policy. 
    It is the purpose of the city council in adopting this public contracting code to utilize public contracting practices and methods that maximize the efficient use of public resources and the purchasing power of public funds by: 
A.  Promoting impartial and open competition; 
B.  Using solicitation materials that are complete and contain a clear statement of contract specifications and requirements; and 
C.  Taking full advantage of evolving procurement methods that suit the contracting needs of the city as they emerge within various industries. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § 3, 7-5-2017) 
2.32.030 - Interpretation of purchasing policy. 
A.  Except as specifically provided in this chapter ("public contracting code" or "code") and rules adopted by city council ("public contracting rules" or "rules"), public contracts and purchases shall be awarded, administered and governed according to ORS Chapter 279A, 279B, and 279C (the "Oregon Public Contracting Code") and the Attorney General's Model Public Contracting Rules ("model rules"), as they now exist. 
1.  In furtherance of the objectives set forth in Section 2.32.020, it is the city's intent that this code be interpreted to authorize the full use of all contracting powers and authorities described in ORS Chapters 279A, 279B and 279C. 
2.  The model rules adopted under ORS 279A.065 shall apply to the contracts and purchases of the city to the extent they do not conflict with this code and the rules adopted by the city. 
3.  In the event of a conflict between any provisions of this code or rules, and the model rules, the provisions of this code or rules shall prevail. 
B.  Specific Provisions' Precedence over General Provisions. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this code, the more specific provision shall take precedence over the more general provision. 
C.  Conflict with Federal Statutes and Regulations. Except as otherwise expressly provided in ORS Chapters 279A, 279B and/or 279C, applicable federal statutes and regulations govern when federal funds are involved. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § 4, 7-5-2017) 
2.32.040 - Inapplicability of public contracting code and rules. 
    In accordance with ORS 279A.025, this code and rules do not apply to the following: 
A.  Contracts or agreements to which the Oregon Public Contracting Code or this code does not apply. 
B.  Contracts, intergovernmental and interstate agreements entered pursuant to ORS Chapter 190. 
C.  Contracts between the city and a public body or agency of the state of Oregon or its political subdivisions, or between the city and an agency of the federal government. 
D.  Grants. 
E.  Contracts, agreements or other documents entered into, issued or established in connection with: 
1.  The incurring of debt, including any associated contracts, agreements or other documents, regardless of whether the obligations that the contracts, agreements or other documents establish are general, special or limited. 
2.  The making of program loans and similar extensions or advance of funds, aid or assistance by the city to a public or private person for the purpose of carrying out, promoting or sustaining activities or programs authorized by law other than for the construction of public works or public improvements. 
3.  The investment of funds by the city as authorized by law; or 
4.  Banking, money management or other predominantly financial transactions that, by their character, cannot practically be established under the competitive contractor selection procedures, based upon the findings of the city manager. 
F.  Contracts for employee benefit plans. 
G.  Contracts with newspapers and other publications for the placement of advertisements or public notices. 
H.  Contracts for items where the price is regulated and available from a single source or limited number of sources. 
I.  Insurance contracts. 
J.  Revenue-generating agreements. 
K.  Federal agreements where applicable federal statutes and regulations govern when federal funds are involved and the federal statutes or regulations conflict with any provision of the Oregon Public Contracting Code or this code or require additional conditions in public contracts not authorized by the Oregon Public Contracting Code or this code. 
L.  Contracts for professional or expert witnesses or consultants to provide services or testimony relating to existing or potential litigation or legal matters in which the city is or may become interested. 
M.  Acquisitions or disposals of real property or interests in real property. 
N.  Contracts for the procurement or distribution of textbooks. 
O.  Procurements from an Oregon corrections enterprises program. 
P.  Any other public contracting specifically exempted from the Oregon Public Contracting Code by another provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § 5, 7-5-2017) 
2.32.050 - Local contract review board. 
A.  The city council is designated as the local contract review board of the city and shall have all of the rights, powers and authority to carry out the provisions of ORS Chapters 279A, 2798, and 279. The local contract review board may delegate, by rule or resolution, any of its powers and duties to the purchasing manager. 
B.  The local contract review board may, by resolution, adopt rules pertaining to purchasing as identified in state law. 
C.  The local contract review board may, by resolution, exempt contracts not exempted by state law from competitive bidding if it finds: 
1.  The lack of bids will not result in favoritism or substantially diminished competition in awarding the contract; and 
2.  The exemption will result in substantial cost savings. 
3.  In making such findings, the board may consider the type, cost, amount of the contract, number of persons available to bid, and such other factors as the board may deem appropriate. 
D.  The local contract review board may determine that a contract is exempt from competitive bidding if the board determines that emergency conditions require prompt execution of the contract. A determination of such an emergency shall be entered into the record of the meeting at which the determination was made. The board shall adopt rules allowing the governing body to declare that an emergency exists. Any contract awarded under this subsection must be awarded within sixty (60) days following declaration of the emergency, unless the board grants an extension. 
E.  The local contract review board may determine that a contract is exempt from competitive bidding to address or mitigate public health and safety impacts of a natural disaster, or similar scale, emergency occurrence. The purchasing manager may award any contract necessary to address or mitigate a natural disaster, or similar scale emergency, within thirty (30) days following the declaration. 
F.  The local contract review board shall establish the dollar amounts which require that a solicitation for work, goods, or services shall be subject to formal solicitation processes. The city manager shall incorporate these dollar amounts into the rules (compiled in the "purchasing manual"). 
G.  In addition to the powers and duties established hereby, the local contract review board shall have such additional powers as authorized by state law. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § 6, 7-5-2017) 
2.32.060 - Purchasing manager. 
A.  A purchasing manager for the city shall be designated, by rule or resolution. The purchasing manager is hereby authorized to issue all solicitations and award all city contracts without specific authorization from city council whenever the amount of the contract is twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or less and the proposed expenditure is included in the current fiscal year budget. Subject to the provisions of this code and the rules, without specific authorization by the city council, the purchasing manager: 
1.  May adopt and amend all solicitation materials, contracts and forms required or permitted to be adopted by contracting agencies under the Oregon Public Contracting Code or otherwise for the city's contracting needs. 
2.  May hear all solicitation and award protests. 
3.  Shall declare vendors in default in their quotations, irresponsible bidders, and to disqualify them from receiving any business from the city for a stated period of time. 
4.  Shall declare a vendor a sole source vendor, upon development of written findings as identified in ORS 279B.075. 
5.  May delegate authority but not responsibility for any of the powers and duties to any other officers or employees of the city. 
6.  May declare the existence of a natural disaster, or similar scale emergency that may require immediate city purchases of goods, materials or services to mitigate the public health and safety impacts. 
7.  Shall review this code and rules and recommend to the public contracting review board any modifications required to ensure compliance with any changes in state law. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § 7, 7-5-2017) 
2.32.070 - Purchasing, procurement, and contracting process. 
A.  Except as set out in this code and the city's rules, the city adopts for local public procurement and purchasing requirements those statutes and administrative rules enacted by the state which relate to public purchasing and procurement, and which generally are contained in ORS Chapters 279A, 279B and 279C and the current Oregon Attorney General's Public Contract Manual, as these may be amended from time to time. 
B.  The rules, procedures and processes specifically set forth in the city's purchasing manual, shall be applied by the city rather than any model rule that conflicts with the city rule, procedure or process. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from using any alternative means of procurement allowed by state law even if this code or the rules are silent about the alternative means of procurement. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § 8, 7-5-2017) 
2.32.080 - Validity. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence or part herein shall be held to be void by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining parts herein shall remain and be in full force and effect; and council hereby declares that the provisions of the chapter are not interdependent. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § 9, 7-5-2017) 
2.32.090 - Unauthorized purchases. 
    Public contracts entered into or purchases made contrary to this code and the city's rules shall be voidable at the sole discretion of the city. 
A.  The city may take appropriate action in response to execution of contracts or purchases made contrary to this provision. 
B.  Such actions include, but are not limited to, providing educational guidance, imposing disciplinary measures, and/or holding individuals personally liable for such contracts or purchases. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § 10, 7-5-2017) 
2.32.100 - Prohibition of interest. 
    No contract shall be entered into with or purchase made from any city employee or employee's immediate family member, or any business with which the employee is associated, unless: 
1.  The contract or purchase is expressly authorized and approved by the city council; or 
2.  The need for the contract or purchase occurs during a state of emergency, and the city manager finds, in writing, that the acquisition from the employee, employee's immediate family member or business with which the employee is associated is the most expeditious means to eliminate the threat to public health, safety and welfare. No officer or employee of the city shall use his or her official position or office to obtain financial gain, other than official salary, for himself or herself or for any member of his or her household, or for any business with which he or she, or a member of his or her household, is associated. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § 11, 7-5-2017) 
2.32.110 - Adoption of code and rules. 
A.  Except as specifically provided in this chapter, public contracts shall be awarded, administered and governed according to the Oregon Public Contracting Code and the model rules, as they now exist and may be amended in the future. 
B.  In the event of a conflict between any provisions of this chapter and the Oregon Public Contracting Code or model rules, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § 12, 7-5-2017) 
Chapter 2.36 - PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

2.36.010 - Purpose. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to establish fair and equitable personnel procedures in recruiting, hiring, paying, promoting, disciplining and retaining employees of the city of Toledo. 
(Ord. 1120 § 1, 1981) 
2.36.020 - Administration. 
    The personnel policies and programs established by this chapter shall be administered by the city manager of Toledo or his designate. The manager shall do so subject to this chapter, adopted personnel rules and regulations, the Toledo City Charter and Oregon state statutes. 
(Ord. 1120 § 2, 1981) 
2.36.030 - Adoption of rules and regulations. 
    The city manager is authorized to prepare rules and regulations for the personnel program to be administered in the city and, from time to time, to prepare amendments as needed. The manager shall submit the rules and regulations and any amendments to the city council, and they shall become effective upon approval by the council by resolution. 
(Ord. 1120 § 3, 1981) 
Chapter 2.40 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

2.40.010 - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to: 
A.  Provide for the preparation, mitigation, training and recovery functions for the city; to carry out plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency management organization; and for the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons; for the agency created herein to lead, coordinate and direct during times of emergency; and 
B.  Implement applicable provisions of ORS Chapter 401. 
(Ord. No. 1338A, § 2, 3-2-2011) 
2.40.020 - Creation of emergency management agency. 
A.  Pursuant to ORS 401.305 there is hereby created within the city an emergency management agency to be under the direction of the emergency program director. 
B.  The emergency management agency shall, in addition to the emergency program director, be staffed by such employees of the various departments of the city as may be designated by the emergency program director pursuant to the emergency management plan as provided in TMC 2.40.070. 
C.  The definitions set forth in ORS 401.025 apply to terms used in this title, unless otherwise defined herein. 
D.  The emergency program director shall be the city manager or, in the absence of the city manager, the person designated to succeed the city manager in the emergency management plan as provided in TMC 2.40.070. 
(Ord. No. 1338A, § 3, 3-2-2011) 
2.40.030 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
A.  "Disaster" means an occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from, but not limited to any natural, technological or human-made cause, including fire, flood, earthquake, windstorm, wave action, oil spill or other contamination, radioactive incident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot, hostile or paramilitary action, or structure failure of a dam, building or infrastructure, or other public calamity requiring emergency action. 
B.  "State of emergency" means a situation which involves an emergency or a disaster. Generally, a state of emergency is a declaration by governing officials that an emergency situation exists and that extraordinary measures are required to preserve the peace or safety for the public. 
(Ord. No. 1338A, § 4, 3-2-2011) 
2.40.040 - Emergency program director. 
    The city manager is designated as the city of Toledo emergency program director. 
A.  The emergency program director may appoint an emergency management coordinator to serve as his or her deputy and to coordinate the preparation, mitigation, preparedness, recovery efforts and training of the emergency management plan and the operation of the city emergency operations center. 
B.  The city emergency program director shall be responsible for the development of the city emergency plan which shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of the city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. 
(Ord. No. 1338A, § 5, 3-2-2011) 
2.40.050 - Declaration and ratification of emergency. 
A.  The declaration by the emergency program director shall: 
1.  State the nature of the emergency. 
2.  Designate the geographical boundaries of the area subject to the emergency controls. 
3.  State of the duration of time during which the area so designated shall remain an emergency area. 
4.  State any special regulations imposed as a result of the state of emergency. 
B.  The ratification by the council may also authorize additional specific emergency powers for the duration of the emergency period set forth in the declaration. 
(Ord. No. 1338A, § 6, 3-2-2011) 
2.40.060 - Powers and duties of the emergency program director. 
    The emergency program director is empowered to: 
A.  Request the city council to pass a resolution proclaiming the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not reasonably available. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the emergency program director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect. 
B.  Request the Governor, in coordination with the counties and appropriate state agencies, to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the emergency program director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency. 
C.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency management agency of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter. 
D.  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city, and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them. 
E.  Represent this city in all dealings with the public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in ORS 401.025(1). 
F.  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as provided in this section and declared by the city council in accordance with subsection A herein, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the emergency program director is empowered, to the extent lawfully permissible: 
1.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council; 
2.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; 
3.  To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in Lincoln County or the existence of a "state of war emergency," to enlist the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered emergency service workers; 
4.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency; 
5.  To redirect city funds for emergency use and suspending standard city procurement procedures; 
6.  To establish a curfew which fixes the hours during which all persons other than officially authorized personnel may not be upon the public streets or other public places; 
7.  To prohibit or limit the number of persons who may gather or congregate upon any public street, public place, including any indoor place, or any outdoor place. These limits and prohibitions shall include private property; 
8.  To barricade streets, prohibiting vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or regulate such traffic on any public street leading to the emergency area for such distance as may be deemed necessary under the circumstances; 
9.  To order mandatory evacuation of persons, which shall be enforceable by peace officers, fire officials, and firefighters; 
10.  To curtail or suspend commercial activity, including activity of public or private schools; 
11.  To order such other measures as are necessary for the protection of the public health, safety or welfare, or for the recovery from the emergency; and 
12.  To execute all of his or her ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto, all powers conferred upon him or her by ORS Chapter 401, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority. 
G.  The city manager may delegate authority to order the measures described in subsections (F)(4) and (F)(5) of this section to city personnel in the plan developed as provided in TMC Section 2.40.070. 
H.  Within ten (10) days of the date of the order, any person aggrieved by an emergency order may request a hearing before the municipal court to determine whether issuance of the order was an abuse of discretion. The municipal court shall hear the matter within thirty (30) days of the request for hearing. The hearing shall be summary in nature and shall not be subject to the Oregon rules of evidence. The case shall be heard by the judge, only, without jury. The only issue for the court is to determine whether or not the emergency order was an abuse of discretion. If the court finds that there is no abuse of discretion in issuing the order, the order shall be affirmed. In the event that the court finds that the issuance of the order was an abuse of discretion, the court shall invalidate the order. 
(Ord. No. 1338A, § 7, 3-2-2011) 
2.40.070 - Emergency management plan. 
A.  The city manager shall develop and revise from time to time a plan for response to emergencies directly or indirectly involving the city; and for provision of emergency services, both directly and in coordination with other public and private agencies. 
B.  Such plan shall include provisions for temporary reassignment of city personnel, equipment and supplies to emergency services functions under lines of authority designated in the plan; for the emergency acquisition of necessary equipment, materials and services; and for the assignment of duties relating to pre-planning, training, and ongoing support for the emergency management agency. 
(Ord. No. 1338A, § 8, 3-2-2011) 
2.40.080 - Expenditures. 
    Any expenditure made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual-aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1338A, § 9, 3-2-2011) 
2.40.090 - Violations-Penalties. 
    It shall be a Class A infraction during a state of emergency to: 
A.  Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of an emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter. 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if the act is of such nature as to give, or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives and property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1338A, § 10, 3-2-2011) 
Chapter 2.44 - CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD POLICY 

2.44.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The council finds as follows: In order for the city of Toledo government to operate effectively, persons selected for employment or as a public service volunteer with the city of Toledo must have the highest degree of citizen and public trust and confidence. 
B.  All city of Toledo employees and public service volunteers represent the city to its citizens. Many city employees and volunteers have responsibilities to regulate and maintain public health and safety. Most city employees and volunteers have access to public funds and property, and possess access to privileged and proprietary information submitted to the city in confidence. Additionally, city employees and volunteers may be required to operate publicly owned vehicles. 
C.  The council concludes that the aforementioned considerations justify the use of a criminal background check for all prospective city employees, and some volunteer positions where it is in the public interest to do so. Volunteer positions requiring criminal background checks will be determined by the city manager, based on the duties and responsibilities of the position or public safety. 
(Ord. No. 1350, § 2, 7-3-2013) 
2.44.020 - Procedure. 
A.  All proceedings pursuant to this section shall be conducted in accordance with ORS 181.555 and OAR 257-10-025, which establish procedures for access to criminal record information possessed by the Oregon State Police through the Law Enforcement Data Systems and as supplemented below. 
B.  The procedures to be followed in obtaining criminal history checks include the following: 
1.  All applicants for positions of employment, volunteer, and city council appointed volunteers with the city of Toledo will be required to authorize the city to conduct a criminal offender information check through the Oregon LEDS system if the position is on the list of positions subject to this ordinance. 
2.  The police department will maintain the criminal history authorization forms and will provide blank forms to the city manager. The city manager shall establish a list of employed and volunteer positions subject to this ordinance. 
3.  The city of Toledo police department will conduct the check on the prospective employees or volunteers and report to the city manager that the applicant's record indicates "no criminal record" or "criminal record." 
4.  If the applicant's record is reported as "criminal record," the city manager will, in accordance with OAR 257-10-025(1)(c), request a written criminal history report from the OSP Identification Services Section and pay the applicable fee for this service. The written criminal history record will be made available to the city manager for use in making the hiring decision or appointment. 
5.  The written criminal history record of applicants who are not hired as employees or appointed as volunteers will be retained the city recorder in accordance with the requirements of OAR 166-200-090(5) for a period of ninety (90) days and thereafter will be destroyed by shredding. 
6.  The criminal history record of applicants or volunteers with a criminal history who are hired or appointed will be kept on file and retained according to state record retention laws. Access to these files is limited to authorized persons who have an official need to access such files as sanctioned by law or regulation. 
7.  Applicants for employment or appointment as a volunteer who have a felony criminal history or a history of conviction of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or theft will be closely examined by the city manager to determine if the applicant possesses the required degree of public trust and confidence. Each selection will, however, be made on an individual, case-by-case basis, taking into account the applicant's qualifications, the requirements of the particular job or volunteer post applied for, and the results of the criminal history check. Factors such as the age of the offender at the time of the offense, the type of offense and the subsequent rehabilitation, and the public sensitivity of the position under consideration shall be taken into account in evaluating a criminal history report. 
8.  Hiring an applicant or appointing a volunteer with a criminal history record will require a positive recommendation by the chief of police and the approval of the city manager or governing body after full disclosure and consideration of the criminal history of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1350, § 3, 7-3-2013) 
2.44.030 - Provisions subject to labor contracts. 
    The provisions of TMC 2.44.020(B)(7) are subject to city contracts with recognized unions. 
(Ord. No. 1350, § 4, 7-3-2013) 
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters: 
Chapter 3.04 - FORECLOSURES 
Sections: 

3.04.010 - Procedure generally. 
    In addition to the method now provided by the city of Toledo for the sale of real property for delinquent liens or assessments, real property may be sold as provided in this chapter for any assessment, lien or installment thereof at any time after one year from the date of such lien, assessment or installment shall become due and payable in the event the same has been bonded; otherwise at any time after sixty (60) days from the time the same shall have been entered in the lien docket. 
(Ord. 832 § 1, 1966) 
3.04.020 - Delinquent liens or assessments-List. 
    If any installment on any lien that may have been bonded as provided by law by the ordinances or Charter of the city of Toledo is delinquent for a period of one year from the time the same becomes due and payable, or at any time after sixty (60) days from the time the same becomes due and payable in the event any such lien or assessment has not been bonded the city recorder of the city of Toledo may thereafter prepare a list in tabulated form made up from the docket of city liens, describing each lien, assessment or installment due on any bonded lien which is so delinquent, the name of the person to whom assessed and a particular description of the property, the amount of the lien or assessment or the amount of the installment due on any bonded liens and of any other facts necessary. 
(Ord. 832 § 2, 1966) 
3.04.030 - Delinquent liens or assessments-Collection-Sale of property. 
A.  The city recorder shall thereupon proceed to collect the unpaid liens or assessments named in such list by advertising and selling such lots or tracts in the manner now provided by law for the sale of real property on execution, except as herein otherwise provided, and except that sale may be made at such place within the corporate limits of such city as may be designated in the notice of such sale. Each piece or tract of land shall be sold separately and for a sum equal to but not exceeding the unpaid lien or assessment thereon and the interest, penalty and cost of advertising and sale; and, where there shall be more than one bid, the land shall be sold to the bidder first offering to take the same for the amount accrued thereon. No levy upon such lots or parcels of land shall be required except that a notice shall be posted four consecutive weeks before said sale upon each lot or parcel assessed to an unknown owner. In such sale the city may include any number of lots or parcels of land upon which it has delinquent assessments and/or liens though the same have been levied under the same or a different ordinance or ordinances. Any number of different assessments and/or liens may be foreclosed upon the same lot, block or parcel of land in one proceeding. 
B.  In the event there shall be more than one delinquent assessment and/or lien upon any lot or parcel of land, the various amounts thereof including accrued interest penalties and costs shall be added together and the total amount thereof shall be deemed to be the amount of the assessments and/or liens for which said property is to be sold. 
(Ord. 832 § 3, 1966) 
3.04.040 - Records-Receipt. 
    The city recorder shall enter into columns provided for that purpose in the list prepared by him the date of sale, the name of the purchaser and the amount bid for each parcel of property sold, and shall give a receipt to each person paying any lien or assessment on the delinquent list prior to the sale thereof and such receipt must state separately the lien or assessment, interest and costs collected and a duplicate of said receipt shall be kept on file by the city recorder. 
(Ord. 832 § 4, 1966) 
3.04.050 - Lawful money. 
    Real property when sold for or to satisfy a delinquent assessment and/or lien must be sold for lawful money of the United States except as herein stated; provided, that in the event no bid is received for the sale of the property, then in such case the city shall be authorized to purchase said property by bidding therefor the amount of the lien or liens and the cost of advertising and sale; and the same may be struck off and sold to said city without the actual payment of any money therefor; and anyone applying or seeking to redeem property so sold, as provided in this chapter, must pay or offer to pay the sum necessary in such lawful money and not otherwise. 
(Ord. 832 § 5, 1966) 
3.04.060 - Certificate of sale. 
    The city recorder shall immediately after having sold any real property upon such list make and deliver to the purchaser a certificate of sale of the property so sold setting forth therein the object for which the sale was made, a description of the property sold, a statement of the amount it sold for, the lien or assessment for which the property was sold, the name of the purchaser and that the sale was made subject to redemption within one year from the date of the certificate and then deliver such certificate to the purchaser. 
(Ord. 832 § 6, 1966) 
3.04.070 - Transfer or assignment- Unsold property. 
A.  Upon a sale being made, the city recorder shall thereupon make proper entries thereof in the docket of city liens. Thereafter, no transfer or assignment or any certificate of purchase of real property sold under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed valid unless an entry of such transfer or assignment shall have been noted by the city recorder in said docket. 
B.  In case any property shall remain unsold upon such sale, the same may again at the discretion of the recorder be offered for sale in like manner but not sooner than three months after the expiration of any sale, except that, in the matter of an assessment for the opening, widening, laying out or establishing of a street, proceedings for such sale may be taken immediately. 
(Ord. 832 § 7, 1966) 
3.04.080 - Redemption of property. 
A.  The owner, or his legal representatives, or his successor in interest, or any person having a lien by judgment, decree or mortgage, or owner of a tax lien on any property so sold may redeem the same upon the conditions provided as follows: 
B.  Redemption of any real property sold for a delinquent assessment or lien under the provisions of this chapter may be made by paying to the city recorder at any time within one year from the date of the certificate of sale the purchase price and ten (10) percent thereof as penalty, and interest on the purchase price at the rate of ten (10) percent per year, from the date of such certificate. Where redemption shall be made by the holder of a tax lien he shall have the right to have such redemption noted upon the record of his lien in like manner and with like effect as hereinafter prescribed; provided, however, that if redemption be made within three months from the date of sale, the penalty to be paid shall be five percent. Such redemption shall discharge the property so sold from the effect of such sale and, if made by a lien creditor, the amount paid for the redemption shall thereafter be deemed a part of his judgment, decree, mortgage or tax lien, as the case may be, and shall bear like interest and may be enforced and collected as a part thereof. 
(Ord. 832 § 8, 1966) 
3.04.090 - Deed of conveyance. 
    After the expiration of one year from the date of such certificate, if no redemption shall have been made, the city recorder shall execute to the purchaser, his heirs or assigns a deed of conveyance containing a description of the property sold, the date of the sale, a statement of the amount bid of the lien or assessment for which the said property was sold, that the assessment or lien was unpaid at the time of the sale, and that no redemption has been made. 
(Ord. 832 § 9, 1966) 
Chapter 3.08 - TRANSIENT ROOM TAX 
Sections: 

3.08.010 - Definition. 
    Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter. 
    "Accrual accounting" means the operator enters rent due from a transient on his records when the rent is earned, whether or not it is paid. 
    "Cash accounting" means the operator does not enter the rent due from a transient on his records until rent is paid. 
    "City council" means the city council of the city of Toledo, Oregon. 
    "Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for transient occupancy for thirty (30) days or less for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, motel, inn, condominium, tourist home or house, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, public or private dormitory, fraternity, sorority, public or private club, and also means space in mobile home, manufacture home, trailer or recreational vehicle parks, or similar structure or space or portions thereof so occupied, provided such occupancy is for less than a thirty (30) day period. 
    "Monthly rental plan" means any rental arrangement whereby the operator of a hotel, shall not advertise, offer, rent or permit the occupancy of such hotel, nor any part or portion thereof, or any adjacent hotel which is part of the same business entity or displaying the same business name, except on a monthly basis, that is, all of the occupants of the premises shall have at least a tenancy from month to month as that term is defined in ORS 91.070. 
    "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession for lodging or sleeping purposes of any room or rooms in a hotel, or space in a mobile home or trailer park or portion thereof. 
    "Operator" means the person who is the proprietor of the hotel in any capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provision of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall be considered to be compliance by both. 
    "Person" means any individual, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private dormitory, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
    "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received by the operator, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, goods, labor, credits, property or other consideration valued in money, without any deduction, but shall not include charges to a condominium unit owner which are solely for cleaning or maintenance of such unit or personal use or occupancy by such owner, so long as the charges are made in connection therewith for space occupancy. 
    "Rent package plan" means the consideration charged for both food and rent for transient lodging where a single combined charge is made for both food and lodging, or where food and lodging are offered as a package, whether offered by an establishment of the type commonly known as a "bed and breakfast," offered by a conventional hotel facility in conjunction with a restaurant, or otherwise. The entire amount charged for the "rent package plan" shall be allocated to rent for the purposes of this chapter, and subject to room tax hereunder, unless the lodging which is offered as a part of the rent package plan is also offered and available independently of any food or meal and the charge for each is separately stated, in which case the amount allocated to rent, and subject to tax hereunder, shall be the charge which would be made for the lodging if purchased separately from any food or meals. 
    "Tax" means either the tax payable by the transient or the aggregate amount of taxes due from an operator during the period for which he is required to report his collections. 
    "Tax administrator" means the city treasurer of the city of Toledo, Oregon. 
    "Transient" means any individual who exercised occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a hotel for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. The day a transient checks out of the hotel shall not be included in determining the thirty (30) day period if the transient is not charged rent for that day by the operator. Any individual so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy, or the tenancy actually extends more than thirty (30) consecutive days. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. A person who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in such month, shall not be deemed a transient; but an individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy for a period of thirty (30) calendar days or less shall be deemed a transient notwithstanding that another person not exercising or entitled to exercise occupancy pays or is responsible for paying rent monthly or for a period of more than thirty (30) days. 
    "Transient lodgings tax review committee" means a committee composed of an accountant, an attorney and three other persons appointed by the mayor and approved by the council of the city of Toledo and may be owners or operators of a "hotel" as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1314 § 1, 2006) 
3.08.020 - Tax imposed. 
    For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, on or after January 1, 2007, each transient shall pay a tax in the amount of seven percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment by the operator to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel, and the operator shall collect the tax at the time the rent is paid. The operator shall enter the tax on the hotel records when rent is collected, if the operator keeps such records on the cash accounting basis, and shall enter the tax on such records when earned, if the operator keeps such records on the accrual accounting basis. If rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid by the transient to the operator with each installment. In all cases, the rent paid or charged for occupancy shall exclude the sale of any goods, services and commodities, other than the furnishing of rooms, accommodations, and space occupancy. 
(Ord. 1314 § 2, 2006) 
3.08.030 - Collection of tax by operator-Rules for collection. 
A.  Every operator renting rooms or space for lodging or sleeping purposes in this city, the occupancy of which is not exempted under the terms of this chapter, shall collect a tax from the occupancy. The tax collected or accrued by the operator constitutes a debt owing by the operator to the city. 
B.  In all cases of credit or deferred payment of rent, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred until the rent is paid, and the operator shall not be liable for the tax until credits are paid or deferred payments are made. Adjustments may be made for uncollectibles. 
C.  The tax administrator shall enforce provisions of this chapter and shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter as may be necessary to aid in the enforcement. 
D.  For rent collected on portions of a dollar, fractions of a penny of tax shall not be remitted. 
E.  In instances where credit is extended to the transient for charges for the rental of the unit through the use of a credit card or other similar transaction whereby the amount paid to the operator is discounted by contract between the operator and the issuer of the credit card, the amount of such discount shall be excluded from the definition of "rent" and no tax shall be imposed on the amount so discounted. 
(Ord. 1314 § 3, 2006) 
3.08.040 - Operator's duties. 
    Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated upon the operator's records, and any receipt rendered by the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise that the tax or any part of the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, when added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided by this chapter. 
    Every "operator" liable for collection and remittance of a transient room tax, or any other transient room tax hereinafter provided for, may withhold five percent of the net tax herein collected, to cover the operator's expense in collection and remittance of said tax. 
(Ord. 1314 § 4, 2006) 
3.08.050 - Exemption. 
    No tax imposed under this chapter shall be imposed upon: 
A.  Any person who occupies the same room or rooms for more than thirty (30) successive calendar days with respect to any rent imposed for the part of such occupancy commencing after the first thirty (30) days of such successive occupancy; 
B.  Any occupant whose rent is of a value less than two dollars ($2.00) per day; 
C.  Any person who rents a private home, vacation cabin or like facility from any owner who directly (without the use of a rental manager or agent) rents such facilities incidental to such owner's personal use thereof, if such owner files with the tax administrator an affidavit to the effect that such owner's personal occupancy is not less than twenty (20) days each year, or in excess of ten (10) percent of the days such unit is rented, whichever is greater; 
D.  Any occupancy of a room in a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home or home for the aged; 
E.  The United States of America, a body politic and sovereign. This exemption shall likewise apply with respect to any agency or instrumentality of the United States of America which is entitled to exemption under the provisions of the Federal Constitution. However, such exemption shall apply only in those instances in which the United States Government or an agency or instrumentality thereof shall enter into an agreement for the rental of such lodgings and shall pay the cost thereof directly to the hotel or other entity providing such lodgings. No exemption is created hereunder merely because the transient occupant of any such room shall be an employee, or on the business, of the United States of America or an agency or instrumentality thereof, or because such party shall be entitled to reimbursement for such cost; 
F.  The operator of any hotel which does not permit occupancy except on a monthly rental plan shall be exempt from collecting tax from occupants renting only on a monthly basis, and, so long as there is no tax required to be collected, shall be exempt, upon the filing of an affidavit as described hereinbelow, from registration and from filing a return for tax collection; 
G.  The affidavit required for the exemption for the above, shall be subscribed upon oath and under penalties of perjury, before a notary public or other person authorized to administer oaths. Such affidavit shall state the following: 
1.  The name of the operator, 
2.  The name and address of the hotel, 
3.  The name and address of the owner of the hotel, and if not an individual, the nature of the entity, 
4.  The facts upon which the operator relies for exemption, 
5.  That the operator understands his obligations to collect the tax and make returns thereof if at any time thereafter such hotel or any portion thereof shall be occupied or made available for occupancy on any basis other than a monthly rental plan as defined above, and further, in such event, to forthwith register pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.08.060. 
H.  Any operator of a hotel which has been granted exemption under this chapter which shall no longer be eligible for such an exemption shall, forthwith upon becoming ineligible for such exemption, commence to collect such tax as shall be due and shall further, within ten (10) days of becoming ineligible, notify the city of Toledo that such hotel is no longer eligible for such exemption, and shall register in accordance with this chapter. Any operator of any hotel for which such exemption has previously been obtained and which has become ineligible for such exemption who shall fail to so notify the city of Toledo of the hotel's ineligibility for continuation of such exemption within ten (10) days shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punishable therefore by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day of noncompliance. 
(Ord. 1314 § 5, 2006) 
3.08.060 - Registration of operator-Form and contents-Execution-Certification of authority. 
    Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall register with the tax administrator on a form provided by him. Operators engaged in business at the time this chapter is adopted must register not later than thirty (30) calendar days after passage date of this chapter. Operators starting business after this chapter is adopted must register within fifteen (15) days after commencing business. The privilege of registration after the date of imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax regardless of registration. Registration sets for the name under which the operator transacts or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business and such other information to facilitate collection of the tax as the tax administrator may require. The registration shall be signed by the operator. The tax administrator shall, within ten (10) days after registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of each registrant. Certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the tax administrator upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. 
    Said certificates shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Transient Lodging Tax Ordinance of the City of Toledo by registration with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the lodging tax imposed by said city and remitting said tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, or to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of the City of Toledo. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Ord. 1314 § 6, 2006) 
3.08.070 - Due date-Returns and payments. 
A.  The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the transient to the operator at the time that rent is paid. All amounts of such taxes collected by any operator are due and payable to the tax administrator on a monthly basis on the fifteenth day of the following month for the preceding month; and are delinquent on the last day of the month in which they are due. The tax administrator has authority to classify and/or district the operators for determination of applicable tax periods, and shall notify each operator of the due and delinquent dates for the operator's returns. 
B.  On or before the fifteenth day of the month following each month of collection, a return for the preceding month's tax collections shall be filed with the tax administrator. The return shall be filed in such form as the tax administrator may prescribe by every operator liable for payment of tax. 
C.  Returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period. The tax administrator may require returns to show the total rentals upon which tax was collected or otherwise due, gross receipts of operator for such period and an explanation in detail of any discrepancy between such amount, and the amount of rents exempt, if any. 
D.  The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the amount of the tax due, to the tax administrator at his office, either by personal delivery or by mail. If the return is mailed, the postmark shall be considered the date of delivery for determining delinquencies. 
E.  For good cause, the tax administrator may extend for not to exceed one month, a time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension shall be granted, except by the transient lodgings tax review committee. Any operator to whom an extension is granted shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month on the amount of tax due without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed, and the tax and interest due is not paid by the end of the extension granted, then the interest shall become a part of the tax for computation of penalties described elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1314 § 7, 2006) 
3.08.080 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due and who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter prior to delinquency shall pay ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax due in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due, and who failed to pay any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of fifteen (15) percent of the amount of the tax due plus the amount of the tax and the ten (10) percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud or intent to evade the provisions thereof, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof without proration for portions of a month, on the amount of the tax due, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall be merged with and become a part of the tax herein inquired to be paid. 
F.  Petition for Waiver. Any operator who fails to remit the tax herein levied within the time herein stated shall pay the penalties herein stated; provided, however, the operator may petition the transient lodgings tax review committee for waiver and refund of the penalty or any portion thereof and the transient lodgings tax review committee may, if a good and sufficient reason is shown, waive and direct a refund of the penalty of any portion thereof. 
(Ord. 1314 § 8, 2006) 
3.08.090 - Deficiency determinations-Evasion, operator delay. 
A.  Deficiency Determinations. If the tax administrator determines that the returns are incorrect, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or returns, or upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more than one period, and the amount so determined shall be due and payable immediately upon service of notice as herein provided after which the amount determined is delinquent. Penalties on deficiencies shall be applied as set forth in Section 3.08.080. 
1.  In making a determination, the tax administrator may offset overpayments, if any, which may have been previously made for a period or periods, or against penalties and interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in Section 3.08.080. 
2.  The tax administrator shall give to the operator or occupant a written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears on the records of the tax administrator. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this chapter, it shall be served by mailing such notice by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. 
3.  Except in the case of fraud or intent to evade this chapter or authorized rules and regulations, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice thereof mailed within three years after the last day of the month following the close of the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires later. 
4.  Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within twenty (20) days after the tax administrator has given notice thereof; provided, however, the operator may petition redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided. 
B.  Fraud, Refusal to Collect, Evasion. If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax or to make within the time provided is this chapter any report or remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise willfully attempts to evade this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such a manner as he may deem best to obtain the facts and information on which to base an estimate of tax due. As soon as the tax administrator has determined the tax due that is imposed by this chapter from any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to report and remit said tax, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice in the manner aforesaid of the amount so assessed. Such determination and notice shall be made and mailed within three years of the discovery by the tax administrator of any fraud, intent to evade or failure or refusal to collect said tax, or failure to file return. Any determination shall become due and payable upon receipt of notice and shall become final within twenty (20) days after the tax administrator has given notice thereof, provided, however, the operator may petition for redemption or refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided. 
c.  Operator Delay. It the tax administrator believes that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the city will be jeopardized by delay, or if any determination will be jeopardized by delay, he shall thereupon make a determination of the tax or amount required to be collected noting the fact upon the determination. The amount so determined as herein provided shall be immediately due and payable, and the operator shall immediately pay such determination to the tax administrator after service of notice thereof; provided, however, the operator may petition, after payment has been made, for redemption and refund of such determination, if the petition is filed within twenty (20) days from the date of service of notice by the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 1314 § 9, 2006) 
3.08.100 - Redeterminations. 
A.  Any person against whom a determination is made under Section 3.08.090 or any person directly interested may petition for a redetermination and redemption and refund within the time required in Section 3.08.090. If a petition for redetermination and refund is not filed within the time required in Section 3.08.090, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the allowable time. 
B.  If a petition for determination and refund if filed within the allowable period, the tax administrator shall reconsider the determination, and if the person has so requested in his petition, shall grant the person an oral hearing and shall give him twenty (20) days notice of the time and place of the hearing. The tax administrator may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary. 
C.  The tax administrator may decrease or increase the amount of the determination as a result of the hearing and if an increase is determined such increase shall be payable immediately after the hearing. 
D.  The order or decision of the tax administrator upon a petition for redetermination or redemption and refund becomes final twenty (20) days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof, unless appeal of such order or decision is filed with the transient lodgings tax review committee within the twenty (20) days after the service of such notice. 
E.  No petition for redetermination of redemption and refund or appeal therefrom shall be effective for any purpose unless the operator has first complied with the payment provisions hereof. 
(Ord. 1314 § 10, 2006) 
3.08.110 - Security for collection of tax. 
A.  The tax administrator, whenever he deems it necessary to insure the compliance with this chapter, may require the operator subject thereto to deposit with him such security in the form of cash, bond or other security as the tax administrator may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the tax administrator but shall not be greater than twice the operator's estimated average monthly liability for the period for which he files returns, determined in such a manner as the tax administrator deems proper, or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), whichever amount is less. The amount of security may be increased or decreased by the tax administrator subject to limitations herein provided. The operator has a right to appeal to the transient lodgings tax review committee any decision of the tax administrator made pursuant to this section. The operator's right to appeal is pursuant to Section 3.08.160 herein. 
B.  At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable or at any time within three years after any determination becomes final, the tax administrator may bring any action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest. 
(Ord. 1314 § 11, 2006) 
3.08.120 - Lien. 
    As a privilege for conducting a business providing transient lodging within the city of Toledo and to secure payment of the tax collected by the operator to the city of Toledo, the operator, by the act of filing a registration to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the city of Toledo does thereby irrevocably grant to the city of Toledo a security interest in all tangible personal property of the operator, which security interest shall be effective at the time when the tax imposed by this chapter, together with the interest and penalties herein provided and the filing fees paid to the county clerk of Lincoln County, Oregon and the advertising costs which may be incurred, becomes delinquent as set forth is this chapter. Upon delinquency as a result of the operator's failure to pay over to the city of Toledo the tax imposed under this chapter, the city may foreclose its security interest in the operator's tangible personal property in such a manner as provided by ORS Chapter 79. The operator further, upon the filing of a registration to conduct a business engaged as a hotel in the city of Toledo grants a special power of attorney-in-fact to the city manager for purposes of executing a financing statement to give evidence of the granted security interest at the time of delinquency and authorizes the city manager to execute the UCC financing statement on behalf of the debtor, listing as collateral all tangible personal property of the operator and to file said financing statement with the Oregon Secretary of State and with the Lincoln County clerk, if appropriate. 
    The administrator shall give notice to the operator of the delinquency, the effective date of the security interest against all tangible personal property of the operator, and the date of recordation of the UCC financing statement if filed, or if not, the city's intent to file a UCC financing statement. 
(Ord. 1314 § 12, 2006) 
3.08.130 - Refunds. 
A.  Refunds by the City to the Operator. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded, provided a verified claim in writing therefore, stating the specific reason upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be made on forms provided by the tax administrator. If the claim is approved by the tax administrator, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amount then due and payable from the operator from whom it was collected or by whom paid and the balance may be refunded to such operator, his administrators, executors, or assignees. 
B.  Refunds by City to Transient. Whenever the tax required by this chapter has been collected by an operator, and deposited by the operator with the tax administrator, and if later is determined that the tax was erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator, it may be refunded by the tax administrator to the transient, provided a verified claim in writing therefore, stating the specific reason on which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years from the date of payment. 
C.  Refunds by Operator to Tenant. Whenever the tax required by this chapter has been collected by the operator and it is later determined that the tenant occupies the hotel for a period exceeding thirty (30) days without interruption, the operator shall refund to such tenant the tax previously collected by the operator from that tenant as a transient. The operator shall account for such collection and refund to the tax administrator. If the operator has remitted the tax prior to the refund or credit to the tenant, he shall be entitled to a corresponding refund under this section. 
(Ord. 1314 § 13, 2006) 
3.08.140 - Administration. 
A.  The terms, provisions and requirements of this chapter as amended, are deemed severable, and if any such term, provision or requirement shall be found void or unenforceable, each and every other term, provision and requirement of this chapter and of any amendments thereto, shall nonetheless remain in full force and effect. In the event any court of competent jurisdiction shall determine that the increase in tax rate as hereinabove provided may not lawfully be imposed, or may not be made effective on the day and year above set forth, it is the intent hereof that such tax shall become effective the earliest date that such tax may lawfully be imposed. 
B.  Records Required from Operators, Etc.-Form. Every operator shall keep guest records of room sales and accounting books and records of the room sales. All records shall be retained by the operator for a period of three years and six months after they come into being. 
C.  Examination of Records-Investigations. The tax administrator, or any person authorized in writing by him, may examine during normal business hours the books, papers and accounting records relating to room sales of any operator liable for the tax, and may investigate the business of the operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
D.  Confidential Character of Information Obtained-Disclosure Unlawful. It is unlawful for the tax administrator or any person having an administrative or clerical duty under the provisions of this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain transient occupancy registration certificate or pay a transient occupancy tax, or the person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person; provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent: 
1.  The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by another city of Toledo official, employee or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter, or collecting taxes imposed hereunder, or collecting city business license fees. 
2.  The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amount of tax required to be collected, or interest and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney approves each such disclosure and that the tax administrator may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when in his opinion the public interest would suffer thereby. 
3.  The disclosure of the names and addresses of any persons to whom transient occupancy registration certificates have been issued. 
4.  The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city. 
(Ord. 1314 § 14, 2006) 
3.08.150 - Transient lodgings tax review committee-Appeal rules, procedure. 
    A transient lodging tax review committee is created to be composed of an attorney, who may be a city employee, an accountant, an operator, as herein defined, and two lay members. The committee shall select from its members a chair who shall serve at its pleasure. Three members of the committee shall constitute a quorum. The committee shall keep a record of its transactions. The committee shall be deemed to be in the office of the tax administrator and shall keep its files in his office. The members of the committee shall not, at any time, receive any compensation as such members or acting members for their services on the committee. The committee shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve four-year terms, except the accountant, the attorney and the operator appointed to the first committee after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall serve three-year terms. Thereafter, all terms shall be four years. The committee shall have power and it shall be its duty: 
A.  To hear and determine appeals of orders or decisions of the tax administrator made upon petitions for redetermination of tax. The committee may affirm, modify, or reverse such orders or decisions or dismiss the appeals therefrom, as may be just, and shall prescribe such forms, rules and regulations relating to appeals as it may deem necessary. In the review of the tax administrator decision or order, the committee may take such evidence and make such investigation as it may deem necessary. It shall give notice of its determinations in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a tax administrator's decision and shall file a copy of each such determination with the tax administrator with certification thereon of the date of service thereof. Such determination shall become final twenty (20) days thereafter and shall thereupon become due and payable, subject to interest penalties, and enforceable by the tax administrator in like manner as an order or decision of the tax administrator. 
B.  To approve, modify or disapprove all forms, rules and regulations prescribed by the tax administrator in the administration and enforcement of this chapter and such forms, rules and regulations adopted or promulgated after June 1, 1976. 
C.  To hear and determine in such manner as shall be just, any protest which may be made by any person who may be interested, to any form, rule, or regulation approved or prescribed by the committee. 
D.  To grant for good cause, applications for extensions of time in excess of one month, for making any return or payment of tax, and to prescribe rules therefore. 
E.  To make such investigations as it deems advisable regarding the imposition and administration of the transient lodging tax and report its findings to the city council; to act in an advisory capacity to the legislative body on matters pertaining to the transient lodgings tax and enforcement problems and to recommend to the council the adoption, amendment or repeal of legislation pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. 1314 § 15, 2006) 
3.08.160 - Appeal to transient lodgings tax review committee. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator may appeal to the transient lodgings tax review committee by filing notice of appeal with the tax administrator within twenty (20) days of the serving or mailing of the tax notice of a decision given by the tax administrator. The tax administrator shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal as prescribed by the transient lodgings tax review committee in its rules and regulations and shall give the appellant twenty (20) days written notice of the time and place of hearing. 
(Ord. 1314 § 16, 2006) 
3.08.170 - Appeals to city council. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the transient lodgings tax review committee may appeal to the city council by filing notice of appeal with the tax administrator within twenty (20) days of the serving or the mailing of the notice of the decision given by the transient lodgings tax review committee. The tax administrator shall transmit said notice of appeal together with the file of said appealed matter to the council, who shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal from the decision of the transient lodgings tax review committee. The council shall give the appellant not less than twenty (20) days' written notice of the time and place of hearing of said appealed matter. Action by the council on appeals shall be decided by a majority of the members of the council present at the meeting where such appeal is considered. 
(Ord. 1314 § 17, 2006) 
3.08.180 - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter, or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional (or otherwise invalid), such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The legislative body declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional (or otherwise invalid). 
(Ord. 1314 § 18, 2006) 
3.08.190 - Violations. 
    It is unlawful for any operator or other person so required to fail or refuse to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator or to render a false or fraudulent return. No person required to make, render, sign or verify any report shall make any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 1314 § 19, 2006) 
3.08.200 - Penalty. 
    Except as hereafter provided, a violation hereof shall be punishable as an infraction, with a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). If a person has committed more than two violations of the same or similar nature within the preceding twenty-four (24) months, then a violation hereof shall be a misdemeanor, with a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). A violation shall be deemed to occur on the date of the occurrence of the act constituting the violation, and not on the date the court shall find defendant guilty of such violation. 
    Each day during which a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Violation of more than one provision hereof shall constitute a separate offense with respect to each provision so violated. 
(Ord. 1314 § 20, 2006) 
3.08.210 - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall become effective at 12:01 a.m. on the 1st day of January, 2007. 
(Ord. 1314 § 21, 2006) 
Chapter 3.12 - DISPOSAL OF CITY-OWNED SURPLUS REAL PROPERTY 
Sections: 

3.12.010 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
A.  "Disposal" or "dispose" means the sale, lease, exchange or donation of real property. 
B.  "Lease" means a tenancy in real property granting the right of possession for a specified term for consideration. "Lease" does not include a permit, license or franchise to use any city-owned or controlled real property or public way. 
C.  "Real property" means any interest in real property owned by the city within or without the geographic limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1342, § 2, 11-2-2011) 
3.12.020 - Qualification-Classification. 
    Real property qualifying for the procedure established in this chapter is classified as follows: 
A.  Substandard Undeveloped Property. Parcels with no structures thereon which are not of minimum buildable size for the zone in which located, and parcels that do not meet the city's existing development code; 
B.  Standard Undeveloped Property. Parcels with no structures thereon which are of minimum or greater buildable size for the zone in which located; 
C.  Developed Property. Parcels of any size with structures thereon; 
D.  Special-case Property. Parcels that, notwithstanding subsections A, B and C of this section, were acquired by the city for capital improvement as defined by this code and were purchased subject to an agreement for the manner in which any surplus would be disposed. 
(Ord. No. 1342, § 3, 11-2-2011) 
3.12.030 - Real property disposal-Scope. 
    Real property owned by the city shall be disposed of as provided in this chapter unless another procedure is specified in this code or approved by council. Before disposing of any real property under this chapter, the city shall find either that the property is not needed for public use or that the public interest may be furthered by disposal of such real property. In determining whether to dispose of real property, the city in its discretion may consider whether to establish certain requirements as conditions of the transaction, such as requiring that the property be developed to a certain standard by a specified date, that the property not be placed in tax-exempt status for a specified length of time, and other conditions the city may deem appropriate. Nothing in this chapter shall require additional procedures or limit the authority of the city manager to issue any permits or licenses authorized by this code. 
(Ord. No. 1342, § 4, 11-2-2011) 
3.12.040 - Inventory of real property. 
A.  The city manager shall establish and maintain an inventory of all real property and improvements titled in the name of the city and all real property and improvements to which the city has an equitable or fee simple title. The inventory shall include properties acquired through tax sales, grants, purchases, eminent domain, or by operation of law, including property transferred to the city from other governmental agencies. The inventory shall also include the classification of each property as determined by the city manager. Properties used for public rights-of-way shall be inventoried separately. 
B.  The city manager shall present the inventory to the city council no later than the first day of October each year. Only those properties which are contained within the inventory shall be permitted to be proposed for lease, sale, or disposal. Revisions to the inventory or classifications shall be submitted as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1342, § 5, 11-2-2011) 
3.12.050 - Disposal of substandard undeveloped property. 
A.  Whenever a particular parcel or parcels is proposed for sale by the city, or purchase inquiry is made, and the property is classified as substandard undeveloped property, the matter shall be set on the regular council agenda, but no public hearing is required. Except as otherwise provided in this section, notice of the agenda item shall be given to all property owners within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the parcel's boundary line and to any parties who have inquired about the purchase. If the city has issued a request for bids seeking purchasers of the property and provided the request for bids to property owners within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the parcel's boundary line and to those who have inquired about purchasing the property, notice need only be provided to those who have submitted a bid proposal. After discussion of the agenda item, the council shall determine whether it will offer the property for sale. 
B.  If the city council decides to sell the property, it will direct the city manager or designee to take further action to sell the property. The city council may authorize the city manager or designee to publicize as appropriate, determine the existence of interested prospective purchasers, and negotiate for the sale of the property. Nothing in this section shall preclude the city manager or designee from taking preliminary actions, including publicizing a possible sale, determining the existence of interested prospective purchasers, and issuing a request for bids prior to the city council's decision, so long as the city does not enter into a binding agreement without city council authorization. 
C.  The city council shall have the final authority to approve or disapprove the final terms of the sale. The city council may pre-approve terms and the agreement form at the meeting at which it determines to sell the property. If the city council does not pre-approve terms and the agreement form at its initial meeting or if alternate terms or agreement form are proposed, the city council shall at a later regularly scheduled council meeting consider approval of the terms and agreement form. 
(Ord. No. 1342, § 6, 11-2-2011) 
3.12.060 - Disposal of standard undeveloped property and developed property. 
A.  Whenever a particular parcel or parcels is proposed for sale by the city or a purchase inquiry is made and the property is classified as standard undeveloped property or developed property, the matter shall be set for a hearing before the council. 
B.  Notice of said hearing shall be published not less than once a week in a newspaper of general circulation in the city for two successive weeks prior to the hearing, and shall describe the property proposed for sale. 
C.  Prior to the sale of a parcel under this section, an appraisal of the property shall be conducted. At the discretion of the council, such an appraisal may be ordered prior to or after the hearing. The appraisal may be made available to the public at the hearing at the discretion of the council. 
D.  Public testimony shall be solicited at the hearing to determine if a sale of any parcel is in the public interest, and the property is not needed for public use. 
E.  After the hearing, the council shall determine whether it will offer the property for sale and what the minimum acceptable terms shall be. 
F.  If an offer to sell is authorized by the council, the council shall decide whether to sell the property to the highest bidder at a public sale, by sealed bid, or directly to the purchase inquirer on terms established by the council. A notice advertising the public sale or soliciting sealed bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city be made a least two weeks prior to the sale or bid deadline date. The notice shall describe the property to be sold, the minimum acceptable terms of sale, and if applicable, the person designated to receive bids, the last date bids will be received, and the date, time and place that bids will be opened. 
G.  If one or more bids are received at or above the minimum acceptable terms, the highest bid shall be accepted and the city manager or designee shall complete the sale. 
H.  If no acceptable bids are received on a particular parcel: (1) the council may alter or keep the same minimum terms as established under subsection E of this section and direct staff to hold another sale, or (2) the council may alter or keep the same minimum terms established under subsection E of this section and list the property for six months with a local real estate broker on a multiple listing basis. A listing may be renewed for an additional one six-month period. 
I.  After expiration of the period set out in subsection H of this section, the property shall be removed from the market. Any decision to sell a piece of property once it has been removed from the market shall require that the entire procedure set forth in this chapter be repeated. The council may, however, decide whether or not an additional appraisal is necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1342, § 7, 11-2-2011) 
3.12.070 - Disposal to other public entities. 
    When disposing of real property to the federal or state government or any of their agencies or political subdivisions, the council may act without complying with the provisions of Section 3.12.050 and 3.12.060 when the disposal is for a specific public use. 
(Ord. No. 1342, § 8, 11-2-2011) 
3.12.080 - Lease of surplus real property. 
    When real property is determined by the city manager to be suitable for tenant occupancy and that occupancy is consistent with the public purpose for which it was acquired or not be needed for the public purpose for which it was acquired for up to five years, the city manager may lease all or any part of it to another for a term not to exceed five years at fair market rent. If a potential tenant who desires to lease real property from the city is tax-exempt nonprofit, the city manager shall have the discretion to lease the real property for rent that is less than fair market value. The city manager may require additional lease terms and conditions consistent with the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1342, § 9, 11-2-2011) 
Chapter 3.16 - TAX ON THE SALE OF MARIJUANA AND MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCTS 

3.16.010 - Purpose. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, every person who sells marijuana, medical marijuana or marijuana-infused products in the city is exercising a taxable privilege. The purpose of this chapter is to impose a tax upon the retail sale of marijuana, medical marijuana, and marijuana-infused products. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 10-29-2014) 
3.16.020 - Definitions. 
    When not clearly otherwise indicated by the context, the following words and phrases as used in this chapter have the following meanings: 
    "Gross taxable sales" means the total amount received in money, credits, property or other consideration from sales of marijuana, medical marijuana and marijuana-infused products that is subject to the tax imposed by this chapter. 
    "Manager" means the city manager, or designee, of the city of Toledo. 
    "Marijuana" means all parts of the plant of the Cannabis family Moraceae, whether growing or not; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its resin, as may be defined by Oregon Revised Statutes as they currently exist or may from time to time be amended. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted there from), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. 
    "Oregon medical marijuana program" means the office within the Oregon Health Authority that administers the provisions of ORS 475.300 through 475.346, the Oregon Medical Marijuana Act, and all policies and procedures pertaining thereto. 
    "Person" means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or any group or combination acting as a unit, including the United States of America, the state of Oregon and any political subdivision thereof, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
    "Purchase or sale" means the retail acquisition or furnishing for consideration by any person of marijuana within the city and does not include the acquisition or furnishing of marijuana by a grower or processor to a seller. 
    "Registry identification cardholder" means a person who has been diagnosed by an attending physician with a debilitating medical condition and for whom the use of medical marijuana may mitigate the symptoms or effects of the person's debilitating medical condition, and who has been issued a registry identification card by the Oregon Health Authority. 
    "Retail sale" means the transfer of goods or services in exchange for any valuable consideration and does not include the transfer or exchange of goods or services between a grower or processor and a seller. 
    "Seller" means any person who is required to be licensed or has been licensed by the state of Oregon to provide marijuana or marijuana-infused products to purchasers for money, credit, property or other consideration. 
    "Tax" means either the tax payable by the seller or the aggregate amount of taxes due from a seller during the period for which the seller is required to report collections under this chapter. 
    "Taxpayer" means any person obligated to account to the city manager for taxes collected or to be collected, or from whom a tax is due, under the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 3, 10-29-2014) 
3.16.030 - Levy of tax. 
A.  Every seller exercising the taxable privilege of selling marijuana and marijuana-infused products as defined in this chapter is subject to and must pay a tax for exercising that privilege. This tax is in addition to any other taxes or fees required by the city. 
B.  The amount of tax levied is as follows: 
1.  Three percent of the gross sale amount paid to the seller of marijuana and marijuana-infused products by a person who is a registry identification cardholder. After adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, city council may amend the amount of tax levied by resolution of the city council. 
2.  Three percent of the gross sale amount paid to the seller of marijuana and marijuana-infused products by persons who are purchasing marijuana and marijuana-infused products but are not doing so under the provisions of the Oregon medical marijuana program. After adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, city council may amend the amount of tax levied by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 4, 10-29-2014) 
3.16.040 - Deductions. 
    The following deductions are allowed against sales received by the seller providing marijuana: 
A.  Refunds of sales actually returned to any purchaser; 
B.  Any adjustments in sales that amount to a refund to a purchaser, providing such adjustment pertains to the actual sale of marijuana or marijuana-infused products and does not include any adjustments for other services furnished by a seller. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 5, 10-29-2014) 
3.16.050 - Seller responsible for payment of tax. 
A.  Every seller must, on or before the last day of the month following the end of each calendar quarter (in the months of April, July, October and January) make a return to the manager, on forms provided by the city, specifying the total sales subject to this chapter and the amount of taxes collected under this chapter. The seller may request or the manager may establish shorter reporting periods for any seller if the seller or manager deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the taxes. The manager may require further information in the return relevant to payment of the taxes. A return is not considered filed until it is actually received by the manager. 
B.  At the time the return is filed, the seller must remit to the manager the full amount of the taxes collected. Payments received by the manager for application against existing liabilities will be credited toward the period designated by the taxpayer under conditions that are not prejudicial to the interest of the city. A condition considered prejudicial is the imminent expiration of the statute of limitations for a period or periods. 
C.  The city will apply non-designated payments in the order of the oldest liability first, with the payment credited first toward any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying taxes until the payment is exhausted. Crediting of a payment toward a specific reporting period will be first applied against any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying taxes. 
D.  If the manager, in his or her sole discretion, determines that an alternative order of payment application would be in the best interest of the city in a particular tax or factual situation, the manager may order such a change. The manager may establish shorter reporting periods for any seller if the manager deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the taxes. The manager also may require additional information in the return relevant to payment of the liability. When a shorter return period is required, penalties and interest will be computed according to the shorter return period. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Sellers must hold in trust all taxes collected pursuant to this chapter for the city's account until the seller makes payment to the manager. A separate trust bank account is not required in order to comply with this provision. 
E.  Every seller required to remit the taxes imposed by this chapter is entitled to retain five percent of all taxes due to the city to defray the costs of bookkeeping and remittance. 
F.  Every seller must keep and preserve in an accounting format established by the manager records of all sales made by the seller and such other books or accounts as the manager may require. Every seller must keep and preserve for a period of three years all such books, invoices and other records. The manager has the right to inspect all such records at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 6, 10-29-2014) 
3.16.060 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  Any seller who fails to remit any portion of any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required must pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the taxes, in addition to the amount of the taxes. 
B.  If any seller fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of sixty (60) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, the seller must pay a second delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the taxes in addition to the amount of the taxes and the penalty first imposed. 
C.  If the manager determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the taxes will be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subparagraphs A and B of this section. 
D.  In addition to the penalties imposed, any seller who fails to remit any taxes imposed by this chapter must pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the taxes, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Every penalty imposed, and any interest as accrues under the provisions of this section, becomes a part of the taxes required to be paid. 
F.  All sums collected pursuant to the penalty provisions in paragraphs A through C of this section will be distributed to the city's general fund. The city council declares that the purpose of the taxes imposed by this chapter is for raising funds for the payment of direct and indirect expenses related to the licensing and regulation of the medical marijuana industry and retail sales, enforcement of marijuana laws in general, educational and public health programs to mitigate any negative consequences associated with the consumption of marijuana and marijuana products, and programs to prevent the illegal diversion of marijuana in retail sales and medical marijuana and medical marijuana products to persons who are not registry identification cardholders. 
G.  Penalties for certain late tax payments may be waived or reduced if approved by city council pursuant to city council policy, if any. Nothing in this subsection requires the city to reduce or waive penalties. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 7, 10-29-2014) 
3.16.070 - Failure to report and remit tax-Determination of tax by manager. 
A.  If any seller fails to make any report of the tax required by this chapter within the time provided in this chapter, the manager will proceed to obtain facts and information on which to base the estimate of taxes due. As soon as the manager procures such facts and information upon which to base the assessment of any taxes imposed by this chapter and payable by any seller, the manager will determine and assess against such seller the taxes, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. 
B.  If the manager makes a determination as outlined in subsection 3.16.70(A), the manager must give notice to the seller of the amount assessed. The notice must be personally served on the seller or deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the seller at the last known place of address. 
C.  The seller may appeal the determination as provided in Section 3.16.080. If no appeal is timely filed, the manager's determination is final and the amount assessed is immediately due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 8, 10-29-2014) 
3.16.080 - Appeal. 
A.  Any seller aggrieved by any decision of the manager with respect to the amount of the taxes owed along with interest and penalties, if any, may appeal the decision to the city council. 
B.  The seller must file the written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the city's serving or mailing of the determination of taxes due. 
C.  The council's decision is final subject only to judicial review pursuant to ORS 34.010 et seq. 
D.  Upon receipt of the appeal form, the manager will schedule a hearing to occur within twenty (20) business days or the next scheduled council meeting, whichever is later. The manager will give the seller notice of the time and date for the hearing no less than seven days before the hearing date. At the hearing the council will hear and consider any records and evidence presented bearing upon the manager's determination of amount due and make findings affirming, reversing or modifying the determination. The manager and the appellant may both provide written and oral testimony during the hearing. The findings of the council are final and conclusive. The city will serve the findings upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due is immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 9, 10-29-2014) 
3.16.090 - Refunds. 
A.  The city may refund to the seller any tax, interest or penalty amount under any of the following circumstances: 
1.  The seller has overpaid the correct amount of tax, interest or penalty; or 
2.  The seller has paid more than once for the correct amount owed; or 
3.  The city has erroneously collected or received any tax, interest or penalties. 
B.  The city may not issue a refund under this subsection unless the seller provides to the manager a written claim under penalty of perjury stating the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded and on forms furnished by the manager. The seller must file the claim within one year from the date of the alleged incorrect payment to be eligible for a refund. 
C.  The manager has twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the claim's receipt to review the claim and make a written determination as to its validity. After making the determination, the manager will notify the claimant in writing of the determination by mailing notice to the claimant at the address provided on the claim form. 
D.  If the manager determines the claim is valid, the claimant may either claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount that was overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously received or collected by the city. The claimant must notify the manager of the claimant's choice no later than fifteen (15) days following the date the manager mailed the determination and the claimant must do so in a manner prescribed by the manager. 
E.  If the claimant does not notify the manager of claimant's choice within the fifteen-day period and the claimant is still in business, the city will grant a credit against the tax liability for the next reporting period. If the claimant is no longer in business, the city will mail a refund check to claimant at the address provided in the claim form. 
F.  The city will not pay a refund unless the claimant establishes by written records the right to a refund and the manager acknowledges the claim's validity. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 10, 10-29-2014) 
3.16.100 - Actions to collect. 
    Any tax required to be paid by any seller under the provisions of this chapter is a debt owed by the seller to the city. Any tax collected by a seller that has not been paid to the city is a debt owed by the seller to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter is liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of the amount owing. In lieu of filing an action for the recovery, the city, when taxes due are more than thirty (30) days delinquent, may submit any outstanding tax to a collection agency. So long as the city has complied with the provisions set forth in ORS 697.105, if the city turns over a delinquent tax account to a collection agency, it may add to the amount owing an amount equal to the collection agency fees, not to exceed the greater of fifty dollars ($50.00) or fifty (50) percent of the outstanding tax, penalties and interest owing. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 11, 10-29-2014) 
3.16.110 - Violation infractions. 
A.  In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, a violation of this chapter is punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.20. It is a violation of this chapter for any seller or other person to: 
1.  Fail or refuse to comply as required herein; 
2.  Fail or refuse to furnish any return required to be made; 
3.  Fail or refuse to permit inspection of records; 
4.  Fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the manager; 
5.  Render a false or fraudulent return or claim; or 
6.  Fail, refuse or neglect to remit the tax to the city by the due date. 
B.  The remedies provided by this chapter are not exclusive and do not prevent the city from exercising any other remedy available under the law. 
C.  The remedies provided by this section do not prohibit or restrict the city or other appropriate prosecutor from pursuing criminal charges under state law or city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 12, 10-29-2014) 
3.16.120 - Confidentiality. 
    Except as otherwise required by law, it is unlawful for the city, any officer, employee or agent to divulge, release or make known in any manner any financial information submitted or disclosed to the city under the terms of this chapter. Nothing in this section prohibits any of the following: 
A.  The disclosure of the names and addresses of any person who is operating a licensed establishment from which marijuana is sold or provided; or 
B.  The disclosure of general statistics in a form which would not reveal an individual seller's financial information; or 
C.  Presentation of evidence to the court, or other tribunal having jurisdiction in the prosecution of any criminal or civil claim by the manager or an appeal from the manager for amount due the city under this chapter; or 
D.  The disclosure of information when such disclosure of conditionally exempt information is ordered under public records law procedures; or 
E.  The disclosure of records related to a business' failure to report and remit the tax when the report or tax is in arrears for over six months or when the tax exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The city council expressly finds that the public interest in disclosure of such records clearly outweighs the interest in confidentiality under ORS 192.501(5). 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 13, 10-29-2014) 
3.16.130 - Audit of books, records or persons. 
    The city may examine or may cause to be examined by an agent or representative designated by the city for that purpose, any books, papers, records, or memoranda, including copies of seller's state and federal income tax return, bearing upon the matter of the seller's tax return for the purpose of determining the correctness of any tax return, or for the purpose of an estimate of taxes or fees due. All books, invoices, accounts and other records must be made available within the city limits and be open at any time during regular business hours for examination by the manager or an authorized agent of the manager. If any taxpayer refuses to voluntarily furnish any of the foregoing information when requested, the manager may immediately seek a subpoena from the municipal court to require that the taxpayer or a representative of the taxpayer attend a hearing or produce any such books, accounts and records for examination. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 14, 10-29-2014) 
3.16.140 - Forms and regulations. 
A.  The manager is authorized to prescribe forms and promulgate rules and regulations to aid in the making of returns, the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the marijuana tax and to provide for: 
1.  A form of report on sales and purchases to be supplied to all vendors; 
2.  The records that sellers providing marijuana and marijuana-infused products must keep concerning the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1356, § 15, 10-29-2014) 
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY* 
Sections: 

5.04.010 - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter, except as otherwise specified, to provide revenue for municipal purposes and to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city through the licensing of businesses, occupations and trades. 
(Ord. 1231 § 1, 1995) 
5.04.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter and the resolution establishing business license fees, the following definitions shall apply: 
    "Applicant" means the agent or owner of the named business. 
    "Business" means any trade, profession, paraprofession, occupation or pursuit conducted for gain, including, but not limited to the following: door-to-door salespeople, itinerant salespeople and sales operations, operations which have headquarters outside the city but which engage in business in Toledo, contractors and subcontractors and all other enterprises which sell retail goods or services. 
    "City" means the city of Toledo, Oregon. 
    "City council" means the city council of the city of Toledo, Oregon. 
    "City manager" means the city manager of the city of Toledo, Oregon, or a designated person(s). 
    "Employee" means a person who works for or at a business, including any owner, manager or agent. 
    "Full-time equivalent (FTE)" means the total number of hours worked in one year by all employees of a business divided by two thousand eighty (2080). 
    "Licensee" means the name specified on a license. 
    "Person" means any public or private corporation, including domestic and foreign corporations, firms, partnerships of every kind, associations, organizations, syndicates, joint ventures, societies, any other group or entity acting as a unit, and individuals. 
    "Solicitor" means one who travels from place to place, taking orders for future delivery. 
    "Suspension (of business license)" means an official order to suspend business operation pending correction or to cease certain conditions or practices. 
    "Wholesale distributor" means any organization that sells a product directly to a business entity for retail and is engaged exclusively in a wholesale business. 
(Ord. 1231 § 2, 1995) 
5.04.030 - License required. 
A.  No person shall engage in or carry on any business within the city without first obtaining a business license and paying in advance the license fee, as required by this chapter. 
B.  If the business is owned by a corporation or the owner is not a resident of the city, it shall be the responsibility of the local business manager to obtain the license and pay the fee. Any person exhibiting a sign or advertisement or otherwise represents that they are engaging in any business in the city shall be deemed to be actually engaging in such business and shall be responsible for obtaining a license and paying the required fee. 
C.  If two or more related businesses are carried on at the same premises by the same owners, one license issued in the name of the business for which the premises is primarily used shall be sufficient for all such activities. If a business employs more than one door-to-door salesperson, one license in the name of the business shall be sufficient. Otherwise, each business shall obtain a separate license and pay the required fee. 
(Ord. 1231 § 3, 1995) 
5.04.040 - Duration. 
    Business licenses shall be valid from the date of issue to the following June 30th and shall be renewable annually for one year beginning July 1st. 
(Ord. 1231 § 4, 1995) 
5.04.050 - Application for business license. 
A.  Any person conducting any business required to be licensed shall, prior to engaging in that business, make application for a business license. Such application shall be made on forms provided by the city. The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee for processing, in addition to the license fee at the time of filing the completed application. The application shall, at a minimum, state: 
1.  The name of the proposed business; 
2.  A description of the trade, shop, business, profession or occupation to be carried on; 
3.  The name and address of the applicant, the manager and all parties having any ownership or proprietary interest therein; 
4.  The address at which the business will be conducted; 
5.  The name and address of the owner of the property at which the business will be conducted; 
6.  The signature of the applicant or agent making application; 
7.  The date of the application; 
8.  Evidence of satisfaction of state registration and bonding or insurance where required by state law (including registration number and expiration date); 
9.  The number of persons employed in the business based upon full-time equivalent (FTE); 
10.  The fiscal year for which application is made. 
B.  The city may require that the applicant supply any additional information necessary to determine the applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other provisions of law. Review of an application shall not begin until all requested information has been provided. 
C.  Prior to approving or denying an application, the city shall cause the application to be reviewed and approved by the community planning and development department. The community planning and development department may deem further review necessary by the police department or fire department. The use listed on the application must meet all requirements of the city's fire, building, zoning and other pertinent codes. If any of those departments finds the application incomplete or in violation of city, state, or federal laws, the application may be amended to correct the violation or it may be denied. 
D.  Any business entity that owes the city any moneys, and is delinquent with regards to such moneys, shall not be issued a license until it has made arrangements with the city to pay such moneys due and owing to the city in an arrangement which is satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. 1231 § 5, 1995) 
5.04.060 - Approval, denial, revocation or suspension of license. 
A.  Approval of License. The city shall issue a decision on an application within thirty (30) days of the submission of a complete application form, all requested additional information and fees. The city may issue a license upon finding that the applicant has met all requirements of this chapter. If an application for a new or renewed license is approved, the city shall issue the license. If any restrictions or limitations are placed on the license, the city shall note such restrictions or limitations on the license. 
B.  Denial, Revocation or Suspension of License. The city may deny, suspend or revoke a business license upon finding that: 
1.  The licensee fails to meet the requirements of, or is doing business in violation of this or any other applicable city ordinance; 
2.  The applicant has provided false or misleading material information, or has omitted disclosure of a material fact of the application, related materials or license. 
C.  Notice. The city shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of a denial, suspension or revocation. The notice shall state the reason for the action taken and shall inform the applicant of the right to appeal under Section 5.04.070 of this chapter. The notice shall be given at least fifteen (15) days before revocation or suspension becomes effective. If the violation or other condition serving as the basis for such action shall be discontinued or resolved within the fifteen (15) days, the city may discontinue the revocation proceedings. 
D.  Summary Suspension. Upon determining that a licensed activity presents an immediate danger to person or property, the city may summarily suspend the license for the activity. The suspension takes effect immediately upon notice of the suspension being received by the licensee or being delivered to the licensee's business address as stated on the licensee's application for the license being suspended. Such a notice shall state the reason for the suspension and inform the licensee of the provisions for appeal under Section 5.04.070 of this chapter. The city may continue a suspension as long as the reason for the suspension exists or until a determination on appeal regarding the suspension is made. 
(Ord. 1231 § 6, 1995) 
5.04.070 - Appeal. 
    In the event an applicant for a license under this chapter is denied such license, or in the event a license is suspended or revoked, the applicant or license holder shall have the right of appeal. The written notice of appeal to the council shall be filed with the city manager within fifteen (15) days after the denial, suspension or revocation of the license. The council shall hear and make a determination in regard to the appeal at its next regular meeting held not less than twenty (20) days after the filing of the notice of appeal. The decision of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 1231 § 7, 1995) 
5.04.080 - License fee. 
    The amount of the license fee or fees shall be set by resolution of the city council and may be amended as the council sees fit. The fee may contain categories with different amounts due for different kinds of businesses. 
A.  If a person begins a business after July 1st, that person shall pay one quarter of the annual fee for each quarter or part thereof remaining in the fiscal year. 
B.  Except as provided in this section, all persons engaged in business shall pay the full annual license fee as set by resolution of the city council, no matter how short the period of time in which they are engaged in business. 
C.  The city shall send renewal applications on July 1st each year. If the licensee is still in business, they shall complete the application and return it with the proper fee before July 31st. 
D.  All license fees for continuing businesses shall be due July 1st and shall be delinquent after August 31st. Delinquent license fees paid after August 31st and on or before September 15th shall have a ten (10) percentsurcharge added. Delinquent license fees paid after September 15th shall have a further fifteen (15) percent surcharge imposed. 
(Ord. 1231 § 8, 1995) 
5.04.090 - Transfers and relocations. 
A.  Transfer of License. In the event of the transfer of ownership of any business, the applicable business license may be transferred by application to the city and payment of the required fee. The city may approve the transfer upon finding that the new applicant has complied with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Relocation of an Existing Business. In the event a business relocates, the licensee shall apply to the city to transfer the business and pay the required fee. The city may issue the license upon finding that the new location meets the requirements of this and all other city ordinances. 
(Ord. 1231 § 9, 1995) 
5.04.100 - Disclaimers, exceptions and general requirements. 
A.  Disclaimers and Exceptions. The levy or collection of a license fee upon any business shall not be construed to be a license or permit by the city to the person engaged therein in the event such business shall be unlawful, illegal or prohibited by the laws of the United States, the state of Oregon, or the city of Toledo. Nothing therein contained shall be taken or construed as vesting any right in any license as a contract obligation on the part of the city. 
B.  General License Requirements. In addition to any other requirement of this chapter, each licensee shall: 
1.  Conform to all federal, state and local laws and regulations, the provisions of this chapter, and any rules adopted hereunder; 
2.  Notify the city within then ten (10) days of any change in material information contained in the application, related materials or license; 
3.  Display a business license upon request to any person dealing with the licensee as part of the licensed activity or to an officer or employee of the city. 
(Ord. 1231 § 10, 1995) 
5.04.110 - Tax exempt organizations. 
    A business license is required for tax exempt organizations; however, tax exempt organizations shall be exempt from the fees required in this chapter. Proof of federal recognition of a tax exempt status shall accompany the application. 
(Ord. 1231 § 11, 1995) 
5.04.120 - Exemptions. 
    The following are exempt from the requirements of this chapter: 
A.  Any person transacting and carrying on business within the city which is exempt from taxation by the city by virtue of the Constitution of the United States, or the state of Oregon, or federal or state law; 
B.  Any person whose income is based solely on a wage or salary shall not, for the purposes of this chapter, be deemed a person transacting or carrying on any business in the city, and it is the intention that all license fees will be borne by the employer; 
C.  Any business paying a franchise fee under any city franchise ordinance; 
D.  Any person sixteen (16) years or younger who operates a business on a part-time basis, which business has annual gross receipts of less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); 
E.  Any person conducting judicial sales by executors, administrators or trustees under court order, or sales being held solely for the lawful execution of government; 
F.  Any organization that sells a product directly to a business entity for retail and is engaged exclusively in a wholesale business; 
G.  Landowners with fewer than three rental units within the city. 
(Ord. 1231 § 12, 1995) 
5.04.130 - Violation-Penalty. 
    A violation of this chapter will constitute a Class B infraction. This remedy is not intended to be exclusive, and the city may pursue any other remedy available to it by law. 
(Ord. 1244 § 22, 1996: Ord. 1231 § 13, 1995) 
Chapter 5.08 - PINBALL MACHINES AND SIMILAR DEVICES 
Sections: 

5.08.010 - Purpose. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to the police powers conferred upon the city of Toledo, and it is deemed for the best interest of the city and for the welfare of the inhabitants thereof that the machines and devices heretofore referred to be licensed and regulated rather than to have the same operated without police regulation and licensing. 
(Ord. 873 § 5, 1971) 
5.08.020 - License required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to operate or permit operation or playing of any pinball machine or similar device or game in which coins or slugs are deposited, without first obtaining a license therefor in the manner hereinafter provided; and further provided that no such pinball machine or similar device so licensed shall be operated or permitted to be operated as a gambling machine or device. 
B.  The term "person" wherever used in this chapter shall also mean and apply to any firm, individual or corporation. 
(Ord. 873 § 1, 1971) 
5.08.030 - License-Application- Issuance. 
    Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate or maintain a pinball machine or similar device or game shall make application therefor at the office of the city recorder on blanks to be furnished for that purpose and shall describe the place of business or premises where such machine or device is to be operated or maintained, and also describe the kind of machine. Each license shall be approved by the city recorder before issuance for the particular machine so licensed. 
(Ord. 873 § 2, 1971) 
5.08.040 - License fee. 
    A monthly license fee shall be charged for each and every machine so licensed. Each such license shall expire on the last day of the calendar month for which the same is issued. The license fee shall be set by council resolution. 
(Ord. 1226 § 3, 1994) 
5.08.050 - License-Display required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to display in his or its place of business any such pinball machine or similar device or game upon which any such license is not attached as provided in this chapter. It shall be, and it is made, the duty of the city marshal to seize any such machine upon which the license is not attached as herein provided. 
(Ord. 873 § 4, 1971) 
5.08.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of this chapter will constitute a Class C infraction. Any machine or device as herein described which shall be operated or displayed for operation without a license attached as herein provided for shall be confiscated. 
(Ord. 1244 § 12, 1996: Ord. 873 § 6, 1971) 
Chapter 5.12 - SOCIAL GAMES 
Sections: 

5.12.010 - Social games defined. 
    "Social games" as used in this chapter means "social games" as defined in ORS 167.117, as constituted in the 1983 Replacement Part. 
(Ord. 1168 § 1, 1985) 
5.12.020 - Authorization. 
    Pursuant to the authority given to the city by ORS 167.121, as constituted in the 1983 Replacement Part, the playing and conducting of social games in a private business, private club or in a place of public accommodation is authorized to be done within the city limits of the city of Toledo. 
(Ord. 1168 § 2, 1985) 
Chapter 5.16 - TAXICABS 

5.16.010 - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this ordinance to require that those persons operating taxicabs do so in a safe, fair and efficient manner. The taxicab industry constitutes an essential part of the city's transportation system, and transportation so fundamentally affects the well-being of the city's citizens that some regulation is necessary to ensure that the public safety is protected, the public need provided for, and the public convenience promoted. The provisions contained herein should be applied and enforced in such a manner as to require the taxicab industry to regulate itself, under city supervision, to promote innovation and adaptation to changing needs, and respond to economics of the market place, so long as the public interest is served thereby. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 2, 7-3-13) 
5.16.020 - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply to those who operate taxicabs from another city and who regularly solicit and do business within this city, but shall not apply to those who operate taxicabs from another city and from that city bring a fare into this city and who then may not solicit but take a fare from this city to the city in which they regularly operate taxicabs. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 3, 7-3-13) 
5.16.030 - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning given to them by this section: 
    "Alcoholic liquor" means any alcoholic beverage containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, capable of being consumed by a human being. 
    "Council" means the city council of the city of Toledo, Oregon. 
    "Employee" means any person employed by a taxicab company for remuneration or under any contract of hire, written or oral, express or implied, including independent contractors. 
    "Operator" means any person owning, having control of the use of or engaged in the business of operating one or more taxicabs within the city. 
    "Person" means and includes one or more persons of either sex, natural persons, corporations, partnerships and associations. 
    "Street" means any street, alley, avenue, court, bridge, lane or public place in the city. 
    "Taxicab" means any motor vehicle that is operated for hire by a taxicab company, other than a shuttle, limousine, charter, tour bus, accessible vehicle, medical transport vehicle or ambulance. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  "Shuttle" means any motor vehicle for hire that transports passengers between predetermined destinations (e.g., motels and airports), at fixed rates, and on a fixed schedule; 
2.  "Limousine" means any luxury class motor vehicle that is operated for hire on a reserved, hourly basis; 
3.  "Charter" means any motor vehicle originating from the Toledo area, marked with the company's business name, operated for hire to transport a group of seven or more persons with the fare based on a fixed group rate rather than an individual rate; 
4.  "Tour bus" means a motor vehicle accepting individual passengers for a fare for sightseeing or guided tours, making occasional stops at certain points of interest and returning the passengers to the point of origin; 
5.  "Accessible vehicle" means any motor vehicle constructed and equipped for the non-emergency transportation of persons in wheelchairs, persons using other mobility aids, or with other mobility impairments; 
6.  "Medical transport vehicle" means any motor vehicle constructed and equipped for the non-emergency transportation of persons in connection with their illness, injury or disability only while such vehicle is being operated for the purpose of transporting persons to or from such medical treatment or appointment with a health care provider. By illustration, and not by way of limitation, such use does not include grocery shopping or other transportation not directly related to the provision of medical services; 
7.  "Ambulance" means any motor vehicle constructed and equipped for the emergency transportation of persons because of or in connection with their illness, injury or disability. 
    "Taxicab driver" means any person who drives a taxicab, whether such person owns the taxicab or is employed by the operator of a taxicab. 
    "Vehicle certificate" means a numbered decal issued by the city to the operator upon approved license application. 
    "Vehicle for hire" means taxicabs, shuttles, limousine services, charter services, tour buses, accessible vehicles, medical transport vehicles and invalid or wheelchair coaches. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 4, 7-3-13) 
5.16.040 - Operator's license. 
A.  No person shall operate or drive a taxicab for hire in the city of Toledo without first obtaining a business license with a taxicab endorsement as required in this chapter. Each applicant for a business license with taxicab endorsement shall apply to the city manager for such license upon such form as is prescribed by the city manager and shall include thereon the following information in addition to the information required for all business licenses: 
1.  The name, business address and residence address of the applicant. If a corporation, limited partnership or association, the applicant shall be authorized to conduct business under the laws of the state of Oregon, and shall supply proof of active business registry with the Secretary of State; 
2.  The make, type, year of manufacture, VIN number, and seating capacity of each vehicle that will be operated as a taxicab under the taxicab company certificate; 
3.  A description of the proposed color scheme, insignia, trademark, or any other distinguished characteristics of the proposed vehicle design; 
4.  A list from the applicant of any violation, misdemeanor, or felony convictions, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed for the owner(s) and/or any officers of the taxicab company; 
5.  Proof of insurance in the manner and form required by this chapter from a responsible, solvent insurance carrier authorized to issue public liability and property damage insurance in the state of Oregon; 
6.  A receipt issued by the city showing payment of the non-refundable application fee. The fee is to be set by resolution of the city council; and 
7.  Any other information reasonably requested by the city manager that pertains to financial responsibility or general qualifications of the operator. 
B.  No application for a business license with taxicab endorsement shall be granted unless the applicant meets the following qualifications: 
1.  The applicant is of the age of eighteen (18) or over; 
2.  The applicant can read and speak the English language sufficiently to converse with the general public; 
3.  The applicant is the holder of a current and valid Oregon motor vehicle driver's Class C license; 
4.  The applicant has not been convicted of a felony; 
5.  The applicant has not been convicted of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or a major traffic violation within the five years immediately preceding the application; 
6.  The applicant has not had an unacceptable number of minor traffic violations within the preceding five years; 
7.  The applicant is not otherwise unfit to be entrusted with the safe care and custody of passengers. 
C.  A denial of an application for a license may be appealed by filing a written appeal with the city council within ten (10) days of the decision denying the application. The city council will hold a public hearing to consider whether the license should be issued. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 5, 7-3-13) 
5.16.050 - Investigation of applicant. 
    Upon receipt of an application for any license required by Section 5.16.030, the city manager shall refer the same to the chief of police and to any other city official for investigation of the applicant's business and moral character and of the statements contained in the application as may be necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and to determine whether any cause exists for denial of the license. Such investigation may include the fingerprinting of any natural person whose name is required to be furnished on the application pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 6, 7-3-13) 
5.16.060 - Report of investigation. 
    The chief of police and any other city official shall, upon concluding any investigation pursuant to Section 5.16.040 of this chapter, prepare a report of findings and submit the same to the city manager, recommending either issuance or denial of the license. Such recommendation shall be considered by, but shall not be binding upon the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 7, 7-3-13) 
5.16.070 - Taxicabs. 
A.  Every taxicab shall be so designated as such by plain visible letters on the side thereof. 
B.  Every taxicab shall have affixed a vehicle certificate as issued by the city upon an approved license application. 
C.  Every taxicab shall post a schedule of rates for services where it can be easily read by any and all passengers. 
D.  No taxicab driver or operator shall use a taxicab for the transportation or delivery of an alcoholic beverage. This section shall not prohibit the transportation of a person, for hire, when such person lawfully possesses an alcoholic beverage. 
E.  No taxicab driver or operator shall accept compensation, in any form, for the transportation or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, except as allowed in subsection D of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 8, 7-3-13) 
5.16.080 - Taxicab certification. 
A.  No operator shall put into service, nor shall any employee drive, any taxicab that has not been certified and issued a vehicle certificate by the city. 
B.  Each vehicle certificate issued by the city shall be affixed to a specific taxicab for identification purposes, placed in a location upon the taxicab as approved by the city manager. 
C.  All vehicle certificates issued by the city are nontransferable and may not be removed by anyone without supervision of the city manager or its designee. 
D.  No vehicle certificate may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred. 
E.  Any operator who retires any taxicab from service shall immediately surrender to the city any vehicle certificate issued by the city for the operation of such taxicab, and may not secure an additional vehicle certificate for the operation of such taxicab without making separate application therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 9, 7-3-13) 
5.16.090 - Fees. 
A.  Each operator making application for a taxicab endorsement or application for a taxicab certification shall pay an annual fee as established by the council by resolution. 
B.  An operator shall pay a proportionate amount of the above fees for parts of less than a year and thereafter fees shall become due and payable the first business day of each fiscal year upon renewal pursuant to Section 5.16.140. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 10, 7-3-13) 
5.16.100 - Safe and adequate service required. 
A.  The interior of a vehicle for hire shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and free of debris through a daily inspection by the operator prior to that vehicle being placed into service. 
B.  Each operator shall conduct a monthly safety check of each vehicle for hire used by that business and shall maintain written vehicle safety logs specifying each safety check. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 11, 7-3-13) 
5.16.110 - Inspections. 
    Every vehicle for hire shall be subject to inspection without prior notice by the appropriate city employee designated by the city manager to ensure compliance with this chapter. These inspections shall be done during business hours. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 12, 7-3-13) 
5.16.120 - Insurance and indemnification. 
A.  No person shall operate any vehicle as a taxicab unless that vehicle is covered by commercial liability insurance providing coverage of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence in combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage claims, or five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence for property damage. Liability coverage shall be provided on an "occurrence" not "claims" basis. A certificate of insurance coverage, evidencing insurance coverage in compliance with this section, shall be filed with the city recorder. The city of Toledo, its officers, employees, and agents shall be named as additional insureds. 
1.  The limits of insurance coverage required under this section shall be subject to any statutory changes regarding the minimum limits of liability required for taxicab companies. 
2.  Insurance policies for all vehicles operating as taxicabs shall contain a provision that the policy will not be reduced in coverage or canceled without thirty (30) days prior written notice to the city recorder. 
3.  Failure to maintain adequate insurance as required under this section shall be cause for immediate suspension or revocation of a taxicab company license. 
B.  All taxicab companies and drivers that receive a license or vehicle certificate, shall, to the extent permitted by law, agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers and employees, from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from any claims for damages to property, or injury to persons, which may occur in connection with the operation of a taxicab company or a taxicab under the terms of the license or vehicle certificate. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 13, 7-3-13) 
5.16.130 - Taxicab endorsement revocation. 
    If the city manager determines that grounds exist for revocation of the taxicab certificate, the manager shall schedule a public hearing before the city council. The operator will be provided with written notice of the hearing at least ten (10) days before the hearing. 
    Grounds for revocation of a taxicab endorsement and certificate include: 
A.  The operator has knowingly submitted a false application or application for renewal. 
B.  The taxi meter, tires, odometer or any other part of the taxicab affecting the meter which determines the amount to be charged to the customer have been intentionally adjusted or tampered with, by or with the knowledge of the operator, so that the amount payable is in excess of the published fare. 
C.  The operator has allowed a taxicab to be driven for hire by a driver not having a valid taxicab endorsement or has used a taxicab that has not been approved by the city. 
D.  The operator has consistently failed to maintain standards in the operation of the taxicab business or as a taxicab driver as required under this chapter. 
E.  The operator has committed a material violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
F.  The operator no longer meets the qualifications for approval of the taxicab endorsement or vehicle certification. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 14, 7-3-13) 
5.16.140 - Renewal. 
A.  Taxicab endorsement shall be renewed upon submission of the annual certificate fee, as established by resolution of the city council, unless otherwise revoked under this chapter. The annual taxicab endorsement fee is due and payable on July 1st of each year. 
B.  An operator wishing to renew shall submit a renewal application on a city form at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the taxicab endorsement or certificate, together with the annual fee. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 15, 7-3-13) 
5.16.150 - Display of rates and license. 
A.  The schedule of rates shall be conspicuously posted in each taxicab in a manner that may be easily read from both the inside and outside of each taxicab. The printed rate shall be headed with the word "rates" in letters not less than one-half of an inch in height, and the text therefore shall be in letters not less than twelve-point type and shall be printed on a card not less than six inches by ten (10) inches in size. 
B.  The driver shall display in each vehicle a laminated business license with taxicab endorsement with a picture of the driver visible to the passengers. 
C.  The operator shall file a list of all rates with the city recorder, and shall maintain the list of rates in each taxicab operated by the taxicab company, at the operator's main place of business and on the operator's website. Any change of rates shall be filed with the city recorder and shall not be effective until seven days after filing or the date specified in the filing, whichever occurs later. 
D.  It is a violation to charge a customer or passenger a rate in excess of the rate on the rate list. In the event that different rates are listed on different rate sheets, the applicable rate shall be the lowest rate of the rates shown on the following: 
1.  The rate list filed with business license application or renewal. 
2.  The rate list in the taxicab providing the service. 
3.  The rate list at the operator's main place of business. 
4.  The rate list on the operator's website, if any. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 16, 7-3-13) 
5.16.160 - Meter; to be in operation when taxicab engaged. 
    Except in the event a flat rate is charged for a trip, no passenger shall be carried in any taxicab unless the taximeter is in operation. This provision shall apply regardless of whether the taxicab is engaged for a trip entirely within the boundaries of the city or partially outside thereof, and such meter shall be kept operating continuously during the entire time that it is engaged in the transportation of passengers for compensation, regardless of the point of destination. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 17, 7-3-13) 
5.16.170 - Inspection by operation; inspection label. 
    Every taximeter shall be inspected and tested for accuracy by the operator at least once every six months, and made available to the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 18, 7-3-13) 
5.16.180 - Calculation and indication of charges. 
    Except in the event a flat rate is charged for a trip, all charges for taxicab service shall be calculated and indicated by a taximeter. Taxicab operators may also make a specialized charge to carry extra passengers, and to deliver packages or other items. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 19, 7-3-13) 
5.16.190 - Dial to be lighted and discernible to passengers. 
    The taximeter shall be placed in each taxicab so that the reading dial showing the amount to be charged shall be well-lighted and readily discernible to a passenger riding in the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 20, 7-3-13) 
5.16.200 - Passenger's receipt. 
    Whenever demanded by the passenger, the driver in charge of a taxicab shall deliver to the person paying for the hiring of such taxicab, at the time of such payment, a receipt therefore in legible printing or writing, containing the name and address of the owner, the name of the driver, any and all of the times for which a charge is made, the total amount paid, and the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 21, 7-3-13) 
5.16.210 - Reporting lost articles. 
    The operator shall notify the Toledo police department within twenty-four (24) hours after discovery of any property of value left in the taxicab by any passenger if the driver has not been able to return the property to the passenger or received instructions from the passenger for the return of the item. Property of value includes, but is not limited, to personal identification, bank cards, and cash. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 22, 7-3-13) 
5.16.220 - Notice. 
    Any notice mailed by first class mail by the city shall be mailed to the operator to the primary address as set forth on the license application, and shall be deemed received by the operator three days after mailing. Failure to receive actual notice shall not be a defense to any proceeding under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 23, 7-3-13) 
5.16.230 - Complaints. 
A.  Every taxicab shall have posted in a prominent place within the passenger compartment a notice entitled "complaints" setting forth the address and telephone number of the taxicab company to which complaints should be directed and a notice that a record of all complaints shall be open to inspection and review by the city at any time on its request. 
B.  Taxicab companies shall maintain a record of all complaints received either in writing or by telephone. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 24, 7-3-13) 
5.16.240 - Violations-Penalty. 
A.  A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class B infraction. Violations of separate provisions are separate offenses, and each day that a violation occurs or continues is a separate offense. 
B.  The remedy set forth in this section is in addition to any other remedy available to the city, and all remedies and penalties are cumulative. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 25, 7-3-13) 
Chapter 5.20 - MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1363, §§ 2-22, 24, adopted July 6, 2016, amended ch. 5.20 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 5.20, §§ 5.20.010-5.20.190, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1358, §§ 2-20, adopted Nov. 19, 2014. 

5.20.010 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to minimize any adverse public safety and public health impacts that may result from allowing a medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility in the city by adopting particular time, place and manner requirements and a permitting process; and to ensure that this type of business is complying with city ordinances, state and federal laws. 
B.  The city council makes findings that the city is an Oregon home rule municipal corporation with a city charter that grants it all the powers and authority that the constitutions, statutes and common law of the United States and this state expressly or impliedly grant or allow as though each such powers were specifically enumerated. 
C.  This chapter is not intended to regulate the possession, cultivation or personal use of marijuana at a registered marijuana grow site or by anyone who is a medical marijuana registry identification cardholder under state law. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 2, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.020 - Definitions. 
    Except as the context otherwise specifically requires, for the purposes of this chapter, the following mean: 
    "Applicant" means a person or entity to whom the Oregon Health Authority ("OHA") has granted a license to operate a medical marijuana facility, or alternatively, to whom the Oregon Liquor Control Commission ("OLCC") has granted a license to operate a recreational marijuana facility, or both. In this chapter, the term "licensee" is interchangeable. 
    "Business license" means the written form of permission required in order to operate a business as required by this chapter, which is not intended to be an endorsement of a particular business or vocation or licensee. 
    "Entity" means any corporation, non-profit corporation, limited liability company, partnership, family limited partnership, association, or any other type of business entity doing business in the city. 
    "Medical marijuana facility" means a medical marijuana facility registered with the Oregon Health Authority under ORS 475B.400 et. seq. In this chapter, the definition "medical marijuana facility" specifically includes a "medical marijuana dispensary facility" and "marijuana processing site," as those terms are defined under the Oregon Medical Marijuana Act. A "facility" includes all premises, buildings, curtilage, or other structures used to accomplish the storage, distribution and dissemination of marijuana. 
    "Person" means a natural person, whether he or she is acting for himself or herself, or as the employee or agent of another. 
    "Recreational marijuana facility" means any recreational marijuana facility registered with the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, including as a marijuana producer, marijuana processor, marijuana wholesaler, marijuana retailer, and marijuana laboratory. A "facility" includes all premises, buildings, curtilage, or other structures used to accomplish the storage, distribution and dissemination of marijuana. 
    "State regulatory authority" means both of the state agencies regulating marijuana, the Oregon Health Authority ("OHA") and the Oregon Liquor Control Commission ("OLCC"), unless the context requires otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 3, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.030 - Rulemaking authority. 
    The city manager, or designee, shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, and shall have the authority to render written and oral interpretations, and to adopt administrative rules and procedures necessary for its proper administration and enforcement. The chief of police may investigate any applicant for a license, or where the premises is located, to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 4, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.040 - Business license required. 
    A business license issued as set forth in Section 5.04.030 shall be required for any person or entity engaging in the operation of a medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 5, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.050 - Application for business license. 
    An application for a business license as set forth in Section 5.04.050 applies to any person or entity engaging in the operation of a medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility, and must be submitted, in addition to the following requirements of this chapter: 
A.  The license fee as set forth in Section 5.04.080 is applicable; 
B.  In order to determine whether or not to issue a business license, the applicant must provide written confirmation to the planning department that all owners, officers, managers, employees, agents, partners, and volunteers of the business identified in this section have passed a criminal background check performed by the chief of police pursuant to OAR 257-010-0025(1)(a); 
C.  Written authorization for any state regulatory agency to disclose information to the city about the business and the applicant in conjunction with any license issued by a state regulatory agency; 
D.  As a quid pro quo for the city agreeing to issue a business license, the applicant agrees to waive liability against the city and any of its elected officials, officers, employees or agents for any claims arising out of the revocation of or refusal to grant a license; for any claims resulting from reporting or other actions taken that is required of the city by state law; for any claims alleging a taking or inverse condemnation due to revocation of or refusal to license a particular location or relocation of a permitted facility for failing to satisfy all the requirements of a license; or for any other claims for damages based upon actions taken or not taken by the city pursuant to a license. 
E.  As a quid pro quo for the city agreeing to issue a license, the applicant agrees to waive liability against the city and any of its elected officials, officers, employees or agents for any claims for any lawful arrest or prosecution of the applicant or any employees, clients or customers for a violation of federal or state criminal laws; and 
F.  Any other information the city considers reasonably necessary for the purpose of the business license to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the general public. 
G.  Upon request, at any time, the applicant agrees to sign and provide to the city any written documentation required by this section, including liability waivers required in (C) and (D) of this section. 
H.  An applicant shall inform the city within ten (10) days of any changes occurring to the information submitted in the application. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 6, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.060 - Display of license. 
    The licensee shall have a conspicuous display of the business license required under this chapter at all times within the business premises. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 7, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.070 - Standards of operation. 
    A person or entity having or required to obtain a business license for a business that is a medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility shall comply with the following regulations: 
A.  A person or entity shall comply with all building code and zoning requirements applicable to the property on which the business is located. 
B.  Except to the extent that marijuana is classified as a Schedule I controlled substance under federal law, the person or entity shall comply with all federal, state, and local laws applicable to the business. A business license under this chapter does not protect a person or entity from possible criminal prosecution under federal law. 
C.  The business shall make available to the chief of police all video surveillance and recordings upon request for the purpose of ensuring compliance with ORS 475B.450, state rules, and this code. 
D.  In order to determine whether or not to issue a business license, the applicant agrees that all employees and volunteers of the business must submit to a criminal background check by the chief of police pursuant to OAR 257-010-0025(1)(a). It shall be a violation of this chapter if an employee or volunteer has been convicted of the manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance in Schedule I or Schedule II within five years of the date of the criminal background check; has been convicted more than once of the manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance in Schedule I or Schedule II at any time; or has been convicted of any of the following crimes at any time; criminal mistreatment based upon the unlawful manufacture of a controlled substance, racketeering, use of minor in controlled substance offense, manufacture or delivery of hydrocodone within one thousand (1,000) feet of a school, manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance within one thousand (1,000) feet of a school, causing another to ingest a controlled substance, application of a controlled substance to the body of another person, falsifying business records, issuing a false financial statement, obtaining execution of documents by deception, forgery, criminal possession of a forged instrument, criminal possession of a forgery device, fraudulently obtaining a signature, fraudulent use of a credit card, negotiating a bad check, unlawful factoring of payment card transactions, identity theft, laundering a monetary instrument, engaging in a financial transaction in property derived from unlawful activity, or felony driving under the influence of intoxicants. 
E.  The person or entity shall keep all real and personal property tax accounts current for the business for which it is a taxpayer, and shall make available to the chief of police upon request such records maintained by the person or entity for the purpose of ensuring compliance with ORS 475B.450, state rules, and this code. 
F.  The business may only operate between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. daily. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 8, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.080 - Criteria for denial, suspension or revocation. 
    Upon a determination that grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of a license exists in Section 5.20.090, the factors to be considered in determining whether to deny, suspend or revoke the license must include: 
A.  The nature of the conduct constituting the grounds for denial, suspend or revocation; 
B.  The frequency of the conduct; 
C.  The effect the conduct has upon the enjoyment of life, health and property of members of the community; 
D.  The efforts of the person or entity responsible for the medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility to prevent, mitigate or eliminate the conduct; 
E.  The actual results of any actions taken by the person or entity responsible for the medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility to prevent, mitigate or eliminate the conduct; 
F.  The license history of the medical marijuana facility, or recreational marijuana facility, and the person or entity responsible for the medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility; 
G.  The cost to the city of investigating the conduct, including bringing the proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 9, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.090 - Grounds for approval, denial, revocation, or suspension of license. 
A.  The approval, denial, suspension or revocation of a license as set forth in Section 5.04.060 applies to any person or entity engaging in the operation of a medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility, except an applicant must also comply with the requirements of this chapter for approval of a business license. As to a medical marijuana facility and to a recreational marijuana facility, Section 5.04.060(B) is modified by this chapter to provide that the city may also deny, suspend or revoke a business license upon a finding that: 
1.  The licensee has failed to comply with, meet the requirements of, or is doing business in violation of this chapter, any other applicable city ordinance, state law, federal law, or administrative rule, except the city will not deny, suspend or revoke a license solely because marijuana is illegal under federal law; 
2.  OHA or OLCC has denied, suspended or revoked the authority of the licensee to operate a medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility; 
3.  The licensee has failed to comply with the advertising requirements of any applicable state regulatory agency; or 
4.  The licensee knowingly makes a material false statement or omission in connection with the issuance or renewal of a license, or in connection with the city's criminal background check form; 
5.  The licensee has an outstanding warrant for his or her arrest; or 
6.  The licensee has maintained or conducted the licensed business or vocation in a manner contrary to the terms of the existing license or contrary to any provision of this chapter. 
B.  In addition to the other grounds for denial, suspension or revocation in this section, the chief of police may recommend denial of a renewal application for a specific location that is the subject of a renewal application that has a documented history of law enforcement contacts during the time that the specific location has been licensed under this chapter. In the event that the chief of police recommends denial of a renewal application, the chief of police shall forward the recommendation to the planning department. The planning department may issue a notice of denial based upon the chief of police's recommendation. Denial of a renewal application based upon the chief of police's recommendation may be reviewed pursuant to Section 5.04.070. 
C.  Any proceeding under this section shall be substantially in accord with the procedure provided in Section 5.04.060(C) and (D). 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 10, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.100 - License surrender. 
    A licensee may surrender a medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility business license by delivering written notice to the city that the licensee thereby surrenders the license. A licensee's surrender of a license under this section does not affect the licensee's civil or criminal liability for acts the licensee committed before surrendering the license. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 11, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.110 - Violations-Generally; penalty. 
A.  A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class A infraction. Violations of separate provisions are separate offenses, and each day that a violation occurs or continues is a separate offense. 
B.  Any penalty or remedy imposed pursuant to this chapter is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other civil, criminal or administrative penalty, sanction or remedy otherwise authorized by law. The abatement of a nuisance under this chapter does not prejudice the right of any person or entity to recover damages for its past existence. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 12, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.120 - Unlawful failure to obtain license. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for a person or entity to engage in any business or vocation for which a license is required by this chapter without first obtaining a license therefor. 
B.  A violation of this section is an A violation. 
C.  Upon conviction for the above offense, the court may in addition to any other sanction or condition imposed that is authorized by law, may prohibit the defendant from operating, being employed, volunteering or having a financial interest in a medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 13, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.130 - Unlawful activity by licensee. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to engage in a licensed activity, or to allow or permit the licensee's employees or agents to engage in the licensed activity, in violation of any applicable standard in the chapter, or of any license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  A violation of this section is an A violation. 
C.  Upon conviction for the above offense, the court may in addition to any other sanction or condition imposed that is authorized by law, may prohibit the defendant from operating, being employed, volunteering or having a financial interest in a medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 14, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.140 - Unlawful engaging in licensed activity while license is suspended or revoked. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to knowingly engage in a licensed activity, or to allow the licensee's employees or agents to engage in a licensed activity, when the license has been suspended or revoked pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  A violation of this section is an A violation. 
C.  Upon conviction for the above offense, the court may in addition to any other sanction or condition imposed that is authorized by law, may prohibit the defendant from operating, being employed, volunteering or having a financial interest in a medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 15, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.150 - Appeal. 
    Except as provided otherwise in this section, the decision pursuant to this chapter to deny a new license, or to deny an application for the renewal of an existing license, or to suspend or revoke a license, may be appealed pursuant to Section 5.04.070. Section 5.04.070 is modified by this chapter to provide that a decision by the council on such appeal is not final and conclusive. Rather, the appeal of a council's final decision shall be by writ of review to the Circuit Court of Lincoln County, Oregon, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 16, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.160 - Closure during pendency of action; emergency closures. 
    The city may institute an action for a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction pursuant to ORCP 78 if a threatened or existing nuisance under this chapter creates an emergency that requires immediate action to protect public health, safety or welfare. In such instances, the notice requirements of Section 5.04.060(C) need not be satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 17, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.170 - Enforcement of closure order; costs. 
    The court may authorize the city to physically secure the medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility against use or occupancy in the event that the owner or person or entity in charge of the facility fails to do so within the time specified by the court. In the event that the city is authorized to secure the premises, all costs incurred by the city to effect a closure shall be allowed and recovered as provided under ORCP 68. As used in this section, "costs" include those reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the city for the physical securing of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 18, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.180 - No vested or nonconforming rights. 
    Neither this chapter nor any other provision of this code, or any action, failure to act, statement, representation, certificate, approval, or permit issued shall create, confer or convey any vested or nonconforming right or benefit regarding any medical marijuana business, medical marijuana facility, recreational marijuana facility, or other facility that is prohibited by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 19, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.190 - Public nuisance declared. 
    Operation of any medical marijuana facility or recreational marijuana facility within the city in violation of the provisions of this code is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 20, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.200 - Chapter 5.04, business licenses generally, is applicable. 
    Except for the definition of "person" in Section 5.04.020, the exemption in Section 5.04.120(F), the classification of a violation in Section 5.04.130, and as otherwise provided in this chapter, all requirements as set forth in Chapter 5.04 are applicable to both the operation of a medical marijuana facility and a recreational marijuana facility. Where the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.20 conflict, the provisions of Chapter 5.20 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 21, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.210 - Fees. 
    Fees specified in this chapter shall be set by city resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 22, 7-6-2016) 
5.20.220 - Confidentiality. 
A.  Except as otherwise required by law, it shall be unlawful for the city, any officer, employee, or agent to divulge, release, or make known in any manner any financial or employee information submitted or disclosed to the city under the terms of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall prohibit: 
1.  The disclosure of licensee names and facility addresses. 
2.  The disclosure of general statistics in a form which would prevent identification of financial information regarding a facility. 
3.  The presentation of evidence to a court, or other tribunal having jurisdiction in the prosecution of any criminal or civil claim, by the city. 
4.  The disclosure of information upon request of a local, state, or federal law enforcement official. 
5.  The disclosure of information under the Oregon Public Records Law. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 24, 7-6-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1363, § 24, adopted July 6, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as Section 5.20.230. To preserve the style of this code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Section 5.20.220. 
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 6.04 - ANIMALS 
Sections: 

6.04.010 - Definitions. 
    "Animal" means any non-human mammal, bird, fish, or reptile. 
    "Animal facility" means any site where animals are kept that functions as a licensed research animal facility or a government operated or licensed animal shelter or private enterprise, used for commercial purposes. 
    "At large" means off the premises belonging to the owner and not in the company of and under control of a person. 
    "City" means the city of Toledo, Oregon. 
    "Communicable disease" means a disease carried by an animal which may be transmitted to another animal or to humans. 
    "Confinement area" means any site where an animal is contained or kept on private property, including grounds and housing structures. 
    "Control" means an animal is under control if restrained from placing others at risk, whether by physical control device, or trained to respond to verbal commands and in close proximity to and in view of the owner. 
    "County" means the county of Lincoln, Oregon. 
    "Court" means the municipal court of the city of Toledo, Oregon, or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
    "Dangerous animal" means any animal which has the propensity to bite or attack any person without provocation and the capacity to inflict physical injury upon that person. It shall be presumed that any animal that has injured a human being on one or more occasions without provocation is a dangerous animal. 
    "Domestic animal" means any animal that is trained and kept as a pet or as livestock. 
    "Family" means a group of persons, whether or not related by blood or marriage, living together in a residence as a single-family unit. 
    "Housing structure" means any contained area or structure where an animal is kept. 
    "Minimum care" means care sufficient to preserve the health and well-being of an animal and, except for emergencies or circumstances beyond the control of the owner, includes, but is not limited to, the following requirements: 
1.  Sufficient food to maintain an animal's health. 
2.  Access to potable water to satisfy the animal's needs. Snow or ice is not an adequate water source. 
3.  Access to a barn, house or other enclosed structure for the protection of the animal. 
4.  Access to an exercise area on a regular basis as required for the health and well being of the animal. 
5.  Veterinary care to relieve distress from injury or disease. 
6.  Confinement area having adequate space and ventilation. 
    "Officer" means any individual empowered by the city to enforce this ordinance. 
    "Owner or keeper" means any individual, or group of people, that has an ownership interest in an animal; or who harbors, cares for, exercises control over or knowingly permits an animal to remain on the premises occupied by that individual or individuals. 
    "Physical control device" means a collar, connected to a leash or tether made of material of sufficient strength to prevent the escape of the animal, or fenced or enclosed in a containment area so as to prevent the escape of the animal. 
    "Physical injury" means an act that physically damages or hurts a human or other animal causing pain, loss, or impairment of health. 
    "Residence" means any dwelling unit designed for occupancy by a family or families. 
    "Wildlife" means animals that are not domesticated. 
(Ord. 1294 § 1, 2001) 
6.04.020 - Officer's authority to cite. 
    An officer shall determine whether a violation of any section or sections of this ordinance has occurred. The determination shall be based upon an investigation that includes observation of the location, the animal, or through the statements to an officer of other witnesses who personally observed the violation. 
(Ord. 1294 § 2, 2001) 
6.04.030 - Public duties. 
    This section expands the statutory requirements of ORS 811.710 to include wildlife as defined in this ordinance, as follows: 
A.  Aiding Injured Animals. Any person operating a vehicle, as defined by the Motor Vehicle Act of the state of Oregon, who runs over, strikes, injures, maims or kills any domestic animal or wildlife, shall immediately stop, render care, and notify the owner of the animal, if known, or notify any law enforcement agency with jurisdiction in the area of the incident, and remain at the scene until released by said law enforcement agency. 
B.  Refusing to Assist an Officer. A person commits the offense of refusing to assist an officer if, upon command by an officer known by the person to be an officer, the person unreasonably refuses or falls to assist in effecting an authorized action or prevents another from effecting an authorized action. 
C.  Interference with an Officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or hinder an officer while that officer is enforcing this ordinance. 
(Ord. 1294 § 3, 2001) 
6.04.040 - Owner's duties. 
A.  Licensing of Dogs. A dog shall be licensed according to the laws of the county. Exceptions to this requirement are dogs owned or located at an animal facility. 
B.  Disease Control. 
1.  No owner shall permit any animal that is afflicted with a communicable disease to come in contact with another animal or human that is susceptible to the affliction other than medical personnel for treatment. 
2.  No owner shall permit the body of a deceased animal to remain upon the public streets or private property for a period of time longer than the minimum necessary to remove such carcass. 
3.  Any owner of an animal shall remove excrement or other solid waste deposited by that animal on maintained areas of public property, and on private property not owned or under the control of the animal owner, unless posted otherwise. 
4.  Excrement, waste and contaminants shall be removed from confinement areas as often as necessary to prevent parasite contamination, reduce disease hazards and minimize odors. 
5.  Whenever any animal bites a person, the owner of said animal shall immediately notify the city or the county. An officer or the county animal control authority shall order the animal held in quarantine on the owner's premises or shall have it impounded and quarantined by the county for a period of not less than ten (10) days if there is no proof of current rabies inoculation. 
6.  Any animal that is placed under quarantine by the city or the county shall be kept separated from any other animals or people other than the owner's family or pets for a period of not less than ten (10) days. 
C.  Animal Housing and Restraint. If appropriate to the type of animal: 
1.  Animal housing structures shall be adequately constructed and maintained in good repair to protect both the animals and the public from injury, safely confine any animal housed therein, and prevent entry of other animals that may be dangerous to the animals within the enclosure. 
2.  Housing structures shall be dry and adequately sealed to prevent cold air and moisture from entering the enclosure. The primary enclosure for animals shall be of sufficient size to permit each animal housed therein to stand freely, sit, turn about and lie in a normal position, unless not warranted for specific commercial purposes. 
3.  Confinement areas shall provide protective shading and adequate shelter areas designed to minimize harmful exposure to weather conditions for those animals not acclimatized to the environment. 
4.  When restraining devices are used in connection with a confinement area intended to permit movement outside the housing structure, such devices shall be adequate in strength and installed in a manner to prevent entanglement with the devices of other animals or objects, and shall be fitted to the animal by a harness or well-fitted collar, other than a choke type collar, and shall not be shorter than three times the length of the animal as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail. 
5.  Physical control devices must be used with animals, except cats or birds, when off or outside the property of the owner unless the animal is field trained to respond to verbal or hand command. 
D.  Minimum Care. No owner shall maintain an animal without providing minimum care. 
(Ord. 1294 § 4, 2001) 
6.04.050 - Prohibited activities. 
A.  Animals at Large. It shall be unlawful for an owner to permit, either by negligence or by intention, any animal to run at large, except cats or birds. 
B.  Dangerous Animals. It shall be unlawful to keep in the city any animal that is dangerous without being properly contained and restrained. 
1.  An animal shall be deemed dangerous if it causes or attempts to cause physical injury or death of any person or other animal: 
a.  while at large, or 
b.  when it is on the property of the owner, but not restrained or contained in a manner that would reasonably prevent incidental contact by any person, or 
c.  when it is in or on a motor vehicle and not restrained or otherwise physically prevented from reaching any area outside the perimeter of the vehicle. 
2.  An animal shall not be classified as dangerous, even if the animal has engaged in these behaviors, upon a determination that the behavior was caused by abuse or torment of the animal, or criminal activity on the part of any victim. 
3.  No dog shall be found to be dangerous or aggressive if it is a dog trained for law enforcement purposes and is on duty under the control of an officer. 
C.  Public Nuisances. It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain within the city any animal that is a nuisance. An animal is a nuisance if it: 
1.  Causes repeated or prolonged disturbances by barking or noise making, plainly audible from inside any neighboring building, vehicle or residence, or 
2.  Damages or destroys property of a person other than that of the animal owner, or 
3.  Molests, attacks, menaces, or otherwise interferes with persons or other animals on property other than the owner's property. 
D.  Illegal Killing. Except as allowed by statute or state regulation: 
1.  No person shall knowingly kill an animal not owned by that person without the permission of the owner, unless it is necessary for the protection and safety of people, other animals, or the euthanasia of a sick or injured animal. 
2.  No person shall knowingly place food of any description containing poison or other injurious ingredients in any area reasonably likely to be accessible to any animal. 
3.  No person shall set any traps that are designed to kill, injure or maim an animal. 
(Ord. 1294 § 5, 2001) 
6.04.060 - Impounding procedures. 
A.  Violations. Any animal which is running at large, a public nuisance, diseased or in an environment hazardous to its health, dangerous, improperly housed or restrained, in violation of quarantine restrictions, not permitted in the city limits, sick, injured or dead, is unlicensed, or as otherwise provided herein, is or may be in violation of this ordinance, and 
1.  May be directed by an officer to be impounded by the county and placed in an animal facility. An officer, at their sole discretion, may also direct that the animal be impounded or quarantined by the owner at an alternate location. 
2.  Any animal allowed to be placed in alternate quarantine or impoundment shall be subject to the same hearing and judicial requirements set forth or imposed on animals impounded at the county. 
3.  Animals impounded by the county will be disposed of in accordance with the procedure provided by county ordinance for the disposition of impounded animals. 
4.  Any officer shall have the right of entry upon private land in the course of the officer's duties in enforcing the provisions of this ordinance, but such officer shall not enter into any building or dwelling without legal authorization or permission of the owner or occupant of the premises, except as required to protect life and property. 
B.  Impoundment Notice. Whenever an animal is impounded pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, in case the owner or custodian of the animal is known to the person doing the impounding, that person shall forthwith give notice of the impounding by personal service or by registered or certified mail upon the owner or custodian. Said notice shall include the name and number of the impounding agency, the date, time and reason for the impound, the location of the impounded animal, the time limit for response, the process for redemption of the animal, and the penalty or disposition of the animal if no contact is made by the owner. If after reasonable search the owner or person having custody of such animal cannot be found and notified of the impoundment, such notice shall within seventy-two (72) hours after the impoundment be conspicuously posted on such premises at which the animal was impounded, or receiving care or housing, if such can reasonably be determined. 
C.  Appeal. An animal owner may petition the court for the release of the animal. The court shall set a time and place for hearing the petition and notify the impounding officer. The court shall have full power to determine whether the animal should be returned to the owner and upon what terms, or other disposition of the animal. 
D.  Costs. Any costs associated with the impoundment of an animal are the owner's responsibility. Any unusual or extraordinary expenses incurred in the enforcement of this ordinance are the responsibility of the animal owner or other responsible party. 
(Ord. 1294 § 6, 2001) 
6.04.070 - Penalties. 
A.  Separate Violations. Each day's violation of any section of this ordinance constitutes a separate offense. 
B.  Violation of Sections. Violation of any section of this ordinance is a class "C" violation, unless otherwise specified. 
C.  Repeat Offenses. Second and subsequent violations of the same chapter of this ordinance that occur within a twelve month period are a class "B" violation, unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. 1294 § 7, 2001) 
6.04.080 - Severability. 
    If any title, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, phrase, clause, sentence or word of this ordinance shall, for any reason, be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the ordinance shall not be affected thereby, and shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1294 § 8, 2001) 
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters: 
Chapter 8.04 - NUISANCES 
Sections: 

8.04.010 - Definitions. 
    Except where the context indicates otherwise, the singular number includes the plural and the masculine gender includes the feminine, and the following mean: 
    "City" means the city of Toledo. 
    "Council" means the governing body of the city. 
    "Fence" means a barrier intended to prevent escape or intrusion or to mark a boundary. 
    "Inoperable vehicle" means any vehicle which has no current valid state vehicle license, or which cannot be moved without being repaired or dismantled, or which is no longer usable for the purpose for which it was manufactured, and which has been in that condition for at least fifteen (15) days. 
    "Person" means a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation. 
    "Person in charge of property" means an agency, occupancy, lessee, contract, purchaser, or person other than the owner, having possession or control of the property. 
    "Police officer" means any sworn or non-sworn officer authorized by the chief of police and city manager to carryout enforcement action. 
    "Public place" means a building, place or accommodation, whether publicly or privately owned, open and available to the general public. 
    "Screened and fenced" means surrounding by a fence to prevent unauthorized entry into an area and effectively screened from view from public rights-of-way and adjacent properties. Items covered by tarps, plastic sheeting or other similar materials shall not be considered screened and fenced for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 820 § 1, 1966) 
(Ord. No. 1347, § 11, 11-21-2012) 
8.04.040 - Livestock and poultry. 
A.  No person shall maintain a pigsty, slaughterhouse or tannery, or permit livestock or poultry owned by the person to run at large within the city. 
B.  No person may permit any barn, stable or chicken coop or other similar structure to cause an odor noticeable at the property line of the property. 
C.  No person may keep roosters or peafowl. 
(Ord. 1294 § 9, 2001; Ord. 820 § 4, 1966) 
(Ord. No. 1330, § 1, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 1347, § 2, 11-21-2012) 
8.04.050 - Buildings and structures. 
A.  An improperly maintained building or structure is a nuisance. An improperly maintained building is one that is in an obviously dilapidated state, such as a building or structure that has: 
1.  A substantial amount of missing siding, roofing or other component. A building with a temporary cover such as a tarp or plywood for more than thirty (30) days is considered to have missing siding or roofing or other components. 
2.  Has missing windows or doors, or windows, doors or screens that are not properly attached or that do not properly close. 
3.  Has substantial visible damage or deterioration of any type, including smoke damage or peeling or flaking paint. 
4.  Has any component or attachment that is visibly broken or damaged. 
(Ord. No. 1347, § 3, 11-21-2012) 
8.04.060 - Nuisances affecting the public health and safety. 
    The owner, occupant or person in charge of property shall not permit or cause a nuisance affecting public health and/or safety. The following are nuisances affecting the public health and safety and may be abated as provided in this chapter: 
A.  Privies. An open vault or privy constructed and maintained within the city, except those constructed or maintained in connection with construction projects in accordance with the Oregon State Health Division regulation; 
B.  Debris on Private Property. Accumulation of debris, rubbish, manure and other refuse located on private property that are not removed within a reasonable time with the presumption that a reasonable amount of time for material that can be disposed of through normal solid waste collection is one week, and fifteen (15) days for all other materials; 
C.  Stagnant Water. Stagnant water which affords a breeding place for mosquitoes and other insect pests; 
D.  Water Pollution. Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream or drainage ditch by sewage, industrial wastes or other substances placed in or near such water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water; 
E.  Food. Decayed or unwholesome food which is offered for human consumption; 
F.  Odor. Premises which are in such a state or condition as to cause an offensive odor noticeable at the property line or which are in an unsanitary condition; 
G.  Surface Drainage. Drainage of liquid wastes from private premises; 
H.  Unprotected Garbage or Refuse. Garbage or refuse stored or allowed to remain outdoors other than in receptacles that provide protection from the weather and animals, including garbage or refuse that overflows from dumpsters. A dumpster or receptacle will be considered to be overflowing if the lid cannot be fully closed because of the accumulation of garbage. For purposes of this section, construction waste is not considered to be garbage or refuse; 
I.  Harborage for Vermin. It is unlawful for any person who owns and/or is in charge of property to allow the accumulation of any litter, filth, garbage, decaying animal or vegetable matter, which may or does offer harborage or source of food for vermin; 
J.  Properties Declared "Unfit for Use." Property placed on the Oregon Health Division "unfit for use" list because it has been used for the manufacture of illegal drugs and that has not been issued a "certificate of fitness" by the Oregon Health Division. 
(Ord. 1113 § 1, 1980; Ord. 820 § 6, 1966) 
(Ord. No. 1330, § 2, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 1347, §§ 4-6, 11-21-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1347, § 4, adopted Nov. 21, 2012, changed the title of § 8.04.060 from "Nuisances affecting the public health" to "Nuisances affecting the public health and safety." 
8.04.070 - Abandoned iceboxes. 
    No person shall leave in a place accessible to children an abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or similar container which has an airtight door with a snap lock, lock or other mechanism which may not be released for opening from the inside, without first removing such lock or door from such icebox, refrigerator or similar container. 
(Ord. 820 § 7, 1966) 
(Ord. No. 1330, § 3, 10-7-2009) 
8.04.080 - Attractive nuisances. 
A.  The owner, occupant or person in charge of property shall not permit: 
1.  Unguarded machinery, equipment or other devices on such property which are attractive, dangerous and accessible to children; 
2.  Lumber, logs or piling placed or stored on such property in a manner so as to be attractive, dangerous and accessible to children; 
3.  An open pit, quarry, cistern, private or public swimming pool, or other excavation, any of which is more than eighteen (18) inches deep, without erecting adequate safeguards, barriers, and/or enclosures consisting of a fence or wall not less than four feet in height above the underlying ground or base, incapable of being crawled under, and sufficient to prevent such places from being frequented by children who are unattended. 
4.  An unoccupied building or structure, no matter what condition or state of disrepair, which is attractive, dangerous and accessible to children. 
5.  Outdoor storage of inoperable vehicles and other vehicles not used for transportation without a sight-obscuring fence, wall, or other visual and physical barrier, regardless of whether vehicle storage is a permitted use in the zone. 
B.  This section shall not apply to authorized construction projects for which an unexpired building permit has been issued, if during the course of construction reasonable safeguards are maintained to prevent injury or death to playing children. 
(Ord. 1144, 1982: Ord. 820 § 8, 1966) 
(Ord. No. 1330, § 4, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 1347, §§ 7, 8, 11-21-2012) 
8.04.090 - Snow and ice removal. 
    The owner, occupant or person in charge of property, improved or unimproved, abutting on a public sidewalk, shall not permit: 
A.  Snow to remain on the sidewalk for a period longer than the first two hours of daylight after the snow has fallen. 
B.  Ice to cover or remain on a sidewalk, after the first two hours of daylight after the ice has formed. Such person shall remove ice accumulating on the sidewalk or cover the ice with sand, ashes, or other suitable material to assure safe travel. 
(Ord. 820 § 9, 1966) 
(Ord. No. 1330, § 5, 10-7-2009) 
8.04.100 - Vegetation. 
A.  The following things, practices, or conditions on any property are nuisances: 
1.  The owner, occupant or person in charge of property permits weeds or other noxious vegetation to grow upon their property. It shall be the duty of an owner, occupant or person in charge of property to cut down or destroy weeds or other noxious vegetation as often as needed in order to prevent the weeds or noxious vegetation from becoming unsightly, from becoming a fire hazard, from maturing, or from going to seed. The city shall have discretion to not enforce this section based on the totality of circumstances, including the type and location of the property, whether the property is appropriately left in a natural state, and other similar factors. 
2.  Dead, decaying, or unsafe trees or tree limbs that present a safety hazard to the public or adjacent property. 
3.  Brush, bushes, shrubbery, tree limbs, or other growth that projects over a sidewalk at less than eight feet above the sidewalk level, or that project over a street at less than thirteen (13) feet above the street level. 
4.  Any vegetation, wall, fence, or other vision obstructing structure exceeding thirty-six (36) inches in height measured from the roadway level that obstructs a driver's view at an intersection or driveway access. Vegetation, wall, fence, or structures obstruct vision if it's within twenty (20) feet of a lot corner at the intersection or at the edge of a driveway and, in the determination of the city manager constitutes a safety hazard. 
5.  Grass in excess of eight inches. 
B.  Noxious weeds include all weeds listed by the State Department of Agriculture as restricted or prohibited noxious weeds, grasses which offer a vector or rodent harborage, contribute noxious pollens to the atmosphere, constitute a fire hazard or unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of abutting public or private property. 
(Ord. 820 § 10, 1966) 
(Ord. No. 1330, § 6, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 1347, § 9, 11-21-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1347, § 9, adopted Nov. 21, 2012, changed the title of § 8.04.100 from "Weeds and noxious growth" to "Vegetation." 
8.04.110 - Junk, garbage and rubbish. 
A.  No person shall throw, dump, or deposit upon public or private property an injurious or offensive substance or any kind of rubbish, trash, debris, refuse or any substance that would mar the appearance, create a stench, detract from the cleanliness or safety of such property, or would be likely to injure an animal, vehicle or person traveling upon a public way. 
B.  No person shall keep any junk outdoors on any street, lot or premises, or in a building that is not wholly or entirely enclosed, without being properly screened and fenced as defined by this chapter. 
C.  The term "junk" as used in this section includes, but is not limited to, inoperable vehicles, vehicle parts, vehicles not in regular operation, vehicles not equipped as required by Chapter 815 of Oregon Motor Vehicle Laws pertaining to equipment on vehicles, machinery, machinery parts, appliances or parts thereof, iron or metal, glass, paper, lumber, wood or other waste or discarded materials. 
D.  This section does not apply to junk kept in a duly licensed junk yard or automobile wrecking yard that is obscured by a sight-tight fence at least six feet in height. 
(Ord. 820 § 11, 1966) 
(Ord. No. 1330, § 7, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 1347, § 10, 11-21-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1347, § 10, adopted Nov. 21, 2012, changed the title of § 8.04.110 from "Scattering rubbish" to "Junk, garbage and rubbish." 
8.04.120 - Fences. 
A.  No person shall construct or maintain a barbed-wire fence or allow barbed wire to remain as a part of a fence unless the barbed wire is placed not less than six inches above the top of a fence which is not less than six feet high. This subsection (A) shall not apply to farms and pastures. 
B.  No person shall install, maintain or operate an electric fence along a street or sidewalk, or along the adjoining property line of another person. 
C.  A fence may consist of wood, metal, masonry, plastic or similar materials, or a hedge or other planting arranged to form a visual or physical barrier. A fence may not be constructed of plywood, tarps, plastic sheeting, corrugated metal or plastic, logs, railroad ties or other similar materials. 
D.  Improperly maintained fences are a nuisance. A fence is improperly maintained if components are missing or loose, or the fence is sagging, leaning or otherwise not in good repair. 
E.  This section does not apply to fences placed and maintained by a government entity for the purposes of public safety or security. 
(Ord. 1154, 1983: Ord. 820 § 13, 1966) 
(Ord. No. 1330, § 8, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 1347, §§ 11, 12, 11-21-2012) 
8.04.130 - Surface waters-Drainage. 
A.  The owner, occupant or person in charge of any building or structure shall not suffer or permit rainwater, ice or snow to fall from such building or structure on to a street or public sidewalk or to flow across such sidewalk. 
B.  The owner or person in charge of property shall install and maintain in a proper state of repair adequate drainpipes or a drainage system so that any overflow water accumulating on the roof or about such building is not carried across or upon the sidewalk. 
C.  Nonpublic stormwater facilities that malfunction and result in flooding or damage to other property not possessed or controlled by the owner or person in charge of the stormwater facility are nuisances. The owner or person in charge of property served by an access drive is responsible for culverts under the access drive, even if the culvert is in the right-of-way. Nonpublic stormwater facilities include but are not limited to: 
1.  A stormwater facility not located on city-owned property, city right-of-way, or city easement; 
2.  A private parking lot storm drain or drywell; 
3.  A stormwater facility not designed and constructed for use by the general public; 
4.  Access-drive culverts in the public right-of-way or on private property; 
5.  A stormwater detention or retention system not constructed or otherwise acquired by the city. 
D.  No person may dispose of waste oil, paints, solvents, or other toxic chemicals into any stream, storm drain or other portion of the storm drain system. "Dispose of" includes placing materials in locations where they will ultimately enter the storm drainage system. 
(Ord. 820 § 14, 1966) 
(Ord. No. 1330, § 9, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 1347, § 13, 11-21-2012) 
8.04.140 - Radio and television interference. 
A.  No person shall operate or use an electrical, mechanical or other device, apparatus, instrument or machine that causes reasonably preventable interference with radio or television reception; provided, that the radio or television receiver interfered with is of good engineering design. 
B.  This section does not apply to electrical and radio devices licensed, approved and operated under the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. 
(Ord. 820 § 15, 1966) 
(Ord. No. 1330, § 10, 10-7-2009) 
8.04.150 - Declaration of nuisance. 
A.  The acts, conditions or objects specifically enumerated and defined in Section 8.04.020 through Section 8.04.140 are declared to be unlawful and public nuisances and such acts, conditions or objects may be abated when they exist on public or private property by the procedures set forth in Section 8.04.160 through Section 8.02.240 of this chapter. 
B.  In addition to those nuisances specifically enumerated within this chapter every other thing, substance or act which is determined by the council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of this city is declared to be unlawful and a nuisance and may be abated when existing on public or private property as provided in Section 8.04.160 through Section 8.04.240 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1113 § 3 (part), 1980; Ord. 820 § 16, 1966) 
8.04.160 - Notice to abate-Private property. 
    Upon determination by a police officer that the officer has probable cause to believe that a nuisance exists as defined in Section 8.04.020 through Section 8.04.140 of this chapter in the city or when pursuant to Section 8.04.150(B) a thing, substance or act not defined in Section 8.04.020 through Section 8.04.140 is determined by the council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the city, the police officer shall: 
A.  Serve notice in writing upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists or in case there is not such occupant, then upon the owner of the property or the owner's agent notifying thereof the existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal in the time specified in this chapter. 
B.  If the occupant or owner of the property fails to abate the nuisance after being served notice that a nuisance exists within the time specified in this chapter, the police officer shall cause to be issued a citation for violation of this chapter to the occupant or owner by personal service or by registered or certified mail, and proceed with abating the nuisance and provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1113 § 3, (part), 1980; Ord. 820 § 17, 1966) 
(Ord. No. 1330, § 11, 10-7-2009) 
8.04.170 - Responsibility for removal. 
    Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner or occupant of the property upon which the nuisance exists, either or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the city, the owner or occupant of the property where the same is located shall be liable for the expenses incurred. 
(Ord. 1113 § 3 (part), 1980; Ord. 1014 (part), 1977: Ord. 820 § 18, 1966) 
8.04.180 - Notice procedure. 
    The chief of police of the city shall cause to be given notice of the existence of any acts, conditions, objects, things or substances declared to be nuisances under this chapter and request removal. Said notice shall be given at least ten (10) days before the time set therein for compliance. It shall constitute sufficient notice when a copy of the same is posted in a conspicuous place upon the property on which the nuisance is located and duplicate copies are sent by registered mail to the owner or occupant of the property at his last known address. 
(Ord. 1113 § 3 (part), 1980; Ord. 1014 (part), 1977: Ord. 820 § 19, 1966) 
8.04.190 - Content of notice. 
    The notice shall contain the request for removal within the time specified in this chapter and the notice shall advise that upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, the city or its designee shall undertake such removal with the cost of removal to be levied against the owner or occupant of the property. 
(Ord. 1113 § 3 (part), 1980; Ord. 1014 (part), 1977: Ord. 820 § 20, 1966) 
8.04.200 - Request for hearing. 
    The persons to whom the notice are directed or their duly authorized agent may file a written request for hearing before the city council or its designee within five days of the date set in the notice for compliance described in Section 8.04.180 for the purposes of defending against the charges by the city. 
(Ord. 1113 § 3 (part), 1980; Ord. 1014 (part), 1977: Ord. 820 § 21, 1966) 
8.04.210 - Procedure for hearing. 
    The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of the request and the person filing the request for hearing shall be advised of the time and place of said hearing at least ten (10) days in advance thereof. At any such hearing, the city and the persons to whom the notices have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either party deems necessary subject to any procedural rules which the city, may have adopted governing the conduct of hearings before the city council. 
(Ord. 1113 § 3 (part), 1980; Ord. 1014 (part), 1977: Ord. 820 § 22, 1966) 
8.04.220 - Abatement of nuisance by city. 
A.  If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied by the date set in said notice for compliance or in the event that a notice requesting a hearing is timely filed, hearing is had and the existence of the violation is affirmed by the council of the city, the chief of police or his designee shall abate any nuisance violation described in the notice. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow the chief of police or his designee to abate any act, condition, object, thing or substance declared a nuisance by this chapter or to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow the chief of police or his designee to enter upon property for the purpose of abating any such act, condition, object, thing or substance declared a nuisance by this chapter. 
C.  The city recorder shall keep an accurate record of the expense incurred by the city in abating the nuisance and shall include therein a charge of twenty (20) percent of the expense for administrative overhead. 
(Ord. 1113 § 3 (part), 1980; Ord. 1014 (part), 1977: Ord. 820 § 23, 1966) 
8.04.230 - Assessment of costs. 
A.  The city recorder, by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, shall forward to the owner or person in charge of the property a notice stating: 
1.  The total cost of abatement including the administrative overhead; 
2.  That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the property unless paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice; 
3.  That if the owner or person in charge of the property objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, he may file a notice of objection with the city recorder not more than ten (10) days from the date of the notice. 
B.  Upon expiration of ten (10) days after the date of the notice, the council in the regular course of business shall hear and determine the objections to the costs to be assessed. 
C.  If the costs of the abatement are not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, an assessment of the costs as stated or as determined by the council shall be made by resolution and shall thereupon be entered in the docket of city liens and, upon such entry being made, shall constitute a lien upon the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated. 
D.  The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvement are enforced and shall bear interest at the rate of percent per year. Such interest shall commence to run from date of the entry of the lien in the lien docket. 
E.  An error in the name of the owner or person in charge of the property shall not void the assessment nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment render the assessment void, but it shall remain a valid lien against the property. 
(Ord. 1113 § 3 (part), 1980; Ord. 1014 (part), 1977: Ord. 820 § 24, 1966) 
8.04.240 - Summary abatement. 
    The procedure provided by this chapter is not exclusive but is in addition to procedure provided by other ordinances, and the health officer, the chief of the fire department, or chief of police may proceed summarily to abate a health or other nuisance which unmistakably exists and from which there is imminent danger to human life or property. 
(Ord. 1113 § 3 (part), 1980; Ord. 1014 (part), 1977: Ord. 820 § 25, 1966) 
8.04.250 - Violation-Penalty. 
A.  Violation of this chapter will constitute a Class A infraction. 
B.  The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violating this chapter, but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person of the duty to abate a nuisance. 
(Ord. 1244 § 6, 1996: Ord. 1113 § 3 (part), 1980; Ord. 1014 (part), 1977: Ord. 820 § 27(2), 1966) 
Chapter 8.08 - TEMPORARY USES, TEMPORARY STRUCTURES, AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 
Sections: 

8.08.010 - Purpose. 
    To regulate placement, restrict time limits, control aesthetics, limit nuisances, and generally protect health, safety, and welfare considerations the city of Toledo recognizes that certain short-term uses, structures, and recreational vehicle placements are not allowed as outright permitted uses. A temporary permit may be issued for up to six months by the city manager or other designated city staff member for only the following uses: 
A.  In conjunction with on-site construction, only if a building permit has been issued for such construction, and the permit is active; 
B.  Security measures that need to be taken for a temporary situation; 
C.  A temporary place to conduct business; 
D.  To meet special housing needs, in conjunction with an existing residence. The applicant must carry the burden of proof to show a permanent alternative is being sought and the temporary use provides the best or only alternative in the interim period; 
E.  Special event structures; or 
F.  Business office for the sale of property within a subdivision. 
(Ord. 1310 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.08.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Adequate sanitation facilities" means any public restroom, private restroom, or any portable fixture approved by either the Lincoln County Sanitarian or a Lincoln County Plumbing Inspector. 
    "City manager" means the city manager of the city of Toledo or designee(s). 
    "Recreational structure" means a campground structure with or without plumbing, heating or cooking facilities intended to be used by any particular occupant on a limited-time basis for recreational purposes and may include yurts, cabins, fabric structures, or similar structures as further defined, by rule, by the city manager. A structure intended for removal or demolition within a prescribed time not exceeding six months. 
    "Recreational vehicle (RV)" means a vehicular-type living unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its own motor power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. Types of recreational vehicles include, but are not limited to, travel trailer, camping trailer, camper, camping van, and motor home. 
    "Special event structure" means a structure occupied in affiliation with an event recognized by the city of Toledo, state of Oregon, or United States related to a holiday, festival, or celebration, including, but not limited to Christmas, Independence Day, Toledo Summer Festival, Toledo Main Street Antique Fair, or carnivals or fairs. Special event vendors affiliated with the event organizers are exempt from obtaining a temporary permit, but are limited to no more than thirty (30) days prior to and seven calendar days following the event. 
    "Structure" means a building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some manner and which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on the ground. 
    "Temporary living quarter" means a recreational vehicle, as defined in this chapter, used for sleeping and/or living purposes and has water and sewer, but is intended for short time use (six months). 
    "Temporary structure" means a structure without any foundation or footings and that is removed when the designated time period (usually six months), activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased. 
    "Temporary use" means a use established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue the use upon the expiration of the permitted time of six months. 
(Ord. 1310 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.08.030 - Fees. 
    An appropriate application fee shall be set by city council resolution for a temporary permit. The application fee and renewal fee must be paid concurrent with the application. Renewal fees will be double the original fee. A request to waive fees for recognized nonprofit applicants must be made in writing to the city council. 
(Ord. 1310 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.08.040 - Permit required. 
    All temporary uses including the uses of an RV as a living quarter or for conducting business within the city of Toledo is prohibited unless the owner of land (applicant) on which it will be parked first obtains a temporary permit from the city. Use of an RV as a temporary living quarter in conjunction with a visitation of less than fourteen (14) days at an existing residence does not require a temporary permit. Using the Type I procedure under Toledo Municipal Code Chapter 19.08, the city shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny a temporary use permit based on findings that all of the criteria are satisfied. 
(Ord. 1310 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.08.050 - Application requirements. 
A.  The application form shall be provided by the city of Toledo and the applicant shall set forth on the site plan the following: 
1.  The location map showing the area in the city where the use will occur; 
2.  The proposed siting of the temporary use or RV on property; and 
3.  The provisions for water, sewer, and electrical service. 
B.  The applicant must indicate the period of time the permit is sought and the reason for the use of a temporary structure or RV instead of a permanent structure. The applicant must propose alternatives to the temporary permit in a permanent solution plan. 
(Ord. 1310 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.08.060 - Special event structures. 
A.  Special event structures may be erected in conjunction with a recognized federal, state, or local holiday, festival, and celebration if the following are met: 
1.  The time limit for such structures is no longer than thirty (30) days prior to and seven calendar days after the special event. 
2.  The permission of the property owner must be obtained. 
3.  The person or persons responsible for the special event structure shall also be responsible for the maintenance of the grounds and shall have a trash receptacle available. 
4.  Adequate sanitary facilities must be available to the site. 
5.  The person or persons responsible for the temporary structure shall sign an agreement that the provisions of this subsection shall be complied with. 
6.  The structure must not interfere with the provisions of parking for the permanent use on the site. 
B.  An application for a special event structure must be made on a form prescribed by the community development and planning department. Failure to fill out all needed items will result in the rejection of the application until such time as all items are provided. The city manager shall issue the permit for a special event structure if all the conditions outlined in subsection A of this section are met. 
(Ord. 1310 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.08.070 - Temporary living quarter. 
A.  A permit to allow a person or persons to occupy a temporary living quarter may be granted subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The permit must be in conjunction with a valid, active building permit, security dwelling, or for a proven medical hardship. 
2.  The time limit shall be no longer than six months from issuance. After the expiration of the time limit, the recreational vehicle (RV) used for the temporary living quarter is subject to renewal provisions in Section 8.08.100. 
3.  The RV used as the temporary living quarter must be self-contained for sanitary sewer or connected to municipal sewer and water. 
4.  Any facility used for temporary living quarter must meet the definition of a RV as contained in this chapter. 
5.  Temporary living situations for nonresidential projects shall not use a job shack or other such structure instead of an RV as the living quarter. 
6.  Prior to the issuance of a temporary living quarter permit, the applicant shall sign an agreement to comply with the provision of this section. 
7.  If the property subject to the temporary living quarter permit is not owned by the applicant, written permission of the property owner is required. 
B.  An application for a temporary living quarter permit must be made on a form prescribed by the community development and planning department. Failure to fill out all needed items will result in the rejection of the application until such time as all items are provided. The city manager or his designate shall issue the permit for the temporary living quarter if all conditions outlined in subsection A of this section are met. 
(Ord. 1310 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.08.080 - Temporary structures. 
    A temporary structure not associated with a special event may be erected subject to the following: 
A.  The permit, if approved, shall be issued for a period not to exceed six months. Upon like application and approval, the permit may be renewed for an additional six months in accordance with Section 8.08.100. Under no circumstances shall any permit be issued under this section exceed one year from the date the permit was first issued. 
B.  Temporary structures are limited to commercial and industrial zoned properties. 
C.  An application for a temporary structure must be accompanied by the following: 
1.  Written permission from the property owner. 
2.  A site plan, drawn to scale, showing: 
a.  The proposed location of the temporary structure; 
b.  Existing buildings; 
c.  Existing parking and proposed parking for the temporary structure; 
d.  Access(es) to the parking areas; 
e.  Any additional structures, seating areas, and amenities associated with the temporary structure; 
f.  The location and size of trash receptacles; 
g.  Utilities; 
h.  Existing signs; 
i.  Temporary structure building elevations or photos; 
j.  The colors of the temporary structure and signing; 
k.  Adequate sanitation facilities must be available to the site. 
D.  In addition to the above requirements, the applicant for a temporary structure permit must submit the following: 
1.  An agreement stating that the applicant is aware of the limitations and conditions attached to the granting of the permit and agrees to abide by such limitations and conditions. 
E.  An application for a temporary structure permit must be made on a form prescribed by the community development and planning department. Failure to fill out all needed items will result in the rejection of the application until such time as all items are provided. The city manager shall issue the permit for the temporary structure if all conditions outlined in subsections B through D of this section are met. 
F.  If the temporary structure permit is approved, the applicant must obtain a city of Toledo business license. 
(Ord. 1310 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.08.090 - Permit revocable. 
    Any temporary permit will be revoked on twenty-four (24) hour notice by the city manager, if, after inspection of the structure or RV, any of the following reasons are found: 
A.  Lacks proper sanitary facilities. 
B.  Is dangerous to the public health and safety. 
C.  Has become a public nuisance due to conditions, location, or use. 
D.  Noncompliance with conditions set forth in granting the permit. 
E.  Approval being obtained by fraud or misrepresentation. 
(Ord. 1310 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.08.100 - Renewal. 
    Except those uses allowed in Section 8.08.060 (Special event structures), six months is the maximum time for which a temporary permit may be issued by city staff. If the applicant can show that a permanent solution will be forthcoming, the applicant may apply to the city council for one renewal of the temporary permit. An applicant is only allowed to apply for one renewal. The council will determine the length of time during which the renewal will be valid up to a maximum of six months. The city council will consider the renewal application at a public meeting. Before council consideration, affected landowners within one hundred feet of the subject property boundaries shall be notified by first class mail of the renewal application, and provided at least a fifteen (15) day comment period before the public meeting. Any subsequent applications by the same property owner within three years of the expiration of the temporary permit must be approved by the city council following the same process and subject to the same fees as a temporary permit renewal. 
(Ord. 1310 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.08.110 - Permits not transferable. 
    Permits authorized by this chapter are not transferable to another person or location unless approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 1310 § 1 (part), 2006) 
8.08.120 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violations of this chapter shall constitute a Class A infraction. 
(Ord. 1310 § 1 (part), 2006) 
Chapter 8.12 - OUTDOOR PUBLIC EVENTS, ENTERTAINMENTS AND ASSEMBLIES 
Sections: 

8.12.010 - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, persons, corporation, organization, landowner or lessor, except regularly organized and supervised school district activities or programs such as local Toledo civic organizations which are generally recognized as such and are first approved by the Toledo city council, to allow, encourage, organize, promote, conduct, permit or cause to be advertised an outdoor event, entertainment, amusement or assembly of persons which would probably attract fifty (50) or more persons unless a valid city permit has been obtained for the operation of said assembly. 
(Ord. 872 § 1, 1971) 
8.12.020 - Permit application. 
    Written application for a permit to hold outdoor assemblies as herein defined and catering to the general public shall be made to the Toledo city recorder forty (40) or more days prior to the date upon which such assembly is scheduled to be held. Written notice of approval or disapproval of said application shall be given the applicant no later than fifteen (15) days after the application has been filed. Permits shall not be denied providing the conditions enumerated in Section 8.12.040 are met by the applicant and the permit fees as required by Section 8.12.030 are paid. No permit shall be granted to anyone who has not reached the age of twenty-one (21). 
(Ord. 872 § 2, 1971) 
(Ord. No. 1328, § 1, 8-5-2009) 
8.12.030 - Fee. 
    The fee required to be paid to the city recorder with the filing of the application shall be in an amount set by resolution of the Council. No permit shall be granted for a period of more than three days expiring at midnight of the third day. The permit fee shall be retained by the city whether a permit is granted, denied or withdrawn. 
(Ord. 872 § 3, 1971) 
(Ord. No. 1328, § 2, 8-5-2009) 
8.12.040 - Permit-Conditions for issuance. 
A.  Location. No permit for an outdoor assembly shall be granted unless said assembly is to be held in those areas of the city zoned or otherwise designated for parks and recreation, or unless the owner of any private property where said assembly is to be held files with the city recorder as a part of the application his written consent to the use of his property for such purpose and furnishes evidence of his ownership, together with a description and map of the property to be used for the proposed assembly. 
B.  Sanitary Facilities. No permit shall be granted unless the applicants obtain the written approval of the Lincoln County health department indicating that sanitary facilities are satisfactory at the location and for the size and purpose of the assembly. 
C.  Fire Protection Required. No permit shall be granted hereunder unless the applicants have shown that the fire chief has approved fire protection devices and equipment available for and at the location of the assembly. 
D.  Public Safety. No permit shall be granted hereunder unless the applicants have obtained the written approval of the Toledo police department indicating that adequate traffic control and crowd protection policing have been contracted for or otherwise provided by the applicants. 
E.  Parking Facilities. Application for a permit hereunder shall be accompanied by a scale drawing showing adequate parking facilities have been made available within or adjacent to the location for which the permit is requested. Such parking facilities shall provide parking space for one vehicle for every four persons expected or reasonably to be expected. Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided to or from such parking area to facilitate the movement of any vehicle at any time to or from the parking area. 
(Ord. 872 § 4, 1971) 
8.12.050 - Hours of operation. 
A.  No entertainment assembly shall be conducted in the incorporated areas of Toledo within one thousand (1,000) feet of any residence between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and nine a.m. and in all other areas between the hours of two a.m. and nine a.m. 
B.  The use of amplified noise shall be regulated in such a manner that it shall not interfere with the normal usage of any school, church, residence or other permanent place of human habitation unless prior written consent is obtained from all affected persons. 
(Ord. 872 § 5, 1971) 
8.12.060 - Intoxicating liquor prohibited. 
    No firm, person, society, association or corporation conducting an entertainment assembly, nor any person having charge or control thereof at any time when an entertainment assembly is being conducted shall permit any person to bring into said entertainment assembly, or upon the premises thereof, any intoxicating liquor, nor permit intoxicating liquor to be consumed on the premises, and no person during said time shall take or carry onto said premises or drink thereon intoxicating liquor. This provision shall not apply to the sale and consumption of intoxicating liquor from a facility located on the premises of an entertainment assembly when licensed by the state of Oregon. 
(Ord. 872 § 6, 1971) 
8.12.070 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this chapter, will constitute a Class A infraction. 
(Ord. 1244 § 11, 1996: Ord. 872 § 7, 1971) 
8.12.080 - Failure to comply. 
    Compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter shall constitute the minimum health, sanitation and safety provisions, and failure to comply with the terms and conditions shall constitute a public nuisance, and the sponsors of said event shall be subject to all criminal and civil remedies as such. 
(Ord. 872 § 8, 1971) 
Chapter 8.16 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 
Sections: 

8.16.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the solid waste management ordinance. 
(Ord. 1150 § 1, 1983) 
8.16.020 - Purposes, policy and scope. 
    It is declared to be the public policy of the city of Toledo to regulate solid waste management to: 
A.  Insure safe, efficient, economical and comprehensive solid waste service; 
B.  Insure fair and equitable consumer rates and to prohibit rate preferences or other practices that might be discriminatory; 
C.  Eliminate overlapping service and thereby to increase efficiency and to decrease truck noise, street wear, energy waste, air pollution and public inconvenience; 
D.  Protect public health and the environment; 
E.  Protect against improper and dangerous handling of hazardous wastes. 
(Ord. 1150 § 2, 1983) 
8.16.030 - Definitions. 
    "Affiliated company" means the parent company of a franchisee or any subsidiary of such parent company, or any company of which thirty (30) percent or more of the common stock of control is owned or controlled by the franchisee or a shareholder or shareholders of the franchisee who own or control thirty (30) percent or more of the common stock of the franchisee which shares costs with the franchisee with respect to the services provided under this agreement. Examples of such shared costs include, but are not limited to, labor, equipment or administrative costs. 
    "Allowable expenses" means those expenses incurred by a franchisee in the performance of this agreement that are acceptable as reimbursable by the ratepayer as enumerated in this section. Allowable expenses are allowable only to the extent that such expenses are known and measurable, calculated according to Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) on an accrual basis, do not exceed the fair market value of comparable goods or services, and are commercially reasonable and prudently incurred by the franchisee solely in the course of performing its obligations under the franchise. Allowable expenses, as qualified in this section, shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  The costs of complying with all laws, regulations or orders applicable to the obligations of franchisee; 
2.  Disposal costs, as defined in this section, including increased disposal costs and surcharges to the extent that such increase does not exceed eighty-five (85) percent of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for the current year. If such increased disposal costs and surcharges exceed eighty-five (85) percent of the CPI for the current year, then such costs and surcharges shall be allowed as pass through expenses; 
3.  Labor costs, including supervisory labor, associated with provision of services under the franchise, including workers compensation and benefits and third party transportation costs for recyclable materials; 
4.  Vehicle and equipment expenses, including vehicle registration fees, motor fuel, oil, tires, and repairs and maintenance of equipment; 
5.  All expenses of maintaining and replacing capital equipment and assets, including depreciation and repair and maintenance; 
6.  Performance bonds and insurance, at a minimum, in the amounts and coverage required by the city; 
7.  Administrative expenses related to data processing, billing and supplies, finance and accounting, officer salaries, franchise administration, human resource and labor management, rate analysis, and regulatory compliance; 
8.  Utilities; 
9.  Training and worker safety; 
10.  Advertising, promotion, and public education costs; 
11.  Property or facility depreciation, rental or lease costs necessary to the provision of services required by the franchise agreement; 
12.  Depreciation and amortization of capital assets, including any necessary stand-by or back-up equipment used on a regular and ongoing basis in the provision of services under this franchise over standardized economic useful lives of the various assets. The city shall set the standard economic lives based upon industry input and prevailing practices; 
13.  Outside professional fees and costs; 
14.  Debt service expenses other than any debt service expenses associated with purchases of routes or business purchases, that are not in excess of market rates ordinarily charted for the various types of financing required for purchases or leases; 
15.  Franchise fees; 
16.  Any expense incurred in the collection, handling, processing, storing, transporting, marketing, or sale or other disposition of recyclable materials, as defined in ORS 459.005(20); 
17.  All surcharges, taxes or fees, other than state or federal income taxes or franchise fees, which are imposed upon franchisee or levied by federal, state or local governments in connection with franchisee's provision of solid waste collection, transportation, disposal and resource recovery services; 
18.  Any other expense determined in advance by the city and franchisee to be reasonable and necessary to the provision of the services required under the franchise agreement; 
19.  Bad debts. 
    "City" means the city of Toledo, Oregon. 
    "City manager" means the city manager of the city of Toledo. 
    "Collection" or "collection service" means all or any part of the activities involved in the collection of solid waste and its transportation to an appropriate solid waste management facility. 
    "Council" means the city council of the city of Toledo. 
    "Customer" means generators of solid waste in the city to whom the franchisee provides service pursuant to a franchise granted by the city, and who have not been refused service pursuant to this chapter. 
    "Disposal" means the disposition of solid waste collected by a franchisee at a permitted solid waste handling facility selected by the franchisee. 
    "Disposal costs" means the total paid by a franchisee for the disposal of solid waste collected pursuant to a franchise granted by the city at the solid waste handling facility or transfer station. 
    "Franchisee" means Dahl Disposal Service, Inc., or a subcontractor to Dahl Disposal Service, Inc. 
    "Gross revenue" for any period means gross accrual-based billings by the franchisee to customers for services provided under this agreement and the accrual-based proceeds from the sales of recycled material collected within the franchise. 
    "Hazardous waste" means: 
1.  Defined as hazardous waste by or pursuant to ORS Chapter 459; 
2.  Defined as hazardous waste by another governmental agency or unit having jurisdiction; or 
3.  Found by the franchisee to be hazardous to service workers, to service equipment, or to the public. 
    "Operating margin" for a period means gross revenues minus allowable expenses. 
    "Operating ratio" is the allowable expense divided into the gross revenues. Expressed as a percentage, the return on gross revenues shall be approximately eighty-eight (88) percent of gross revenues, which is consistent with industry averages for solid waste collection companies. 
    "Person" means any individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust, firm, estate, joint venture or other private legal entity or any public agency. 
    "Resource recovery" means the process of obtaining useful material or energy resources from solid waste, including reuse, recycling and other materials recovery or energy recovery of or from solid waste. 
    "Revenue requirement" means the sum of the quotient of allowable expenses divided by the operating ratio, expressed as a decimal, and pass through expenses. 
    "Service" means the collection, compaction (through either mechanical or manual means), transportation or disposal of or resource recovery solid waste. 
    "Solid waste" means all solid waste or semisolid waste including without limitation: garbage, rubbish, refuse, trash, ashes or swill, newsprint or wastepaper, corrugated or cardboard; grass clippings, compost, residential, commercial, industrial, governmental or institutional wastes, discarded home or industrial appliances, equipment or furniture, vehicle parts or tires, vegetable or animal wastes, and other wastes. 
    "Solid waste management" means the prevention of or reduction of solid waste, management of service, and facilities and equipment necessary or convenient to such activities. 
    "Unallowable expense" means any of the following, which under no circumstances will be counted as an allowable expense: 
1.  Political and charitable contributions; 
2.  Federal, state, and local income taxes; 
3.  Loss on sale of assets; 
4.  Officers' life insurance premiums; 
5.  Director fees; 
6.  Interest on the purchase of equipment or facilities to the extent that the purchase price exceeds the fair market value of the asset at the time of purchase; 
7.  Penalties and fines; 
8.  Costs, whether allocated or direct, associated with collection or unrelated operations that are not governed by this section; 
9.  Accruals for future unknown regulatory changes; 
10.  Principal or interest payments on the acquisition of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection routes; the purchase of equipment and facilities at a price that would be construed to include goodwill or a premium in excess of fair market value at the time of acquisition; 
11.  Attorney's fees and related expenses resulting from: 
a.  Any judicial proceeding in which the city and a franchisee are adverse parties, unless the franchisee is the prevailing party, 
b.  Any judicial proceeding in which a franchisee is ruled to be liable due to willful misconduct or gross negligence, or in violation of law or regulation. 
    "Waste" means material that is no longer directly usable by the source, generator or producer of the material and which is to be disposed of or to be resource recovered by another person. 
1.  The fact that all or any part of the material may have value and thus be recovered does not remove them from this definition. 
2.  The fact that the source, generator or producer of materials has separated or segregated such material from other wastes does not remove the materials from this definition. 
(Ord. 1301A § 2, 2003; Ord. 1150 § 3, 1983) 
(Ord. No. 1323, 12-17-2008) 
8.16.040 - Persons and practices exempt from franchise. 
    Nothing in this chapter requires a franchise for the following businesses or practices: 
A.  The collection, transportation and reuse of repairable or cleanable discards by a private charitable organization regularly engaged in such business or activity including, without limitation, Salvation Army, St. Vincent De Paul, Goodwill and similar organizations; 
B.  The collection, transportation and reuse or recycling of totally source-separated recyclable materials or operation of a collection center for totally source-separated recyclable materials by a religious, charitable, benevolent or fraternal organization, which organization was not organized or operated for any solid waste management purpose and which organization is using the activity for fund raising, including, without limitation, scouts and churches; 
C.  The collection, transportation or redemption of returnable beverage containers under ORS Chapter 459 and that portion thereof commonly known as the "Bottle Bill"; 
D.  The generator or producer who transports and disposes of waste created as an incidental part of regularly carrying on the business or service of auto wrecking, to the extent licensed by the state of Oregon; gardening, park maintenance or landscaping service; street sweeping; auto body recovery; or septic tank pumping or sludge collection; 
E.  The transportation by a person of solid waste generated or produced by such person to a disposal site, resource recovery site or market. In the case of nonowner-occupied property, the waste is generated or produced and is owned by the occupant and not by the landlord, property owner or association of property owners, or the agent of such landlord, property owner or association; 
F.  The purchase of totally source-separated recyclables for fair market value; 
G.  The providing of service to a state or federal agency under written contract with such agency; provided, however, that the provider shall apply for a franchise for that service only, shall pay the franchise fee on such service, shall comply with all requirements imposed on the franchiser by this ordinance and shall, unless the written contract with such agency provides otherwise, charge the rates and adhere to the terms of service imposed on the franchisee by this chapter and attached schedules; 
H.  The providing of service for hazardous wastes; 
I.  Any other practice, business or activity which is withdrawn by the council after public hearing and upon a resolution and order finding the withdrawal has no substantial impact on service, consumer rates or the purposes stated in Section 8.16.020 of this chapter. A copy of any such order shall be attached to and incorporated in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1150 § 4, 1983) 
(Ord. No. 1323, 12-17-2008) 
8.16.050 - Exceptions to provisions. 
    The council may authorize exceptions to provisions of this chapter, provided the following requirements have been met: 
A.  Applicant shall obtain an application form and file a completed application with the city manager. 
B.  Upon thirty (30) days' written notice to the applicant and the franchisee, a public hearing shall be held before the council. 
C.  The manager shall provide information and recommendations to the council to assist it in reaching a determination. 
D.  The council shall hold a public hearing and make findings. The council's decision shall be based on the following: 
1.  The need for the proposed service; 
2.  The ability of franchisee to provide the required service unless the service was being supplied on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; 
3.  Whether there are unnecessary, unreasonable hardships or practical difficulties which can be relieved only by granting an exception; 
4.  Whether there are exceptional circumstances or conditions applying to the land, buildings or use referred to in the application, which circumstances or conditions do not apply generally to other land, buildings or similar uses; 
5.  Whether the granting of the application will not be materially detrimental or have a substantial impact on service, consumer rates or the franchisee; 
6.  Whether the applicant has the necessary equipment and/or personnel to provide adequate service. 
E.  An order by resolution shall be drawn setting forth the decision of the council and shall be distributed to the applicant and the franchisee. The order may specify any conditions or limitations deemed necessary by the council to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1150 § 5, 1983) 
8.16.060 - Activity prohibited. 
    Unless exempted under Section 8.16.040, excepted under Section 8.16.050, or franchised pursuant to Section 8.16.070, no person shall provide service or offer to provide or advertise for performance of such service in the city. 
(Ord. 1150 § 6, 1983) 
8.16.070 - Grant of exclusive franchise. 
    The city grants to Dahl Disposal Service, Inc. the exclusive right, privilege and franchise to provide service within the city limits as of the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and within any area that may hereafter be annexed to the city and, for that purpose, to utilize the streets and facilities of the city. 
(Ord. 1150 § 7, 1983) 
8.16.080 - Franchise term. 
    The rights, privileges and franchise granted by this chapter shall begin on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and shall be considered renewed for an additional ten-year term unless at least thirty (30) days prior to February 1 st of any year, the council shall notify the franchisee in writing of intent to terminate the franchise. Upon the giving of such notice of termination, the franchisee shall have a franchise which will terminate ten (10) years from the date of the notice of termination. The council may later extend the term or reinstate continuing renewal upon mutual agreement with the franchisee. Nothing in this section restricts the council from suspending, modifying or revoking the franchise for cause pursuant to Section 8.16.120. 
(Ord. 1150 § 8, 1983) 
(Ord. No. 1323, 12-17-2008) 
8.16.090 - Franchise fee. 
A.  The holder of a franchise granted pursuant to this title shall pay the following fees in the manner prescribed: 
1.  Any solid waste franchisee shall pay a fee of five (5) percent of the gross cash receipts from franchised collection service provided to the service territory included in the franchise. 
2.  The franchisee shall make quarterly payments to the city on or before the 15 th day of each January, April, July, and October for the immediately preceding quarter. Grantee shall pay a pro rata fee for the last payment to the date of termination in addition to any other sums due the city and shall make such payment within thirty (30) days of termination. 
3.  In consideration of the franchise granted by this chapter, the franchisee shall furnish the city a certified statement of gross revenue for the calendar year from service within the city as required by this chapter and shall pay to the city two percent of the gross revenue. The statement shall include the number of residential, commercial and other services performed by franchisee and the revenue derived from those services. Payments to the city shall be based on the calendar year and shall be due by February 1st of the following year and payable to the city recorder of the city. As further compensation the franchisee shall remove all solid waste from all administrative buildings, the library, and other city-owned litter and solid waste receptacles. All consideration paid by franchisee shall be in addition to any business license or other fees assessed by the city. 
(Ord. 1301A § 6, 2003: Ord. 1150 § 9, 1983) 
(Ord. No. 1323, 12-17-2008) 
8.16.100 - Franchisee responsibility. 
    The franchisee shall: 
A.  Dispose of solid waste at the site approved by local government unit having jurisdiction or resource recover such wastes, both in compliance with ORS Chapter 459 and with this chapter; 
B.  Provide and keep in force public liability insurance in the amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for injury to a single person, two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) to a group of persons and one million dollars ($1,000,000) property damage, all relating to a single occurrence, which shall be evidenced by a certificate of insurance filed with the city recorder; 
C.  Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, file with the city recorder a written acceptance of this franchise by endorsing acceptance on a copy of this chapter; 
D.  Provide sufficient collection vehicles, containers, facilities, personnel and finances to provide all types of the necessary service or subcontract with others to provide such service; 
E.  Respond to any complaint on service; 
F.  Provide weekly service in residential areas and daily service to commercial areas on weekdays; 
G.  Where a new resource recovery service or a continuation of or a substantial expansion of an existing service is proposed by the city or another person other than the franchisee: 
1.  Prior written notice of the proposed service shall be given to franchisee by city manager at least thirty (30) days prior to consideration by the council. 
2.  The council may on its own motion and shall upon request of the franchisee or applicant for an exception hold a public hearing on the proposed service, costs and justification. 
3.  In determining whether service is needed, the council shall give due consideration to the purposes of this chapter, the public need for the service, the technological and economic feasibility, the effect on consumer rates, the effect on other service by franchisee, applicable laws, ordinances or regulations and any applicable solid waste management plan. 
4.  If council determines that such service is needed, it may require the franchisee to provide the service within a specified period of time or the council may grant an exception to another person to provide the service under Section 8.16.040(I). Where applicable, the council may determine necessary rates. 
H.  The franchisee is not required to store, collect, transport, transfer, dispose of or resource recover any hazardous waste; provided, however, that the franchisee may provide such service outside this chapter in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinance and regulations; 
I.  The franchisee may subcontract with others to provide a portion of the service where franchisee does not have the necessary equipment or personnel. Such a subcontract shall not relieve the franchisee of total responsibility for providing and maintaining service and from compliance with this chapter; 
J.  The franchisee shall not: 
1.  Give any rate preference to any person, locality or type of solid waste stored, collected, transported, disposed of or resource recovered. This paragraph shall not prohibit uniform classes of rates based upon length of haul, type or quality of solid waste handled and location of customers so long as such rates are reasonably based upon cost of the particular service and are approved by the council or shall it prevent any person from volunteering service at reduced cost for a charitable, community, civic or benevolent purpose, 
2.  Transfer this franchise or any portion of it to other persons without prior written approval of the council, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The council shall approve the transfer if the transferee meets all applicable requirements met by the franchisee. Assignment of this franchise to a company affiliated with the franchisee shall not be considered to be a transfer for purposes of this section. A pledge of this franchise as financial security shall be considered as a transfer for purposes of this subsection. The council may attach whatever conditions it deems necessary to guarantee maintenance of service and compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 1150 § 10, 1983) 
(Ord. No. 1323, 12-17-2008) 
8.16.110 - Supervision. 
    Service provided under the franchise and other requirements of this chapter shall be under the supervision of the city manager. Franchisee shall, at reasonable times, permit inspection of his facilities, equipment and personnel providing service. 
(Ord. 1150 § 11, 1983) 
8.16.120 - Suspension, modification or revocation of franchise. 
A.  Failure by franchisee to provide necessary service or otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter after written notice and a reasonable opportunity to comply shall be grounds for modification, suspension or revocation of the franchise. 
B.  After written notice from the city manager that such grounds exist, the franchisee shall have at least twenty (20) days from the date of mailing of the notice in which to comply or request a public hearing before the council. 
C.  At a public hearing, the franchisee and other interested persons shall have an opportunity to present oral, written or documentary evidence to the council. 
D.  If the franchisee fails to comply within the time specified or, if a council hearing is held, with the order of the council entered upon the basis of findings at the public hearings, the council may suspend, modify or revoke the franchise or make such action contingent upon continued compliance. 
E.  In the event the council finds an immediate and serious danger to the public through creation of a health hazard, it may take action within a time specified in the notice to the franchisee and without a public hearing prior to taking such action. 
(Ord. 1150 § 12, 1983) 
8.16.130 - Termination of service. 
    The franchisee shall not terminate service to all or a portion of his customers unless: 
A.  The street or road access is blocked and there is no alternate route and provided that the city shall not be liable for such blocking of access; 
B.  Excessive weather conditions render providing service unduly hazardous to persons providing service or such termination is caused by accidents or casualties caused by an act of God, public enemy or vandalism; 
C.  A customer has not complied with Section 8.16.150 of this chapter or has not paid for service provided after a regular billing and after written notice to pay; 
D.  Ninety (90) days' written notice of intent to terminate all or a substantial part of service is given to the council and written approval is obtained from the council; or 
E.  Ordered to suspend, reduce or terminate all or a portion of service by a legislative, administrative or judicial body having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 1150 § 13, 1983) 
8.16.140 - Rate determination. 
A.  Rates for service provided by franchisee shall be fixed and thereafter amended from time to time by resolution of the council. 
B.  In determining rates, the council shall give due consideration to current and projected revenue and expenses; actual and overhead expense; the cost of acquiring and replacement of equipment; the cost of providing for future, added or different service; a reasonable return to franchisee for doing business; research and development; and such other factors as the council deems relevant. The council may also consider rates charged by other persons performing the same or similar service in the same or similar areas under the same or similar service conditions. 
C.  The maximum rates to be charged shall be those set as provided herein. Unscheduled services may be provided at the reasonable cost of providing the service giving consideration to the standards in subsection B of this section. 
D.  Franchisee may require payment for residential service and multifamily residential service up to three months in advance. Franchisee may bill up to three months in advance, arrears or any combination. Where billed in advance, franchisee shall refund a pro rata portion of the payment for any complete month in which service is not to be provided. Franchisee may charge at the time service is provided to drop box or rolloff box service customer where the customer has not previously established credit with the franchisee. 
E.  If approved in the new rate schedule, franchisee may charge: a starting charge for a new service; a restart charge to any customer who has been previously terminated for failure to pay for service; and interest on past due accounts. 
F.  Rates may be uniform or uniform within zones or classes of service. 
G.  Collection of Charges. 
1.  Franchisee shall charge and collect those rates adopted each year in accordance with this section. The rates set shall be fixed at a level sufficient to produce a revenue requirement for the franchisee that is equal to the quotient of allowable expenses divided by the operating ratio, expressed as a decimal. The operating ratio for this agreement shall be calculated at eighty-eight (88) percent. For purposes of this section, the rates shall include all monies collected by the franchisee for the services provided pursuant to a franchise granted by the city, including, but not limited to, charges for collection of solid waste and recyclable materials, revenue from the sale of recycled material, disposal charges, surcharges, fees and taxes. Revenue shall also include any other monies received by the franchisee from any other entity as compensation for services allocated fairly and reasonably to the jurisdiction and customers receiving said services. 
2.  The franchisee and its affiliates may use common resources, such as equipment, fuel, labor, management, and administration, to service the city and other nearby jurisdictions. In such cases, it will be necessary to allocate the costs of such resources among the jurisdictions they serve. Franchisee and the city shall mutually agree upon an allocation formula, which may be amended upon the written mutual consent of the franchisee and the city, and shall be applied, as amended, to determine allowable expenses throughout the term of the franchise. 
3.  The three factors that will be used to allocate these costs are: 
a.  Labor hours: Used to allocate labor costs. Vehicle costs will also be allocated on labor hours as a substitute for engine hours. If, in the opinion of the operator, these hours would not be materially similar, then a four-factor formula would need to be implemented which would include engine hours to allocate the cost of vehicles; 
b.  Weight: Average vessel weights used to allocate disposal; 
c.  Customer base: Weighted customer counts used to allocate general, administrative, and management expenses. 
4.  The methods for collecting the data for the factors described in subsection (G)(3)(c) of this section are: 
a.  Labor hours: A "time on route" form will be completed by route drivers one week each quarter. This data will then be summarized and averaged for application to the annual accounting data, or summarized and applied to the specific quarterly accounting data; 
b.  Weight: Quarterly weight statistics will be generated by the company to obtain quarterly average vessel weights. These weights will then be applied to route list customer data to obtain relative weights per route. These relative weights per route will then be applied to the cost of disposal; 
c.  Customer base: This data is readily available from computer reports generated in conjunction with billing and route list preparation. 
5.  The factors described in subsection (G)(3)(c) of this section will be captured and applied to the costs on a periodic basis. The city and the franchisee agree that test periods shall be utilized, at least quarterly, to collect this data. 
6.  Commencing on April 1st, but in no event after April 1, 2004, the franchisee will submit to the city an annual report of operations prepared by the hauler's certified public accountant, showing the actual allowable expenses incurred by the franchisee in the preceding fiscal year, all additional allowable expenses the franchisee reasonably anticipates will be incurred or imposed in the current fiscal year, the allocation formulas used to determine expenses, the actual operating ratio for the preceding fiscal year, and the expected operating ratio for the current fiscal year. 
7.  Except as provided in subsection (H)(4)(h) of this section, a cost of living rate adjustment shall be made every other year commencing with the completion of the report described in subsection (H)(4)(f) of this section, and according to the following procedure: 
a.  Commencing on June 1, 2004, and on June 1st of each even numbered year thereafter (the adjustment date) throughout the term of the franchise, the rates shall be adjusted in an amount equal to eighty-five (85) percent of the two-year percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers for West B/C, All Items (1982-84=100) published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (the index) that occurred between the months of May and April of the previous and the current years. The adjustment shall not exceed six percent in any two-year period. In addition, no cost of living adjustment shall be allowed if the adjustment would cause the franchisee to project operations in excess of the operating ratio range. The adjusted rates shall become effective on each July 1st, thirty (30) days following the adjustment date; 
b.  On each adjustment date, the then current rates shall be multiplied by the calculated percentage change in the index for the year; 
c.  On or before each adjustment date, the franchisee shall send to the city a revised rate schedule reflecting the proposed new rates, as adjusted by the index as provided in this subsection. Upon adoption, the revised rate schedule shall become effective on July 1st of each year; 
d.  If a rate adjustment occurred in the previous year due to an upward adjustment of the rates due to a formal rate review, then the franchisee is only eligible for eighty-five (85) percent on the one year change in the Consumer Price Index; 
e.  In the event that the Index for Urban Consumers of West B/C is no longer published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the franchisee and the city shall negotiate in good faith and agree upon a suitable replacement index reflective of the cost of living in the franchise area. 
8.  If the report described in subsection (H)(4)(f) of this section indicates that the operating ratio for the next succeeding twelve (12) month period will be less than eighty-five (85) percent or greater than ninety-one (91) percent, then a rate review will automatically be implemented in accordance with this section. No more than five consecutive years shall pass during the term of this franchise without a formal rate review as set forth in this section. In the event a rate review is requested or required as provided in this section, the following procedures shall bind the city and the franchisee: 
a.  The city shall review the report and, if the city's review of the report indicates that the operating ratio is likely to be greater than eighty-five (85) percent or less than ninety-one (91) percent, the city shall adopt rates for the next year, either as proposed by the franchisee in the report, or as modified by the city, no later than June 15th. The adopted rates shall then become effective no later than July 1st, and shall supersede the rates that were previously in effect. The adopted rates shall provide the franchisee an operating ratio of eighty-eight (88) percent; 
b.  In the event the report shows that the operating ratio for the current fiscal year is not likely to be greater than eighty-five (85) percent or less than ninety-one (91) percent, the existing rates shall not be adjusted, and the current rates shall continue in effect until next adjusted in accordance with subsection (H)(4)(g) of this section. The city shall set all policies and procedures respecting the implementation of rates and shall direct the franchisee to carry out such policies and procedures. The city, its agents or employees may, upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours, audit those records of the franchisee that pertain to revenue and allowable expenses. However, in reviewing such records, the city and its agents and employees shall maintain the confidentiality of the records, and not disclose, divulge or transmit the records, or copies of the records, to any third party, except as may be compelled under law or by a court of competent jurisdiction; 
c.  Upon review by the city, if it is found that deliberate or malicious material misrepresentation of books, records, accounts or data relating to collection service operations has occurred, the franchisee shall pay all review costs incurred by the city. 
9.  In the event the franchisee, at any time, becomes liable to pay any new or increased legislated costs, including surcharges, fees, or expenses associated with regulatory requirements, or any new or increased disposal or long-haul transportation costs or fees, and these costs represent in excess of three percent of gross revenue, then all such costs and fees shall be immediately passed through and added to the existing rate structure upon the city's receipt and verification of the franchisee's documentation of, and liability to pay, those new costs or fees. In the event the franchisee, at any time, experiences a reduction in these costs, in excess of three percent of gross revenue, then all such savings shall be immediately passed through and subtracted from the existing rate structure upon the city's receipt and verification of the franchisee's documentation of those reduced costs or fees. The franchisee shall include all such costs, cost savings, and fees in the next succeeding year's report as actual allowable expenses of the franchisee. 
H.  Submission of Reports. 
1.  The following reports and information shall be submitted by the franchisee to the city in accordance with the following schedule. Commencing with the first rate adjustment request by the franchisee, and on each April 1st thereafter, the franchisee shall submit the annual report in the format approved and distributed by the city, consisting of the following: 
a.  Financial statements for the franchisee for the preceding year, with schedules prepared by the franchisee's certified public accountant to provide backup for any allocated expenses. The franchisee shall also identify any expense incurred with an affiliated company. At the city's request, the franchisee shall provide backup as is reasonable to verify expenses; 
b.  Equipment and depreciation schedules and equipment replacement projections for the current year; 
c.  Projected allowable expense and pass through expense for the current year; 
d.  Projected gross revenue for the current year, based on current levels of service and the current rate schedule before any cost of living adjustment; and 
e.  Subject to the conditions of subsection G of this section, a proposed rate schedule to be effective July 1st, with rationale as to how the rates were developed. 
2.  Records and Information Requirements. The franchisee shall maintain accounting, statistical, operational, and other records related to its performance under the franchise agreement. Also, the franchisee agrees to conduct data collection, information and record keeping, and reporting activities needed to comply with applicable laws and regulation and to meet the reporting and solid waste program management needs of the city. To this extent, requirements set out in this agreement shall not be considered limiting or necessarily complete. In particular, this section is intended to only highlight the general nature of records and reports, and is not meant to define exactly what the records and reports are to be, and their content. Further, with the written direction or approval of the city, the records and reports to be maintained and provided by the franchisee in accordance with this agreement shall be adjusted in number, format, or frequency. This is not intended to require significant additional administrative labor, or the modification of the franchisee's computer software. 
3.  All records shall be maintained for at least five years after the expiration of this agreement, with the exception of accounts payable records, which shall be maintained for at least three years after payment. The records addressed in this agreement shall be provided or made available to the city and its official representatives during normal business hours. 
4.  Solid Waste Records. Records shall be maintained by the franchisee for the city relating to: 
a.  Customer service and billing; 
b.  Weight and volume of solid waste and recyclable materials; 
c.  Routes; 
d.  Facilities, equipment and personnel used; 
e.  Facilities and equipment operations, maintenance and repair; 
f.  Disposal of solid waste; 
g.  Complaints; and 
h.  Missed pick-ups. 
5.  CERCLA Defense Records. The city views the ability to defend against litigation brought under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 USC § 9601, et seq.), and other related litigation, as a matter of great importance. For this reason, the city regards the ability to prove where solid waste collected in the city was taken for disposal, as well as where it was not taken, to be matters for concern. Franchisee shall maintain data retention and preservation systems which can establish where solid waste collected in the city was land filled, and therefore establish where it was not land filled, and provide a copy or summary of the reports required for at least five years after the term during which collection services are to be provided pursuant to this agreement, or to provide copies of such records to the city. 
6.  Disposal Records. The franchisee shall maintain records of disposal of all solid waste collected in the city for the period of this agreement, and all extensions to this agreement or successor agreements. In the event the franchisee discontinues providing solid waste services to the city, the franchisee shall provide all records of disposals or processing of all solid waste collected in the city within thirty (30) days of discontinuing service. Records shall be in chronological order, and organized in a form and manner that is capable of easily and readily being understood and interpreted. 
7.  Reporting Responsibilities. 
a.  At the time of payment of the annual franchise fees, the franchisee shall file with the city a sworn and verified statement of annual gross revenues for the period covered by the tendered fee. Such statements shall be public records. Each franchisee shall maintain books and records disclosing the gross receipts derived from business conducted within the city, which shall be open at reasonable times for audit by city personnel or assigned agents. The city may require a uniform system of bookkeeping and record keeping to be used by all franchisees; 
b.  Deliberate or malicious misrepresentation of gross revenues by a franchisee constitutes a major contract violation, and may be cause to initiate the process to terminate the franchise; 
c.  The city council may change the amount and computation of franchise fees from time to time. 
8.  Confidentiality of Annual Rate Review Reports. Franchisees may identify information submitted to the city as confidential. The city shall treat any information marked confidential as being confidential, and shall not subject the confidential information to public disclosure except as required by law or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. If the city receives a request for disclosure of confidential information, the city shall notify the franchisee within five business days of receiving the request, in order to allow the franchisee a reasonable opportunity to defend against the requested disclosure through appropriate legal process. 
9.  Reportable Incidents and Events. The franchisee shall provide the city with two copies, one to the city council and one to the city manager, of all reports, pleadings, applications, notifications, notices of violation, and all other formal actions relating specifically to the franchisee's performance of services pursuant to this agreement, submitted by franchisee to, or received by franchisee from, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, or any other federal, state, or local agency, including federal or state court actions brought by any of these agencies, with regard to franchisee operations within the state of Oregon. Copies shall be submitted to the city simultaneously with franchisee's filing or submission of such matters with the agency or court. A franchisee's routine correspondence to the agency or court need not be submitted to the city, but shall be made available to the city upon written request. 
10.  The refusal or willful failure of a franchisee to file any required report, or to provide required information to the city, or the inclusion of any materially false or misleading statement or representation by the franchisee in a report, shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise, and shall subject the franchisee to all remedies which are available to the city under the franchise. 
11.  Vehicle Inventory. The franchisee, in conjunction with the annual report, shall provide the city with an inventory of vehicles used by the franchisee within the city. The list shall include vehicle make, year of manufacture, model name, vehicle identification number (VIN), and PUC numbers. 
12.  Access for Inspections and Delivery of Notices. 
a.  Franchisees shall make all company premises, facilities and records related to their solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection services, including, but not limited to, offices, storage areas, financial records, non-financial records, records pertaining to the origin of any solid waste collected by the franchisee, receipts for sale or delivery of collected recyclable materials, customer lists, and all records related to vehicle maintenance and safety which are required under Oregon Department of Transportation motor carrier requirements and regulations and ORS Chapter 767, available for inspection by the city, the Lincoln County Solid Waste District, and their employees or assigned agent, within twenty-four (24) hours of notice by registered mail. Inspections are only for purposes of enforcing this agreement, and are restricted to normal business hours; 
b.  During normal business hours, the franchisee shall make all company premises and facilities accessible to city employees or assigned agents for delivery of any written notices; 
c.  Franchisee collection vehicles must be accessible for inspection during the normal operating hours for collection, in addition to normal business hours. Where receptacles are stored in the public right-of-way, or when the city is conducting an inspection in a situation where the franchisee is allegedly disposing recyclable or yard debris with solid waste, the need for twenty-four (24) hour notice does not apply to inspection of receptacles or vehicles. 
I.  City reserves the right, at any time during the period of a franchise, to examine the rate structure of a franchisee and to modify rate changes which, in the discretion of the city council, are reasonably required in view of the following considerations: 
1.  To facilitate considerations as in this section provided, a franchisee shall furnish and provide to the city a certified copy of the published rate schedule, which rate schedule shall contain the rates and charges made for all its operations. Said rate schedule, after having been filed as herein provided, shall be kept current and a franchise shall file with the city, at least ninety (90) days prior to any contemplated change, a new and revised rate schedule which shall be examined by the city in an appropriate public proceeding affording due process. Notification of the decision of the city council shall be made to the franchisee by certified mail. In the event of disapproval, franchisee shall not put the new rate schedule into effect, but may file with the city, either on its own motion or in compliance with the city council's request, further information to justify the rate schedule changes. Negotiations shall be had in good faith between the parties. The existing approved rate schedule, as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be deemed to be in effect. The city may require annual statements and other records to be furnished to the city to carry out the intentions of this section. 
2.  In the event of approval of a new and revised rate schedule, the new and revised rate schedule shall not apply to persons and groups who have an advance payment agreement with the franchisee until the normal expiration of said advance payment agreement. 
3.  The rates in effect at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter takes effect and thereafter shall be subject to review and change only one time in a calendar year beginning January 1st and ending December 31st of the same year; provided, however, that: 
a.  Upon application and without prior notice, the city council may, by order, grant an interim or emergency rate for new, special, or different service. The city council may specify the duration of said rate or continue it until final determination by the city council on the next overall rate adjustment; 
b.  In addition to an annual rate adjustment, a supplemental rate adjustment may be requested when the cost of service is increased by governmental regulations and compliance therewith; or when there is substantial increase in a single expense that was not anticipated at the time of the last rate adjustment; or, when the total cost of service exceeds projected costs by five percent, or more. 
4.  Notwithstanding any other provision of Chapter 8.16, the city council may establish a fee on waste generated within the franchise which utilized the Agate Beach Landfill/Balefill. The fee shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council at a level which will cover all expected costs including but not limited to financing closure and post-closure debt instruments. The fee shall be collected by the respective franchisees based on waste generated within the franchise area and remitted by franchisee monthly to the city. The city shall receive all fee proceeds to be held in trust exclusively for Toledo's proportional share of on-going closure and post-closure costs of the Agate Beach Landfill. Upon full funding of the costs of such closure and post-closure activities, the city shall end the Agate Beach closure fee. 
a.  The institution of this fee is accepted by franchisee as an amendment to the provisions of the franchise as set out in Chapter 8.16 and shall be binding upon them, their successors, heirs, or assigns. A separate executed instrument signifying the franchisees acceptance shall be placed in the records of the city. This subsection constitutes an amendment of the original franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 1301A §§ 3-5, 2003; Ord. 1150 § 14, 1983) 
8.16.150 - Public responsibility. 
    In addition to and not in lieu of compliance with ORS Chapter 459 and other applicable laws and regulations: 
A.  No person shall place hazardous waste for collection or disposal by franchisee without notice to the city manager or office or franchisee. This shall not apply to minor quantities of wastes generated at or by a single-family residential unit. 
B.  No unauthorized person shall place material in or remove material from or compact the contents of a solid waste collection container without permission of the owner of the container. For the purpose of this section, the franchisee is the "owner" of containers supplied by franchisee. 
C.  No unauthorized person shall remove or manually compact solid waste placed out for collection and resource recovery by the franchisee or a person exempted by Section 8.16.040 of this chapter and operating solely within the exemption. 
D.  No person shall install an underground solid waste container for storage and collection after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The franchisee is not required to service an underground container unless the person responsible for it places the can above ground prior to time of collection. 
E.  No can for residential service shall be located behind any locked or latched door, gate or inside of any building or structure. 
F.  Each customer shall provide safe access to the solid waste container or wastes without risk or hazard to franchisee's employees, the public or franchisee. 
G.  No container designed for mechanical pickup shall exceed safe loading weights or volumes as established by the franchisee to protect service workers, the customer, the public and the collection equipment. 
H.  Where a customer requires an unusual volume of service or a special type of service requiring substantial investment in equipment, the franchisee may require a contract with the customer as necessary to finance and assure amortization of such equipment. The purpose of this provision is to assure that such equipment not become a charge against other ratepayers who are not benefitted. 
I.  Stationary compacting devices for solid wastes shall comply with federal and state safety standards and provide adequate protection to the user. 
J.  Every person who generates or produces wastes shall remove or have removed at least once every seven days all waste which may putrefy during that period. More frequent removal may be required by the city manager where a facility or service involves the public health. All wastes shall be removed at sufficient frequency so as to prevent health hazards, nuisances or pollution. 
K.  The producer or generator of waste shall clean both cans and containers and shall keep the area around such cans or containers free of accumulated wastes. The franchisee shall provide periodic maintenance to containers supplied by franchisee. 
L.  No person shall accumulate or store waste that is unsightly, or in violation of regulations of the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. 
(Ord. 1150 § 15, 1983) 
(Ord. No. 1323, 12-17-2008) 
8.16.160 - Payment of service. 
    Any person who received service from the franchisee shall be responsible for payment of service. The owner of a rental or lease facility shall be liable for payment for services provided to a tenant of such dwelling if the tenant fails to make timely payment for such service. The owner of any multiple unit rental or lease facility having two or more dwelling units shall be primarily responsible for services provided to the occupants of such facility and shall be billed for the services. 
(Ord. 1150 § 16, 1983) 
8.16.170 - Appeals. 
    Any action or determination by franchisee under or pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the city manager. Any action or determination of the city manager under this chapter may be appealed to the city council. 
(Ord. 1150 § 17, 1983) 
8.16.180 - City enforcement. 
    The city shall enforce the provisions of this chapter by administrative, civil or criminal action or any combination as necessary to obtain compliance with this chapter. The council shall take such legislative action as is necessary to support the chapter and the franchise granted. The franchisee may also enforce payment or protect its rights by appropriate civil action. 
(Ord. 1150 § 19, 1983) 
8.16.190 - Penalties. 
    Violation by any person of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished upon conviction by a civil penalty of a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Penalties in this section are not in lieu of other remedies provided in this chapter. Each day of a violation is a separate offense; provided, however, that two or more such continuing offenses may be joined in the same action. 
(Ord. 1150 § 20, 1983) 
Chapter 8.20 - UNIFORM FIRE CODE 
Sections: 

8.20.010 - Documents adopted. 
A.  The city of Toledo adopts for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion that certain code known as the Uniform Fire Code and the Uniform Fire Code Standards, recommended by the Western Fire Chiefs Association and the International Conference of Building Officials, the 1991 Edition, as amended by the Oregon State Fire Marshall, 1992 amendments, except such portion as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended by this chapter. 
B.  The city further adopts the National Fire Protection Association, National Fire Codes, Volumes 1 through 12, as amended yearly, as guidelines and standards to be used in enforcing the Uniform Fire Code. The Code, the Standards, and the NFPA Codes are adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length, and from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the provisions of these documents shall be controlling within the city of Toledo. 
C.  The city also adopts the standardized-costs schedules for transportation route response, unprotected area response, and apparatus cost that are contained in the State Fire Marshal's Oregon Fire Mobilization Plan and the volunteer firefighter reimbursement rate that is contained in the State Fire Marshal's Oregon Fire Service Mobilization Plan. All responses billed under these plans are subject to a thirty (30) minute minimum response charge. 
(Ord. 1229 § 3, 1994: Ord. 1128 § 1, 1981) 
8.20.020 - Violation-Penalty. 
A.  Violation of any section of this chapter, or failure to comply with any order issued under this chapter, or building in violation of specification or plans submitted and approved under this chapter, is a Class A infraction. 
B.  This remedy is not intended to be exclusive, and the city of Toledo may pursue any other remedy available to it by law, including the removal of the prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. 1244 § 10, 1996; Ord. 1128 § 9, 1981) 
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE 
Chapters: 
Chapter 9.04 - CRIMINAL CODE 
Sections: 

9.04.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter may be cited as city of Toledo offenses ordinance. 
(Ord. 1073 § 1, 1979) 
9.04.020 - Definitions. 
    The definitions contained in ORS Chapters 131 through 170, inclusive, as constituted in the 1983 Replacement Part, are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the general definitions and the definitions appearing in the definitional and other sections of the above chapters of Oregon Revised Statutes shall be applicable throughout this chapter. 
(Ord. 1170 § 2, 1985: Ord. 1073 § 3, 1979) 
9.04.030 - Application of state statutes. 
    Provisions of ORS Chapters 131 through 170, inclusive, as constituted in the 1983 Replacement Part, relating to defenses and burden of proof, general principles of criminal liability, parties and general principles of justification shall apply to all offenses defined and made punishable by this chapter. 
(Ord. 1170 § 3, 1985: Ord. 1073 § 4, 1979) 
9.04.040 - Offenses outside city limits. 
    Where permitted by Oregon law, an act made unlawful by this ordinance shall constitute an offense when committed on any property owned or leased by the city, even though outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. 1073 § 5, 1979) 
9.04.050 - Soliciting or confederating to violate ordinances. 
    No person shall solicit, aid, abet, employ or engage another or confederate with another to violate a provision of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 1073 § 6, 1979) 
9.04.060 - Attempt to commit offenses. 
    A person who shall attempt to commit any of the offenses mentioned in this chapter or any ordinance of the city, but who for any reason is prevented from consummating such act, shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. 1073 § 7, 1979) 
9.04.070 - Separate violations. 
    Whenever in this chapter or any ordinance of the city of Toledo, an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of an act is required, or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful or an offense, each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1073 § 8, 1979) 
9.04.080 - Nuisance abatement. 
    No provisions in this chapter shall preclude the abatement of a nuisance as provided in the general nuisance ordinance of the city, Chapter 8.04. 
(Ord. 1073 § 9, 1979) 
9.04.090 - Drinking in public places. 
    No persons shall drink or consume alcoholic liquor in or upon a street, alley, mall, parking lot or structure, motor vehicle, public grounds or other public place unless such place has been licensed for that purpose by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission; provided, however, consumption of alcoholic liquor in a public park shall be permitted where a permit therefor has been received from the city manager. 
(Ord. 1073 § 13, 1979) 
9.04.100 - Unnecessary noise. 
    No person shall create or assist in creating, or permit the continuance of unreasonable noise in the city; the following enumeration of violations of this section is not exclusive but is illustrative of some unreasonable noises: 
A.  The keeping of an animal which by loud and frequent or continued noise disturbs the comfort and repose of a person in the vicinity. 
B.  The use of an engine, thing or device which is so loaded, out of repair or operated in such a manner as to create a loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
C.  The use of a mechanical device operated by compressed air, steam or otherwise, unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled. 
D.  The construction, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of a building other than between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m., except upon special permit granted by the city. 
E.  The use or operation of an automatic or electric piano, phonograph, loudspeaker or sound-amplifying device so loudly as to disturb persons in the vicinity thereof, or in such manner as renders the same a public nuisance; provided, however, that upon application to the council, permits may be grated to responsible persons or organizations to broadcast programs of music, news, speeches or general entertainment. 
(Ord. 1073 § 13, 1979) 
9.04.110 - Discharge of weapons. 
    Except at firing ranges approved by the council, no person other than a peace officer shall shoot an arrow by means of a bow or other device or fire or discharge a gun, including spring- or air-actuated pellet guns, air guns or BB guns, or other weapon which propels a projectile by use of gunpowder or other explosive, jet or rocket propulsion. 
(Ord. 1073 § 25, 1979) 
9.04.120 - Fireworks. 
    The following sections of the Oregon Fireworks Law, together with all acts and amendments applicable to cities which are now or hereafter enacted by the state of Oregon, are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter: ORS 480.110, 480.120, 480.130, 480.140(1) and 480.150. 
(Ord. 1073 § 26, 1979) 
9.04.130 - Places of amusement-Minors. 
A.  No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall enter, visit or remain or about a public cardroom, poolroom or billiard parlor. 
B.  No person operating or assisting in the operation of a public cardroom, poolroom, billiard parlor or public place of amusement shall permit a person under eighteen (18) years of age to engage therein in any game of cards, pool, billiards, dice, darts, pinball, games of like character, or games of chance, either for amusement or otherwise. 
C.  This section shall not apply to the playing of billiards or pool in a recreational facility. As used in this section, a "recreational facility" means an area, enclosure or room in which facilities are offered to the public to play billiards or pool for amusement only, and: 
1.  Which is clean, adequately supervised, adequately lighted and ventilated; 
2.  In which no alcoholic liquor is sold or consumed; and 
3.  Access to which does not require passing through a room where alcoholic liquor is sold or consumed. 
(Ord. 1073 § 31, 1979) 
9.04.150 - Obstructing police and fire communications. 
    No person shall operate any generator or electromagnetic wave or cause a disturbance of such magnitude as to interfere with the proper functioning of any police or fire department radio communication system. 
(Ord. 1073 § 47, 1979) 
9.04.160 - Posted notices. 
    No person shall affix a placard, bill or poster upon personal or real property private or public without first obtaining permission from the owner thereof or from the city manager. 
(Ord. 1073 § 53, 1979) 
9.04.161 - Property inventory. 
A.  A vehicle that has been impounded, seized as evidence in a criminal investigation, or seized for forfeiture by a law enforcement officer shall be inventoried for condition and property contents. The inventory shall include, but is not limited to, the contents of all closed containers and compartments within the vehicle. The condition and contents shall be described on a property receipt. All impounded or seized items of personal property contained in the vehicle that are not a part of the vehicle and that appear to have a value of more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be removed from the vehicle and stored in an evidence locker. 
B.  A person that has been taken into custody, pursuant to being cited and released for a criminal offense, shall have their personal possessions searched and inventoried as part of the arrest process. The inventory shall include, but is not limited to, the contents of all closed containers and compartments found on the person. The inventoried possessions that are to be seized as evidence of the original criminal offense, or additional offenses, shall be described on a property receipt. 
C.  The Toledo chief of police is delegated authority to adopt departmental policies and procedures to implement the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 1306 §§ 1-3, 2004) 
9.04.170 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of this chapter will constitute a Class B infraction. 
(Ord. 1244 § 7, 1996: Ord. 1170 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1096, 1980: Ord. 1073 § 2, 1979) 
Chapter 9.08 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY 

9.08.010 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies: 
    "Public place" means a place to which the general public has unrestricted access and where casual observers, including minors, are likely to wander, including all public parks within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1339, § 2, 3-2-2011) 
9.08.020 - Sexual conduct. 
A.  No person shall, while in a public place or in a view of a public place engage in an act of sexual intercourse, an act of deviate sexual intercourse or an act of sexual contact. As used in this section, the terms "sexual intercourse," "deviate sexual intercourse, " and "sexual contact" have the meaning found in ORS 163.305. 
B.  Violation of this section is a Class C Misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1339, § 3, 3-2-2011) 
9.08.030 - Urination or defecation in public places. 
A.  No person shall, while in a public place or place visible from a public place, perform an act of urination or defecation, except in toilets provided for that purpose. 
B.  Violation of this section is a Class C Misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1339, § 4, 3-2-2011) 
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters: 
Chapter 10.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

10.04.010 - Short title. 
    This title may be cited as city of Toledo uniform traffic ordinance. 
(Ord. 1072 § 1, 1979) 
10.04.020 - Applicability of state traffic laws. 
    Violations of provision in ORS Chapters 801 through 823, as constituted in the 1987 Replacement Part and known as the Oregon Vehicle Code, shall be an offense against the city. 
(Ord. 1184 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1169, 1985: Ord. 1072 § 2, 1979) 
10.04.030 - Definitions. 
A.  In addition to those definitions contained in the Oregon Vehicle Code, the following words or phrases, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, shall mean: 
    "Bus stop" means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for use by buses loading or unloading passengers. 
    "Holiday" means New Year's Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and any other day proclaimed by the council to be a holiday. 
    "Loading zone" means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or materials during specified hours of specified days. 
    "Motor vehicle" means every vehicle that is self-propelled, including tractors, fork-lift trucks, motorcycles, road building equipment, street cleaning equipment, and any other vehicle capable of moving under its own power, notwithstanding that the vehicle may be exempt from licensing under the motor vehicle laws of Oregon. 
    "Person" means a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation. 
    "Street" means road or highway as defined in ORS 801.305. 
    "Taxicab stand" means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for use by taxicabs. 
    "Traffic lane" means that area of the roadway used for the movement of a single line of traffic. 
    "Vehicle" as used in subsequent sections of this chapter, includes bicycles. 
B.  As used in this chapter, the singular includes the plural, and the masculine includes the feminine. 
(Ord. 1184 § 2, 1988; Ord. 1072 § 3, 1979) 
Chapter 10.08 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 

10.08.010 - Powers of the council. 
A.  Subject to state laws, the city council shall exercise all municipal traffic authority for the city except those powers specifically and expressly delegated herein or by another ordinance. 
B.  The powers of the council shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Designation of through streets; 
2.  Designation of one-way streets; 
3.  Designation of truck routes; 
4.  Designation of parking meter zones; 
5.  Restriction of the use of certain streets by any class or kind of vehicle to protect the streets from damage; 
6.  Authorization of greater maximum weights or lengths for vehicles using city streets than specified by state law; 
7.  Initiation of proceedings to change speed zones; 
8.  Revision of speed limits in parks. 
(Ord. 1072 § 4, 1979) 
10.08.020 - Duties of the city manager. 
    The city manager or his designate is authorized to exercise the following duties: 
A.  Implement the ordinances, resolutions and motions of the council by installing traffic control devices. Such installations shall be based on the standards contained in the Oregon Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. 
B.  Establish, maintain, remove or alter the following classes of traffic controls: 
1.  Crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes; 
2.  Intersection channelization and areas where drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left or U-turns, and the time when the prohibition applies; 
3.  Parking areas and time limitations, including the form of permissible parking. 
C.  In exercising these duties, the city manager shall take into consideration budgetary, scheduling and manpower restrictions on the city in addition to the need for traffic control devices and parking and safety measures. 
(Ord. 1077, 1979: Ord. 1072 § 5, 1979) 
10.08.030 - Public danger. 
    Under conditions constituting a danger to the public, the city manager or his designate may install temporary traffic control devices deemed by him to be necessary. 
(Ord. 1072 § 6, 1979) 
10.08.040 - Standards. 
    The regulations of the mayor and common council or its designate shall be based upon: 
A.  Traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations; 
B.  Standards, limitations and rules promulgated by the Oregon Transportation Commission; 
C.  Other recognized traffic control standards. 
(Ord. 1072 § 7, 1979) 
10.08.050 - Authority of police and fire officers. 
A.  It shall be the duty of police officers to enforce the provisions of this title. 
B.  In the event of a fire or other public emergency, officers of the police and fire department may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 1072 § 8, 1979) 
10.08.060 - Impoundment of vehicles. 
A.  Whenever a vehicle is placed in a manner or location that constitutes an obstruction to traffic or a hazard to public safety, a police officer shall order the owner or operator of the vehicle to remove it. If the vehicle is unattended the officer may cause the vehicle to be towed and stored at the owner's expense. The owner shall be liable for the costs of towing and storing, notwithstanding that the vehicle was parked by another or that the vehicle was initially parked in a safe manner but subsequently became an obstruction or hazard. 
B.  The disposition of a vehicle towed and stored under authority of this section shall be in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance of the city relating to impoundment and disposition of vehicles abandoned on the city streets. 
C.  The impoundment of a vehicle will not preclude the issuance of a citation for violation of a provision of this title. 
D.  Stolen vehicles may be towed from public or private property and stored at the expense of the vehicle owner. 
E.  Whenever a police officer observes a vehicle parked in violation of a provision of this title, if the vehicle has four or more unpaid parking violations outstanding against it, the officer may, in addition to issuing a citation, cause the vehicle to be impounded. A vehicle so impounded shall not be released until all outstanding fines and charges have been paid. Vehicles impounded under authority of this subsection shall be disposed of in the same manner as is provided in subsection B of this section. 
(Ord. 1072 § 38, 1979) 
10.08.070 - Violation-Penalty. 
A.  Violation of Sections 10.16.010 through 10.16.060 and Sections 10.24.010 through 10.24.130 will constitute a Class B infraction. 
B.  Violation of Sections 10.12.010 through 10.12.090, 10.16.070, 10.16.080, 10.16.100, 10.20.010 and 10.20.020 of this title will constitute a Class C infraction. 
C.  Violation of Section 10.16.110 of this title will constitute a Class D infraction. 
(Ord. 1296 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1244 § 8 (part), 1996: Ord. 1072 § 39 (part), 1979) 
(Ord. No. 1326, 6-3-2009) 
Chapter 10.12 - PARKING 
Sections: 

10.12.010 - Method of parking. 
A.  Parking is permitted only parallel with the edge of the street, headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement, except where the street is marked or signed for angle parking. Where parking spaces are marked, vehicles shall be parked within the marked spaces. Parking in angled spaces shall be with the front head-in to the curb, except that vehicles delivering or picking up goods may be backed in. Where curbs exist, the wheels of a parallel-parked vehicle shall be within twelve (12) inches of the curb, and the front of an angle-parked car shall be within six inches of the curb. Any vehicle which, because of its size or shape, cannot be parked as provided in this section may be parked outside the restricted or limited parking area of the city in a manner which will not impede or interfere with vehicular traffic. No vehicle may be parked to impede or interfere with a vehicle travel lane. 
B.  The operator who first begins maneuvering his motor vehicle into a vacant parking space on a street shall have priority to park in that space, and no other vehicle operator shall attempt to deprive him of his priority or block his access. 
C.  Whenever the operator of a vehicle discovers that his vehicle is parked close to a building to which the fire department has been summoned, he shall immediately remove the vehicle from the area unless otherwise directed by police or fire officers. 
(Ord. 1072 § 15, 1979) 
(Ord. No. 1347, § 14, 11-21-2012) 
10.12.020 - Prohibited parking or standing. 
A.  No person shall park or stand: 
1.  A vehicle in violation of state motor vehicle laws. 
2.  A vehicle in an alley other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, and in no case for a period in excess of thirty (30) consecutive minutes, and then only in such a manner as to leave available space for another vehicle to pass the parked vehicle; 
3.  A motor truck as defined by ORS 801.355 on a street between the hours of nine p.m. and seven a.m. of the following day in front of or adjacent to a residence, motel, apartment house, hotel or other sleeping accommodation. 
B.  No operator shall park and no owner shall allow a vehicle to be parked upon a street for the principal purpose of: 
1.  Displaying the vehicle for sale; 
2.  Repairing or servicing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency; 
3.  Displaying advertising from the vehicle; 
4.  Selling merchandise from the vehicle, except when authorized. 
5.  Storage for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours. Storage includes parking in excess of seventy-two (72) consecutive hours. 
C.  No person shall park a vehicle between eleven p.m. and seven a.m. leaving any audible auxiliary motor or engine running. For purposes of this section, "audible" means audible to humans in any public right-of-way or on any private residential property other than private property where the vehicle is parked with the permission of the owner, and "running" means either continuously or intermittently running, whether controlled by a thermostat or timer, or other means. 
D.  Parking is prohibited in streets immediately adjacent to yellow-marked curbs, and parking or stopping is prohibited in streets or other public areas immediately adjacent to red-marked curbs, except as needed to comply with traffic signs and signals or when traffic does not permit continued movement. No other sign or wording is needed to make the prohibition effective. The prohibitions established by this section apply if the yellow or red markings are visible, even though faded or partially obliterated. Public areas include private property open to the public designated or required as fire lane. Curbs may be painted red on public or private property only to indicate a fire lane or other area where parking and stopping is prohibited. Parking or standing other than for the permitted loading and unloading is prohibited in streets immediately adjacent to green-marked curbs. 
E.  No person may park a vehicle in a handicapped parking space without a handicapped license or permit properly displayed on or in the vehicle. 
(Ord. 1184 § 3, 1988; Ord. 1072 § 16, 1979; Ord. No. 1347, § 15, 11-21-2012) 
10.12.030 - Use of loading zone. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, in a place designated as a loading zone when the hours applicable to that loading zone are in effect. In no case, when the hours applicable to the loading zone are in effect, shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed the time limits posted. If no time limits are posted, then the use of the zone shall not exceed thirty (30) minutes. 
(Ord. 1072 § 17, 1979) 
10.12.040 - Unattended vehicles. 
    Whenever a police officer finds a motor vehicle parked unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, the police officer is authorized to remove the key from the vehicle and deliver the key to the person in charge of the police station. 
(Ord. 1072 § 18, 1979) 
10.12.050 - Standing or parking of buses and taxicabs. 
    The operator of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park the vehicle upon a street in a business district at a place other than a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively; except that this provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping his vehicle outside a traffic lane while loading or unloading passengers. 
(Ord. 1072 § 19, 1979) 
10.12.060 - Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, or a bus in a bus stop; except that the operator of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, when stopping does not interfere with a bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the restricted space. 
(Ord. 1072 § 20, 1979) 
10.12.070 - Lights on parked vehicle. 
    No lights need be displayed upon a vehicle that is parked in accordance with this title upon a street where there is sufficient light to reveal a person or object at a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet from the vehicle. 
(Ord. 1072 § 21, 1979) 
10.12.080 - Extension of parking time. 
    Where maximum parking time limits are designated by sign, movement of a vehicle within a block shall not extend the time limits for parking. 
(Ord. 1072 § 22, 1979) 
10.12.090 - Exemption. 
    The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to a vehicle of the city, county or state or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work on a street, or a vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of mail. 
(Ord. 1072 § 23, 1979) 
10.12.100 - Citation on illegally parked vehicle. 
    Whenever a vehicle without an operator is found parked in violation of a restriction imposed by this title, the officer finding the vehicle shall take its license number, and any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its owner, and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a parking citation for the operator to answer to the charge against him or pay the penalty imposed within five days during the hours and at a place specified in the citation. 
(Ord. 1072 § 34, 1979) 
10.12.110 - Failure to comply with parking citation attached to parked vehicle. 
    If the operator does not respond to a parking citation affixed to a vehicle within a period of five days, the city recorder may send to the owner of the vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that in the event that the letter is disre garded for a period of five days, a warrant for his arrest will be issued. 
(Ord. 1072 § 35, 1979) 
10.12.120 - Owner responsibility. 
    The owner of a vehicle placed in violation of a parking restriction shall be responsible for the offense, except when the use of the vehicle was secured by the operator without the owner's consent. 
(Ord. 1072 § 36, 1979) 
10.12.130 - Registered owner presumption. 
    In a prosecution of a vehicle owner charging a violation of a restriction on parking, proof that the vehicle at the time of the violation was registered to the defendant shall constitute a presumption that he was then the owner in fact. 
(Ord. 1072 § 37, 1979) 
Chapter 10.16 - MISCELLANEOUS VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

10.16.010 - Crossing private property. 
    No operator of a vehicle shall proceed from one street to an intersecting street by crossing private property. This provision shall not apply to the operator of a vehicle who stops on the property for the purpose of procuring or providing goods or services. 
(Ord. 1072 § 9, 1979) 
10.16.020 - Unlawful riding. 
A.  No operator shall permit a passenger and no passenger shall ride on a vehicle upon a street except on a portion of the vehicle designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to a person riding within a truck body in space intended for merchandise. 
B.  No person shall board or alight from a vehicle while the vehicle is in motion upon a street. 
(Ord. 1072 § 10, 1979) 
10.16.030 - Roller skates, skateboards and similar devices. 
A.  No person shall: 
1.  Use roller skates, in-line skates or skateboards on either sidewalks or streets in the Main Street areas as defined by the Toledo Zoning Ordinance, as adopted by Ordinance No. 1286. 
2.  Use any other streets for traveling on roller skates, in-line skates, skateboards, skis, toboggans, sleds, or similar devices except to cross at a crosswalk. When crossing at a crosswalk, such person shall have all rights, and shall be subject to all duties, applicable to pedestrians. 
B.  Any roller skates, skateboards, skis, toboggans, sleds or similar devices used to violate this section by a person previously cited for violation of this section shall be impounded by the police officer and held until released by order of the municipal court or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
C.  Roller skates, skateboards, skis, toboggans, sleds or similar devices used to violate this section may be impounded for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days in addition to any other penalty or fine. Impounding is not the exclusive punishment. 
(Ord. 1316 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1246 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1186 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1184 § 4, 1988: Ord. 1072 § 11, 1979) 
10.16.040 - Damaging sidewalks and curbs. 
A.  The operator of a motor vehicle shall not drive upon a sidewalk or roadside planting strip except to cross at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
B.  No unauthorized person shall place dirt, wood or other material in the gutter or space next to the curb of a street with the intention of using it as a driveway. 
C.  No person shall remove a portion of a curb or move a motor vehicle or device moved by a motor vehicle upon a curb or sidewalk without first obtaining authorization and posting bond if required. A person who causes damage shall be held responsible for the cost of repair. 
(Ord. 1072 § 12, 1979) 
10.16.050 - Removing glass and debris. 
    A party to a vehicle accident or a person causing broken glass or other debris to be upon a street shall remove the glass and other debris from the street. 
(Ord. 1072 § 13, 1979) 
10.16.060 - Storage of vehicles or property on streets. 
A.  No person shall store or permit to be stored a vehicle on a street or other public property, without permission of the council. A vehicle shall be considered to be "stored" for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Not having and displaying a current, valid state vehicle license, 
2.  Any vehicle which is inoperable. "Inoperable vehicle" means any vehicle which cannot be moved under its own power without being repaired or dismantled, or which is no longer usable for the purpose for which it was originally manufactured, 
3.  Any vehicle parked in excess of seventy-two (72) consecutive hours. 
B.  No person may store personal property on public streets, property or rights-of-way for any length of time without permission of the council. 
(Ord. 1072 § 14, 1979) 
(Ord. No. 1347, § 16, 11-21-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1347, § 16, adopted Nov. 21, 2012, changed the title of § 10.16.060 from "Storage of motor vehicle on streets" to "Storage of vehicles or property on streets." 
10.16.070 - Pedestrians must use crosswalks. 
    No pedestrian shall cross a street other than within a crosswalk in blocks with marked crosswalks or if within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a marked crosswalk. 
(Ord. 1072 § 26, 1979) 
10.16.080 - Right angles. 
    A pedestrian shall cross a street at a right angle unless crossing within a crosswalk. 
(Ord. 1072 § 27, 1979) 
10.16.090 - Vehicle forfeiture as result of repeat driving while under the influence of intoxicants. 
A.  Lincoln County Code Sections 2.3000 through 2.3015, in effect as of this date and as amended in the future, relating to forfeiture of vehicles as the result of repeat driving while under the influence of intoxicants (DUII), is applicable in the city of Toledo. 
B.  City staff shall work with county staff to provide the city of Toledo police department with procedures and forms to implement the county's DUII forfeiture program in the city of Toledo. 
C.  An emergency is declared because the New Year celebration is the busiest time of the year, the sheriff's department is geared up to begin the program December 31st, and the purpose of this section is the preservation of public health, safety and welfare. Therefore, this chapter shall become effective immediately upon its passage. 
(Ord. 1308 §§ 1-3, 2005) 
10.16.100 - Violation of posted truck routes. 
A.  A person commits the offense of violation of posted truck routes if appropriate signs designating truck routes are posted and the person does not operate a vehicle in compliance with the posted requirements. 
B.  Authority to establish and change truck routes for purposes of this section is established in ORS 810.040. 
C.  It is a defense to a charge of violation of this section if the person so charged can establish that the person could not reach the person's destination without traveling upon the street, road or highway prohibited under the posted requirements, or 
D.  The person so charged has a permit issued by the city of Toledo allowing travel upon the street, road or highway prohibited under the posted requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1326, 6-3-2009) 
10.16.110 - Prohibited braking. 
A.  No person shall operate a motor vehicle within the city in a manner that creates or causes excessive noise. Any manner of braking, including but not limited to, dynamic braking devices, exhaust braking, compression braking or Jake or Jacob braking shall be considered excessive noise and a violation of this section. 
B.  A person is not in violation of this section if the person uses an engine brake in an emergency situation to avoid imminent danger to a person or to property. 
(Ord. No. 1326, 6-3-2009) 
Chapter 10.20 - BICYCLES 
Sections: 

10.20.010 - Bicycle operating rules. 
    In addition to observing all other applicable provisions of this title and state law pertaining to bicycles, a person shall: 
A.  Not leave a bicycle, except in a bicycle rack. If no rack is provided, the person shall leave the bicycle so as not to obstruct any roadway, sidewalk, driveway or building entrance. A person shall not leave a bicycle in violation of the provisions relating to the parking of motor vehicles; 
B.  Not ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk, except on designated bicycle paths. 
(Ord. 1072 § 24, 1979) 
10.20.020 - Impounding. 
A.  No person shall leave a bicycle on public or private property without the consent of the person in charge or the owner thereof. 
B.  A bicycle left on public property for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours may be impounded by the police department. 
C.  In addition to any citation issued, a bicycle parked in violation of this title may be immediately impounded by the police department. 
D.  If a bicycle impounded under this title is licensed, or other means of determining its ownership exist, the police shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner. No impounding fee shall be charged to the owner of a stolen bicycle which has been impounded. 
E.  A bicycle impounded under this title which remains unclaimed shall be disposed of in accordance with the city's procedures for disposal of abandoned or lost personal property. 
F.  Except as provided in subsection D of this section a fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall be charged to the owner of a bicycle impounded under this section. 
(Ord. 1072 § 25, 1979) 
Chapter 10.24 - IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSITION OF DISCARDED VEHICLES 
Sections: 

10.24.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following mean: 
    "Costs" means the expense of removing, storing or selling a discarded vehicle. 
    "Discarded vehicle" means: 
1.  A vehicle that is in one or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Inoperative, 
b.  Wrecked, 
c.  Dismantled, 
d.  Partially dismantled, 
e.  Abandoned, 
f.  Junked; 
2.  Discarded vehicles include major parts of vehicles, including but not limited to, bodies, engines, transmissions, and rear ends; 
3.  A vehicle that does not lawfully display registration plates with unexpired stickers shall be presumed to be "abandoned." This shall be a disputable presumption. 
4.  For the purposes of this chapter only, a vehicle rendered temporarily inoperative but otherwise legally parked outdoors on public right-of-way adjacent to the vehicle owner's residence or on private property shall not be considered a discarded vehicle if the vehicle is secure, not creating a hazard, and repairs to the vehicle are made within thirty (30) days. 
    "Enforcement authority" means any authorized agent or representative of the city as set forth in Section 1.20.040. 
    "Person in charge of property" means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser, owner, or person having possession, control, or title to property where a vehicle is located. 
    "Vehicle" means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. For example, and not a limitation, the following are vehicles: 
1.  Motor vehicle; 
2.  Motor home; 
3.  Utility trailer; 
4.  House or vacation trailer; 
5.  Implement of husbandry; 
6.  Article of machinery; 
7.  Boat; 
8.  Camper; or 
9.  Canopy or any part thereof. 
    "Vehicle owner" means an individual, firm, corporation or unincorporated association with an individual or joint claim or a legal or equitable interest in a vehicle. 
(Ord. 1296 § 2, 2003; Ord. 1264 (part), 1997) 
10.24.020 - Declaration of public nuisance. 
    Accumulation and storage of discarded vehicles reduces property values, is unsightly, promotes neighborhood deterioration, invites plundering, creates fire hazards, is an attractive nuisance causing a hazard to minors' health and safety, creates a harborage for rodents and insects, and is injurious to the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, a discarded vehicle on private or public property is a public nuisance which may be abated in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 1296 § 3, 2003; Ord. 1264 (part), 1997) 
10.24.030 - Prohibited action. 
A.  Storage of a discarded vehicle on private property in Toledo is prohibited unless the vehicle is completely enclosed by a building, stored behind a site obscuring fence, hedge or wall, or stored by a lawfully conducted business dealing in disabled vehicles. 
B.  Storage of a discarded vehicle on public property in Toledo is prohibited unless the vehicle is completely enclosed by a building or stored by a lawfully conducted business dealing in disabled vehicles. 
(Ord. 1296 § 4, 2003; Ord. 1264 (part), 1997) 
10.24.040 - Investigation. 
A.  When an enforcement authority investigates a discarded vehicle on private or public property and determines that a nuisance exists, the officer shall: 
1.  Attempt to discover the owner of the vehicle and the person in charge of the property on which the vehicle is located; and 
2.  Give written notice to them by personal service or by registered or certified mail that the vehicle is in violation of this chapter. 
B.  If the owner of the vehicle is not found, the officer shall place a notice on the windshield or some other part of the vehicle where it can be easily seen. 
C.  An enforcement officer may issue a citation for violation of this chapter either to the person in charge of the property and/or the vehicle owner by personal service or by registered or certified mail, and proceed with abating the nuisance as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1296 § 5, 2003; Ord. 1264 (part), 1997) 
(Ord. No. 1332, § 1, 11-11-2009) 
10.24.050 - Contents of notice. 
    A notice issued under Section 10.24.040 shall state: 
A.  That the discarded vehicle is in violation of this chapter and that within ten (10) days after sending or posting the notice: 
1.  The vehicle must be removed from the city or to the storage yard of a lawfully conducted business dealing in disabled vehicles, 
2.  The vehicle must be completely enclosed within a building, or 
3.  If the vehicle is on private property, the vehicle must be stored behind a sight obscuring fence, hedge or wall; 
B.  That the alternative to compliance with subsection A of this section is to petition the municipal court clerk within the ten (10) day period described in subsection A of this section and make a written request to appear before the municipal court judge to show why the vehicle should not be immediately removed or properly stored; 
C.  That failure to comply with this chapter authorizes the city to remove the vehicle, charge the cost against the property from which it was removed and/or the vehicle owner, issue a citation to either the person in charge of the property and/or the vehicle owner, and/or sell the vehicle to satisfy the costs of removal and storage. 
(Ord. 1296 §§ 6, 7, 2003; Ord. 1264 (part), 1997) 
10.24.060 - Entry on private property. 
A.  An enforcement authority is authorized to enter private property at all reasonable times and examine a vehicle to determine whether it is discarded. Except when an emergency exists, before entering onto private property, the officer shall obtain the consent of an occupant or a warrant of the municipal court authorizing entry for inspection. 
B.  No search warrant shall be issued under this chapter until an affidavit has been filed with the municipal court showing probable cause for the inspection by stating the purpose and extent of the proposed inspection, citing this chapter as the basis for the inspection, stating whether it is an inspection instituted by complaint, or giving other specific or general information concerning the vehicle in question or the property on which it is located. 
C.  No person shall interfere with or attempt to prevent an enforcement authority from entering private premises and inspecting a vehicle when an emergency exists or when the officer exhibits a warrant authorizing entry. 
D.  If required by law, the same procedures for entry onto private property shall be followed for entry onto public property. 
(Ord. 1296 § 8, 2003; Ord. 1264 (part), 1997) 
10.24.070 - Hearing by municipal court. 
A.  Following a request, the municipal court shall fix a time for a hearing to show cause why a vehicle should not be abated immediately and to receive evidence and the testimony of the enforcement authority and other interested persons concerning the existence, location, and condition of the vehicle. After the hearing, the court may order the vehicle removed by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The court shall make its ruling in the form of an order declaring the vehicle to be a public nuisance. The court may order the removal of more than one vehicle and may consolidate the hearings and orders relating to move than one vehicle. People receiving the notice specified in Section 10.24.040 shall be sent copies of the court order. 
C.  The court may impose conditions and take other action it considers appropriate under the circumstances to carry out this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle when, in its opinion, circumstances justify such action. It shall refuse to order removal of the vehicle when the vehicle is not subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1264 (part), 1997) 
10.24.080 - Abatement by the city and appraisal. 
A.  Ten (10) days after giving the notice required in Section 10.24.040 or, if a hearing is held, ten (10) days after adoption of an order declaring a vehicle to be a public nuisance as required in Section 10.24.070, the city will have jurisdiction to abate the nuisance and may remove the vehicle by use of city employees or authorized independent contractors. No person shall interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow authorized persons to enter private or public property to remove a vehicle under this chapter. 
B.  After removing the vehicle, the city shall have it appraised. 
(Ord. 1296 § 9, 2003; Ord. 1264 (part), 1997) 
10.24.090 - Low-value vehicle. 
A.  If the vehicle is appraised at one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, the enforcement authority or independent contractor may dispose of the vehicle without notice and public sale if either of the following occur: 
1.  The owner of the vehicle and any lessor or security interest holder shown in the records of the division sign a release, under oath, disclaiming any future interest in the vehicle; 
2.  The owner and any lessor or security interest holder shown in the records of the division have been sent notification of the location of the vehicle and, within fifteen (15) days after the date the notification is mailed, the persons notified have not signed releases or the vehicle has not been reclaimed. Failure to sign a release or to reclaim the vehicle shall constitute a waiver of interest in the vehicle. 
B.  Prior to sale, the enforcement authority or authorized independent contractor shall file an affidavit with the motor vehicles division describing the vehicle, including the license plates, if any, stating the location and appraised value of the vehicle and stating that the vehicle will be junked or dismantled. The enforcement authority or independent contractor may dispose of the vehicle and execute a certificate of sale without notice and public auction. 
(Ord. 1264 (part), 1997) 
10.24.100 - Public sale notice. 
A.  If the vehicle is appraised over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the enforcement authority shall publish a notice of sale in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The notice of sale shall state: 
1.  The sale is of discarded property in possession of the city; 
2.  A description of the vehicle, including the type, make, license number, identification number, and any other information that will aid in accurately identifying the vehicle; 
3.  The terms of the sale; 
4.  The date, time and place of the sale. 
B.  The notice of sale shall be published twice. The first publication shall be made not less than fifteen (15) days before the date of proposed sale, and the second shall be made not less than seven days before the date of proposed sale. 
(Ord. 1264 (part), 1997) 
10.24.110 - Public sale. 
A.  If a vehicle is subject to Section 10.24.100, the enforcement authority or independent contractor shall hold a sale at the time and place appointed, within view of the vehicle to be sold. 
B.  The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder. The city may specify a minimum bid price. However, if no bids are entered or the bids entered are less than the costs incurred by the city, the enforcement authority may enter a bid on behalf of the city in an amount equal to the costs. 
C.  When the purchase price is paid, the enforcement authority shall execute a certificate of sale in duplicate; the original shall be delivered to the purchaser and a copy filed with the city recorder. 
(Ord. 1264 (part), 1997) 
10.24.120 - Redemption before sale. 
A.  A vehicle impounded under the provisions of this chapter may be redeemed by its owner or by the person in charge of the property from which the vehicle was removed by applying to the enforcement authority before sale or disposition has taken place. The person shall: 
1.  Submit satisfactory evidence of ownership or interest in the vehicle to the enforcement authority; 
2.  Pay the costs owing at the time the application to redeem is made; 
3.  Give evidence that the nuisance character of the vehicle will not be resumed. 
B.  Upon compliance with subsection A of this section, the enforcement authority or independent contractor shall execute a receipt and cause the vehicle to be returned. 
(Ord. 1264 (part), 1997) 
10.24.130 - Assessment of costs. 
A.  After disposing of the discarded vehicle and deducting any money received from sale of the vehicle from the costs, the enforcement authority shall give notice by personal service or by registered or certified mail to the person in charge of the property from which the vehicle was removed and/or the vehicle owner: 
1.  Of the unpaid costs of abatement; 
2.  If notice is mailed to the person in charge of the property, that the costs as indicated will be assessed to, and become a lien against, the real property unless paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice; 
3.  That if the person in charge of the property objects to the indicated costs of the abatement, a written notice of objection may be filed with the municipal court clerk within ten (10) days from the date of the notice of unpaid costs. If the notice is mailed to the vehicle owner and the vehicle owner objects to the indicated costs of abatement, a written notice of objection may be filed with the municipal court clerk within ten (10) days from the date of the notice of unpaid costs. 
B.  Objections to the proposed assessment shall be heard and determined by the municipal court. 
C.  If notice of assessment was sent to the person in charge of the property and if the costs of the abatement are not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, or within ten (10) days of a court determination made under subsection B of this section, assessment of the costs shall be made by order of the court and entered in the docket of city liens. When the entry is made, it shall constitute a lien on the real property from which the nuisance was removed or abated. 
D.  The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements are enforced and shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per annum. Interest shall accrue from the date of the entry of the lien into the lien docket. 
E.  An error in the name of the person in charge of the property shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive notice of the proposed assessment render the assessment void. The assessment shall remain a valid lien against the property. 
(Ord. 1296 § 10, 2003: Ord. 1264 (part), 1997) 
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters: 
Chapter 12.04 - STREET NAMING SYSTEM 
Sections: 

12.04.010 - System adopted. 
    A uniform and orderly system of naming the streets in the city of Toledo and its additions be and the same is adopted; and that the present names of the streets be changed to conform to said arrangement as hereinafter set out. 
(Ord. 426 § 1, 1931) 
12.04.020 - Street naming generally. 
    In accordance with the street naming system, the name of Hill Street is changed to Main Street and the name Fourth Street is changed to Graham Street; that the streets running north and south or northerly and southerly in a generally parallel direction to-Main Street are to be named in relation to their position with regard to Main Street; and the streets running east and west or easterly and westerly and in a generally parallel direction to Graham Street are to be named in relation to their position with regard to Graham Street. 
    The streets lying to the west of Main Street and in a generally parallel direction thereto be named with the letters of the alphabet, the first street to the west of Main Street being A Street, the second B Street, and so on in like manner to the western extremity of the city and its additions. 
    The streets to the east of Main Street shall be given names, preferably the names of trees, the first letters of which names are to be alphabetical, that is, the first street to the east of Main Street shall be given a name beginning with "a," the second street to the east shall be given a name beginning with "b," and so on in like manner to the eastern extremity of the city and its additions. 
    The streets running generally parallel with and lying north and south of Graham Street and running in a generally easterly and westerly direction are to be numbered from Graham Street both north and south, the first street north of Graham Street and also south of Graham Street to be First Street, the second street both to the north of Graham Street and to the south of Graham Street to be Second Street, and so on in like manner to the northern and southern extremities of the city, together with its additions; those streets north of Graham Street running in a generally parallel direction thereto and bearing numbers as hereinabove set out to be designated north as First Street North, Second Street North, etc., in like manner; and those streets south of Graham Street and running in a generally parallel direction thereto are to be designated south as First Street South, Second Street South, and so on, in like manner. 
(Ord. 426 § 2, 1931) 
12.04.030 - Street name changes. 
    In accordance with the plan of naming the streets in the city of Toledo and all additions thereto, the present names of the streets therein are changed as follows: 
    Hill Street to Main Street 
    Fourth Street to Graham Street 
    Third Street to First Street South 
    Second Street to Second Street South 
    A Street to Third Street South 
    First Street to Third Street South 
    B Street (extending from the former location of Graham Street East) to Fifth Street South 
    The unnamed street commonly called Division Street (being south of Jones' Addition and Nash's Addition) to Sixth Street South 
    William Street to Seventh Street South 
    Stark Street to Eighth Street South 
    Perkins Street (being a dedicated strip parallel to and the first street south of Eighth Street South) to Ninth Street South 
    Fifth Street to First Street North, which said street shall extend as far west as the county bridge across Depot Slough, following the present line of the Yaquina Road west of the Southern Pacific Railroad track 
    Sixth Street to Second Street North 
    Seventh Street to Third Street North 
    Eighth Street to Fourth Street North 
    The street designated as Ninth Street, west of Main Street (formerly Hill Street) and Tenth Street east of Main Street, to Fifth Street North 
    The street designated as Tenth Street west of Main Street and Eleventh Street east of Main Street to Sixth Street North 
    The street designated as Eleventh Street west of Main Street and Twelfth Street east of Main Street to Seventh Street North 
    The street designated as Twelfth Street west of Main Street and Thirteenth Street east of Main Street, to Eighth Street North 
    Howell Street to Ninth Street North 
    Park Avenue to Tenth Street North 
    Grove Street to Alder Street 
    Graham Street to Beech Street 
    Jones Street to Cedar Street 
    A Street in Vincent's Addition, to Cedar Street 
    Enderly Street to Douglas Street 
    B Street in Vincent's Addition, to Douglas Street 
    Stanton Street to Elder Street 
    C Street in Vincent's Addition, to Elder Street 
    Amanda Street to Fir Street 
    Gidley Street to Fir Street 
    D Street in Vincent's Addition, extending as far south as the south side of the intersection and of said D Street with the county road running east to Olalla Slough, to Fir Street 
    Fir Street lying east of Gaither's Addition, to Grove Street 
    A Street in Hawk's Townsite, to A Avenue 
    B Street in Hawk's Townsite, to Main Street 
    Catherine Street to Main Street 
    Dale Street to B Street 
(Ord. 426 § 3, 1931) 
12.04.040 - Conformance with chapter required. 
    The streets in the city of Toledo and its additions are hereafter to be known by the names adopted in this chapter and not otherwise that in all additions to the city of Toledo hereafter laid out and dedicated, the plan of naming streets therein shall conform to the plan herein provided. 
(Ord. 426 § 4, 1931) 
Chapter 12.08 - SIDEWALK REPAIRS 
Sections: 

12.08.010 - Duty of owners to make sidewalk repairs and power of the city council. 
    All property owners are required and it is their duty to keep the sidewalks adjoining and/or abutting upon their property free and clear of any defects, obstructions or hazardous materials and, failing in such duty, shall be liable to any person or persons injured thereby. 
(Ord. 724 § 1, 1960) 
12.08.020 - Council to control repairs. 
    The city shall have the power and authority to determine the grade and width of all sidewalks, the material to be used for the repair thereof, and the specifications for the repair thereof along or upon any street, way or part thereof within the city. 
(Ord. 724 § 2, 1960) 
12.08.030 - Notice of defective sidewalks. 
    If the owner of any lot or part thereof or parcel of land shall allow any sidewalk along the same to become out of repair, it shall be the duty of the city manager, his deputy, or any person appointed by the council for that purpose, when ordered to do so by the council, to post a notice on the adjacent property headed "Notice to Repair Sidewalk," and the notice shall direct the owner, agent or occupant of the property to repair the same within twenty (20) days thereof in good and substantial manner. The person posting the notice shall file with the city recorder an affidavit of the posting of such notice, stating the date when and the place where the same was posted. The city recorder shall, upon receiving the affidavit of the person posting the notice, send by certified mail a notice to repair the sidewalk to the owner, if known, and directed to the post office address of such owner or agent when such post office address is known to the city recorder. If such post office address is unknown to the city recorder, such notice shall be directed to such owner or agent at Toledo, Oregon. A mistake in the name of the owner or agent, or a name other than that of the true owner or agent of such property, shall not render void such notice, but, in such case, the posted notice shall be sufficient. The owner, agent or occupant shall make the repairs within twenty (20) days from the date of posting the notice. 
(Ord. 724 § 3, 1960) 
12.08.040 - Permit for repairs. 
    The owner, agent or occupant, before making the repairs shall obtain a written permission so to do from the city engineer. The permit from the city engineer shall state the kind of repair to be made, the material to be used, and specifications therefor. 
(Ord. 724 § 3a, 1960) 
12.08.050 - Owner's protest to repairs. 
    The owner notified to make repairs may make and file, within said twenty (20) days of the date of posting notice, written objections to the council protesting the proposed repair, which objections will be considered by the council at its next regular meeting thereafter. 
(Ord. 724 § 4, 1960) 
12.08.060 - Repairs by city, record and repairs. 
    If the owner, agent or occupant of any such lot or part thereof or parcel of land shall fail or neglect or refuse to make the sidewalk repairs within the time designated or, following consideration of the written objections, if any, the city council does not rescind the action of ordering the repair of the sidewalk, the city manager shall then order the same done. He shall keep an accurate account of the cost of the labor and materials used in making such repairs and shall report monthly to the council all costs of such repairs, together with a description of the lot or part thereof or parcel of land fronting on or adjoining the sidewalk upon which such repairs are made. The costs of repair shall include legal, administrative and engineering costs. 
(Ord. 724 § 5, 1960) 
12.08.070 - Assessment for repairs by city. 
    The council shall, at least once each year, by ordinance levy upon each of the lots or parts thereof or parcels of land benefitted by sidewalks which have been so repaired by the city the cost of making such repairs including legal, administrative and engineering costs attributable thereto. In each case all such assessments may be combined in one assessment roll and the same shall be entered in the docket of city liens. 
(Ord. 724 § 6, 1960) 
12.08.080 - Interest and foreclosure. 
    Upon such entry in the lien docket, the mount so entered shall be a lien and charge upon the respective lots, tracts and parcels of land against which the same are placed. Such liens shall be first and prior to all other liens or encumbrances thereon whatsoever insofar as the laws of the state allow. Interest shall be charged at the rate of six percent per year until paid on all amounts not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of such entry. The city may proceed to foreclose or enforce any lien to which it shall be entitled pursuant to the provisions of this chapter at any time after thirty (30) days from the date on which the assessment was entered in the lien docket, as provided for the foreclosure or enforcement of liens by the general law of the state. 
(Ord. 724 § 7, 1960) 
12.08.090 - Owner's duty of sidewalk care-Penalty. 
    It shall be the duty of all property owners including record owners or contract purchasers, or both, to keep all sidewalks in front of and abutting and adjoining their property clean and in good repair. Failure to keep such sidewalks clean and/or free of debris will constitute a Class C infraction. 
(Ord. 1244 § 2 (part), 1996: Ord. 724 § 8, 1960) 
12.08.100 - Removal or destruction of sidewalks-Penalty. 
    No sidewalk in existence as of March 4, 1996 shall be destroyed or removed unless for purpose of replacement, improvement or repair without permission of the council. Violation of this section will constitute a Class B infraction. 
(Ord. 1244 § 2 (part), 1996: Ord. 724 § 9, 1960) 
Chapter 12.10 - SIDEWALK REGULATION 

12.10.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context requires otherwise, in this chapter, the following mean: 
    "Edge of sidewalk" means the edge of the public sidewalk opposite the curb where the area dedicated to sidewalk use by the city meets either private property or public property that is not dedicated to sidewalk use. 
    "Entity" means any corporation, non-profit corporation, limited liability company, partnership, family limited partnership, association, or any other type of business entity doing business in the city. 
    "Fence" means a wood, metal, masonry, plastic or similar materials, or a hedge or other planting arranged to form a visual or physical barrier. 
    "Inset area" means an area including vestibules, entrances, stairways or porches outside the exterior wall of a building that follows the property boundary line of the tax lot or parcel but is under the main roof. Such inset area is not in the public rights-of-way, but includes an angled entrance into a building or a space that does not follow the edge of sidewalk that border the sidewalk. Nothing in this chapter is meant to regulate this area, because it is outside the public rights-of-way and such area is owned by property owners up to the adjacent property line. 
    "Owner" means a natural person, firm, corporation, or other entity holding deed or title to real property addressed herein. 
    "Pedestrian" means a person who is on foot or assisted by a mobility device and able to move immediately to accommodate other sidewalk users. 
    "Pedestrian use zone" means a path where the surface of a public sidewalk for pedestrian use is located, which is six foot in width on sidewalks that are ten (10) feet wide or less, or alternatively, five feet wide on sidewalks that are eight feet wide or less. 
    "Person" means a natural person, whether he, she, or is acting for himself or herself, or as the employee or agent of another. 
    "Person or entity in charge of property" means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser, person, or entity, other than the owner, having legal possession or control of the property. 
    "Public rights-of-way" means any real property owned by the city that is used for the free and unimpeded passage of the public; any lesser interest in real property held by the city which contains a grant for the free and unimpeded access by the public across such property. Public rights-of-way includes, but are not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, public trails and paths, and all other easements which provide the public with a right of access or give the city the right to construct, maintain, repair and operate a public improvement. As used in this chapter, public rights-of-way includes subsurface and air space over the property. For example, building an awning above the sidewalk requires a permit to do work in the public rights-of-way. As used in this chapter, public rights-of-way also includes a sidewalk and sidewalk landscape area. 
    "Sidewalk" means any paved area intended for the use of pedestrians, improved by surfacing, within that part of the public rights-of-way located normally between the curbing or lateral lines of the rights-of-way and the edge of sidewalk. As used in this chapter, public rights-of-way includes a sidewalk. 
    "Sidewalk landscape area" means that area consisting of the nearest three and one-half feet from the curb edge, more or less, where light poles, street trees, city owned trash cans, pots and planters provided they do not infringe on the ability to exit a vehicle at the curb, and signs, or similar objects, after city council approval, may be permanently located; and temporary flags and signs, including A-frame signs for advertisement, may be located only during daytime hours. As used in this chapter, public rights-of-way includes a sidewalk landscape area. 
    "Temporary-in-nature" means signs, bicycle parking, banners, flags, temporary seating, sales displays, and other objects similar in nature, that are located on sidewalks, provided they are removed each and every night from the sidewalk and as long as they are not located within the pedestrian use zone. Items that meet this definition are allowed outright without a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 2, 7-6-2016) 
12.10.020 - Jurisdiction. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided by state or federal law, the city has jurisdiction, and may exercise regulatory control, over all public rights-of-way owned by or otherwise vested in the city. 
B.  The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory control pursuant to this chapter does not obligate or create an obligation for the city to maintain, repair or improve any part of or improvement in public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 3, 7-6-2016) 
12.10.030 - Exclusions. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall require a permit or shall be construed to pertain to the placement of objects, such as street signs, street lights, trees, trash cans, and mailboxes, without limitation, in the public right-of-way by the city, or any other government body, public service agency, such as the U.S. Postal Service, or utility that have been authorized by the city to place objects. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 4, 7-6-2016) 
12.10.040 - Encroachment prohibited. 
A.  Except as otherwise permitted by this chapter, no person or entity may occupy or otherwise encroach upon the sidewalk subject to the jurisdiction or regulatory authority of the city, unless it is temporary-in-nature, or without first obtaining a permit, as the case may be, from the city for such encroachment. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, it shall be unlawful to occupy or otherwise encroach upon any portion of the path that is a part of the definition of the pedestrian use zone. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 5, 7-6-2016) 
12.10.050 - Objects temporary-in-nature; pedestrian use zone. 
A.  If an object is temporary-in-nature, it is allowed outright on the sidewalk provided it is outside the pedestrian use zone as identified by the city planner. A permit for an encroachment under Section 12.10.060 may be issued and is required if an object is not temporary-in-nature. Violation of this section may also be considered a public nuisance and is subject to the abatement provisions of this chapter and those set forth in other city ordinances relating to nuisances. 
B.  The pedestrian use zone extends from the edge of sidewalk, opposite the curb, but does not include the sidewalk landscape area unless objects with permit or temporary-in-nature require the path to deviate from the edge of the sidewalk into the sidewalk landscape area. If objects in the sidewalk landscape area do not allow a pedestrian use zone that is as wide as required for the width of that sidewalk, then objects may not receive a permit and those temporary-in-nature may not be placed on the sidewalk. No temporary or permitted objects may be placed on the sidewalks, except where a path can remain unobstructed. At street corners, the pedestrian use zone encompasses the entire area bounded by the extended edge of sidewalk and the streets. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 6, 7-6-2016) 
12.10.060 - Permits. 
    Except as otherwise permitted by ordinance, any property owner or person or entity in charge of property desiring to obtain a permit to locate an object in the public rights-of-way shall file an application therefor with the city. If the city finds that the application submitted by the owner or person or entity in charge of property will be consistent with the city's policies for sidewalks and curbs, the city shall approve the application and set forth the fee required. Thereupon the city shall collect such fee established by council resolution and issue the permit. All construction to be in accordance with plans and specifications on file in the planning department. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 7, 7-6-2016) 
12.10.070 - Issuance of permits to allow encroachment. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this code, the planning department, or other department as designated by the city manager, may issue permits for encroachment on sidewalks. The permit may impose conditions on the encroachment. In the event that a permit is denied, or the conditions imposed on the permit are unsatisfactory, the applicant may appeal this planning department decision to the city manager, within fifteen (15) days of the decision, or within fifteen (15) days of the placement of object that encroaches on the sidewalk, whichever is more. In the event that the decision by the city manager in an appeal is unsatisfactory, the decision can be appealed to the city council, within fifteen (15) days of the decision. 
B.  In making a decision on a permit, the decision maker shall consider the following criteria: 
1.  The applicant's willingness and ability to assume all risk for the proposed activities. 
2.  Consent of the property owners and occupants of the affected property and adjacent properties. 
3.  The degree of interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic and utilities use of the public rights-of-way. 
4.  Compliance with land use designations on adjoining property. 
5.  Compliance with all applicable state and local laws. 
6.  Compatibility of proposed use with the purposes for which the right-of-way was dedicated. 
C.  A permit issued under this section may be permanently or temporarily suspended by the city manager or designee if the public interest requires use of the right-of-way for a public event, construction, repair or any other purpose. There is no property interest in this permit, which is revocable for any or no reason. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 8, 7-6-2016) 
12.10.080 - Permanent objects allowed on sidewalks. 
A.  Except as otherwise permitted by ordinance, no person or entity shall permanently affix or attach anything that is not a temporary-in-nature object to the public sidewalk without a permit. 
B.  The following objects considered permanent-in-nature, but are not affixed or attached to the sidewalk, are allowed without a permit, but only if they do not block the pedestrian use zone. Such objects are city approved garbage cans, newspaper boxes, flower planters, whiskey barrel planters, benches permanently affixed to the sidewalk, or benches affixed to a building that are located primarily within an alcove which does not encroach on the sidewalk more than twelve (12) inches. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 9, 7-6-2016) 
12.10.090 - Depositing rubbish or debris upon. 
    No person or entity shall deposit upon any street or public sidewalk any kind of rubbish, trash, debris, refuse or any substance that would mar the appearance, create a stench, create a fire hazard, detract from the cleanliness or safety of such street or sidewalk, or would be likely to injure a person, animal or vehicle traveling upon such street or sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 10, 7-6-2016) 
12.10.100 - Snow and ice on street or sidewalk. 
    The owner or person or entity in charge of property shall make sure sidewalks are clear of snow and ice within a reasonable time of accumulation, and structures above the sidewalk should be cleared of collected water, snow and ice that might fall on such sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 11, 7-6-2016) 
12.10.110 - Obstructing streets or sidewalks. 
A.  Except as otherwise permitted by ordinance, no person or entity shall place, park, deposit or leave upon any street, alley, curb, sidewalk, park, or other public right-of-way (whether developed or not), any article, thing or material which in any way prevents, interrupts or obstructs the free passage of pedestrians or vehicular traffic or obstructs a driver's view of traffic-control signs and signals. No person or entity other than the city may erect a fence, structure or other impediment to the free movement of pedestrian or vehicle traffic within a public right-of-way, except with an approved permit. The free flow of pedestrian traffic on sidewalks is impeded when doors or gates into buildings are not closed and blocking pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk. 
B.  It is hereby made a duty of every owner and person or entity in charge of property to remove any obstacle or obstruction on any sidewalk abutting or located on such owner's property and to maintain and afford continuous unobstructed access to such sidewalk to the public. 
C.  This section specifically exempts vehicles whose purpose is delivering or picking up merchandise, materials or passengers at regular business or commercial establishments as long as said vehicles do not violate safety, traffic or other ordinances of the city or infringe upon the rights of private property owners. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 12, 7-6-2016) 
12.10.120 - Trees and shrubs endangering usefulness of streets and sidewalks-Public nuisance. 
    Trees, plants, shrubs or vegetation, or parts thereof, which endanger the security or usefulness of any public street, sidewalk, sewer or other underground utility, are declared to be a public nuisance, except that trees may extend over the sidewalk when kept trimmed to a height of eight feet above sidewalks and twelve (12) feet above a roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 13, 7-6-2016) 
12.10.130 - Summary abatement. 
    The procedure provided by this chapter is not exclusive but is in addition to any procedure provided by any other chapters of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 14, 7-6-2016) 
12.10.140 - Nuisance-Declared-Abatement. 
    Any act or condition prohibited by the ordinance codified in this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in this chapter or set forth in other ordinances relating to nuisances, including the abatement procedures found in Chapter 8.04 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 15, 7-6-2016) 
12.10.150 - Violation-Procedures. 
    Any violation or infraction of this chapter will be punishable upon conviction as a violation in accordance with the civil infractions ordinance found in Chapter 1.20 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 16, 7-6-2016) 
12.10.160 - Violation-Penalties. 
A.  Violation of this chapter will constitute a Class A infraction. 
B.  The penalties imposed by this chapter are not exclusive and are in addition to any other remedies available under city ordinance or state statute. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 17, 7-6-2016) 
12.10.170 - Violation-Each day a separate offense. 
    Each day's violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 18, 7-6-2016) 
12.10.180 - Violation-Abatement deemed additional remedy. 
    The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violating this chapter but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person or entity of the duty to abate a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 19, 7-6-2016) 
Chapter 12.12 - WORK PERMITS FOR PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
Sections: 

12.12.010 - Permit required. 
    Unless otherwise authorized by contract with the city of Toledo, no person, firm or corporation shall perform any work within the rights-of-way of any public street, road or alley in the city of Toledo or within any easement held by the city of Toledo or wherever else city utilities or facilities may be located, which work would affect traffic flow or any other activity within the right-of-way or easement or would disrupt in any way the surface of the right of way, without first applying for and obtaining from the city manager's office a permit to perform such work. 
(Ord. 1115 § 1, 1980) 
12.12.020 - Permit procedure. 
A.  Each applicant shall complete and sign forms provided by the city, stating the date, the applicant's full name, the location and specific nature of the work to be performed, and agreeing to pay to the city all costs incurred, as set forth in this chapter, for repair work performed by the city because of damage by applicant's work to public right-of-way surfaces or city utilities or any other facilities. 
B.  The city manager is authorized to grant a permit if the application is complete and the work to be performed will not halt or unduly delay traffic and will not unduly endanger city utilities or other facilities. 
C.  If the city manager denies application for a permit, the applicant may request a hearing before the city council. The request must be in writing and must be filed with the city manager within thirty (30) days of the receipt by the applicant of notification of the denial of the permit. The hearing shall be de novo, and the council's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. 1115 § 2, 1980) 
12.12.030 - Work requirements. 
    All work performed by a permittee shall be done quickly as possible and strictly according to the public works standards or any other applicable standards adopted by the city of Toledo. The permittee shall leave the surface of the right-of-way in as good or better condition than it was before the work began. 
(Ord. 1115 § 3, 1980) 
12.12.040 - Payment for damaged city facilities. 
    Whether a permittee or not, any person, firm or corporation, which damages in any way a city utility, such as sewer or water line, or any other city facility, shall immediately notify the city manager and repair the damage to the city's satisfaction. If the repair is not so done, the city of Toledo may perform whatever repair work it deems necessary. The cost of the city's work plus twenty (20) percent for administrative overhead, the total sum to be determined by the city manager, shall be charged to and paid by the permittee. 
(Ord. 1115 § 4, 1980) 
12.12.050 - Promulgation of standards. 
    The city manager is authorized to promulgate and adopt the public works standards and any other construction standards necessary to regulate all work done within the city of Toledo. 
(Ord. 1115 § 5, 1980) 
12.12.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of this chapter will constitute a Class A infraction. 
(Ord. 1244 § 5, 1996) 
Chapter 12.16 - PARADES AND PROCESSIONS 
Sections: 

12.16.010 - Prohibited activity. 
    No person shall organize or participate in a parade which may disrupt or interfere with traffic without obtaining a permit. A permit shall always be required of a procession of people utilizing the public right-of-way and consisting of ten (10) or more persons or five or more vehicles. 
(Ord. 1072 § 28, 1979) 
12.16.020 - Parade permit. 
A.  Application for parade permits shall be made to the city recorder at least forty (40) days prior to the intended date of the parade. 
B.  Applications shall include the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the person responsible for the proposed parade; 
2.  The date of the proposed parade; 
3.  The desired route including assembling points; 
4.  The number of persons, vehicles and animals which will be participating in the parade; 
5.  The proposed starting and ending time; 6. The application shall be signed by the person designated as chairman. 
C.  If the city manager, upon receipt of the application, determines that the parade can be conducted without endangering public safety and without seriously inconveniencing the general public, he shall approve the route and issue the permit. 
D.  If the city manager determines that the parade cannot be conducted without endangering public safety or seriously inconveniencing the general public, he may: 
1.  Propose an alternate route; 
2.  Propose an alternate date; 
3.  Refuse to issue a parade permit. 
E.  The city manager shall notify the applicant of his decision within five days of receipt of the application. 
F.  If the city manager proposes alternatives or refuses to issue a permit, the applicant shall have the right to appeal his decision to the city council. 
(Ord. 1072 § 29, 1979) 
(Ord. No. 1328, § 3, 8-5-2009) 
12.16.030 - Appeal to council. 
A.  An applicant may appeal the decision of the city manager by filing a written request of appeal with the city recorder within five days after the city manager has proposed alternatives or refused to issue a permit. 
B.  The council shall schedule a hearing date which shall not be later than the second regular session following the filing of the written appeal with the city recorder and shall notify the applicant of the date and time that he may appear either in person or by a representative. 
(Ord. 1072 § 30, 1979) 
12.16.040 - Offenses against parade. 
A.  No person shall unreasonably interfere with a parade or parade participant. 
B.  No person shall operate a vehicle that is not part of a parade between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade. 
(Ord. 1072 § 31, 1979) 
12.16.050 - Permit revocable. 
    The city manager may revoke a parade permit if circumstances clearly show that the parade can no longer be conducted consistent with public safety. 
(Ord. 1072 § 32, 1979) 
12.16.060 - Funeral processions. 
A.  A funeral procession shall proceed to the place of interment by the most direct route which is both legal and practicable. 
B.  The procession shall be accompanied by adequate escort vehicles for traffic control purposes. 
C.  All motor vehicles in the procession shall be operated with their lights turned on. 
D.  No person shall unreasonably interfere with a funeral procession. 
E.  No person shall operate a vehicle that is not a part of the procession between the vehicles of a funeral procession. 
(Ord. 1072 § 33, 1979) 
12.16.070 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of any section of this chapter will constitute a Class C infraction. 
(Ord. 1244 § 8 (part), 1996: Ord. 1072 § 39 (part), 1979) 
Chapter 12.20 - PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1351, § 1, adopted Sept. 4, 2013, repealed the former Ch. 12.20, § 12.20.010, and enacted a new Ch. 12.20 as set out herein. The former Ch. 12.20 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 1199, § 1, adopted 1992. 

12.20.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect law-abiding citizens in their use of city parks, parking lots, pool, and other public facilities, and to authorize the city to exclude persons violating applicable laws from specific public places where such conduct is violent or disruptive of activities, events, or the normal conduct of business. 
(Ord. No. 1351, § 3, 9-4-2013) 
12.20.020 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
A.  "Applicable provision of law" includes any applicable provision of this code, of any city ordinance applying to use of public places, any applicable criminal or traffic law of the state of Oregon, any law regarding controlled substances or alcoholic beverages, and any applicable Lincoln County ordinance or regulation. For purposes of this section, "applicable" means relating to the person's conduct in the public place. 
B.  "Public place" includes the city pool and any city building, park, and parking lot within the city of Toledo. 
(Ord. No. 1351, § 4, 9-4-2013) 
12.20.030 - Authority. 
    In addition to other remedies provided for violation of this code, or of any of the laws of the state of Oregon, police officers or the code enforcement officer shall have authority to exclude any person who violates any applicable provision of law in any public place subject to this chapter in accordance with the provisions of this section. The police officer or code enforcement officer shall further have the authority to regulate activities in any area where necessary to prevent congestion and to secure maximum use of the public place for the comfort and convenience of the public. 
(Ord. No. 1351, § 5, 9-4-2013) 
12.20.040 - Warning-Conduct subject to exclusion. 
    Before issuing an exclusion under this section, the police or code enforcement officer may first give the person a warning and a reasonable opportunity to desist from the violation of law. An exclusion shall not be issued if the person promptly complies with the direction and desists from the violation of law. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, no warning shall be required if the person is to be excluded for engaging in conduct that: 
A.  Is classified as a felony or as a misdemeanor under any federal or state of Oregon law, or is an attempt, solicitation or conspiracy to commit any such felony or misdemeanor as defined therein; or 
B.  Has resulted in injury to any person or damage to any property; or 
C.  Constitutes a violation of any of the following provisions of this code: 
1.  TMC 6.04.050, Dangerous animals; 
2.  TMC 9.04.110, Discharge of weapons; 
3.  TMC 9.08.030, Urination or defecation in public places; 
4.  TMC 12.20.100, Skate Park; or 
D.  Is conduct for which the person previously has been warned or excluded for committing in a public place. 
(Ord. No. 1351, § 6, 9-4-2013) 
12.20.050 - Notice. 
    The exclusion or restriction notice shall be issued by a police officer or code enforcement officer and shall be personally served upon the person cited or arrested for the commission of the identified violation or enumerated criminal offense. In the case of city ordinance violations resulting in exclusion or other restriction, the notice shall be personally served or, after reasonable attempts for personal service have failed to personally serve the person for whom the notice of exclusion is issued, the notice may be sent by mail to the residence address of the involved party. The notice shall be in writing, shall specify the offense or offenses upon which the notice is based, the geographical extent of the exclusion, dates of exclusion, exemptions, and the procedure for filing an appeal. The period of exclusion shall commence at the time of service of the notice or, if the notice is mailed, three days from the mailing of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 1351, § 7, 9-4-2013) 
12.20.060 - Appeal. 
A.  A person receiving such notice of exclusion may appeal the notice to the city manager. An appeal shall be filed by providing a written request for hearing within ten (10) days of the date the exclusion commences, unless the time is extended by the city manager for good cause shown. 
B.  The request for an appeal hearing must be in writing, contain a copy or description of the notice of exclusion, and a statement of the basis on which the decision to exclude is invalid, unauthorized, or otherwise improper. 
C.  Within ten (10) days of receiving a request for an appeal hearing, the city manager shall schedule a hearing on the appeal. Notice of the hearing time and date shall be given to the person requesting the hearing and to the person issuing the exclusion notice. The hearing shall be held within twenty-one (21) days of the request for an appeal hearing. 
D.  At the hearing, the city manager may determine the matter without hearing upon the record. The appeal shall be conducted in accordance with applicable hearing procedures adopted by resolution. The city manager shall affirm the exclusion if the preponderance of evidence demonstrates that more likely than not the person in fact committed the violation, and provided the exclusion is otherwise in accordance with law. The city manager may also reverse or modify the exclusion notice appealed from. 
E.  If an appeal of the exclusion is timely filed under this section, the effectiveness of the exclusion shall be stayed, pending the outcome of the appeal. If the exclusion is affirmed, the remaining period of exclusion shall be effective immediately upon the issuance of the city manager's decision, unless the city manager specifies a later effective date. 
F.  The determination of the city manager is a quasi-judicial decision and is not appealable to the city council. Appeals from any determination by the city manager under this section shall be by writ of review to the circuit court of Lincoln County, Oregon, as provided in ORS 34.010 through 34.100. 
(Ord. No. 1351, § 8, 9-4-2013) 
12.20.070 - Application for waiver. 
    At any time within the period of exclusion, a person receiving such notice of exclusion may apply in writing to the city manager for a waiver of some or all of the effects of the exclusion for good reason. If the city manager grants a waiver under this section, the city manager shall promptly notify the Toledo police chief and the code enforcement officer, as applicable, of such action. In exercising discretion under this section, the city manager shall consider the severity of the violation for which the person has been excluded, the particular need of the person to be in the public place during some or all of the period of exclusion, such as for work or to attend or participate in a particular event, and any other criterion the city manager determines to be relevant to the determination of whether to grant a waiver. Notwithstanding the granting of a waiver under this section, the period of waiver will be included for purposes of calculating the appropriate length of exclusion under TMC 12.20.080. The decision of the city manager to grant or deny, in whole or in part, a waiver under this section is committed to the sole discretion of the city manager and is not subject to appeal or review. 
(Ord. No. 1351, § 9, 9-4-2013) 
12.20.080 - Exclusion period. 
A.  An exclusion issued under the provisions of this section shall be for thirty (30) days. If the person to be excluded has been excluded from any public place at any time within two years before the date of the present exclusion, the exclusion shall be for ninety (90) days. If the person to be excluded has been excluded from one or more public places on two or more occasions within two years before the date of the present exclusion, the exclusion shall be for one hundred eighty (180) days. 
B.  If a person is issued a subsequent exclusion while a previous exclusion is stayed pending appeal (or pending judicial review, should a court stay the exclusion), the stayed exclusion shall be counted in determining the appropriate length of the subsequent exclusion. If the previous exclusion is set aside, the term of the subsequent exclusion shall be reduced, as if the previous exclusion had not been issued. If multiple exclusions issued to a single person for one public place are simultaneously stayed pending appeal, the effective periods of those which are affirmed shall run consecutively. 
(Ord. No. 1351, § 10, 9-4-2013) 
12.20.090 - Violation-Criminal trespass. 
    No person shall enter or remain in any public place at any time during which there is in effect a notice of exclusion issued under this chapter excluding that person from that place. A person who knowingly violates a notice of exclusion from public places under this chapter commits the crime of criminal trespass in the second degree pursuant to ORS 164.245. 
(Ord. No. 1351, § 11, 9-4-2013) 
12.20.100 - Skate park. 
    The city may take any of the following actions in regards to the skate park: 
1.  Close the skate park in the event of vandalism, graffiti, littering, or aggressive behavior; 
2.  Exclude users at such times as the city deems the skate park to be at full capacity; or 
3.  Exclude from the skate park, without warning, any person who violates any offense listed in TMC 12.20.040 or a posted park rule. 
(Ord. No. 1351, § 12, 9-4-2013) 
12.20.110 - Rates. 
    The city council appoints the city manager and parks and recreation director to annually review and recommend rates for the pool and park and recreation activities. The council shall by resolution set rates for the pool and park and recreation activities. 
(Ord. No. 1351, § 13, 9-4-2013) 
Chapter 12.24 - ANNUAL TRANSPORTATION PERMIT FOR OVERSIZED VEHICLES 
Sections: 

12.24.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for an annual transportation permit for oversized vehicles. For the purpose of this chapter, an oversized vehicle is defined as any vehicle or combination of vehicles including loads which exceed sixty (60) feet in length. 
(Ord. No. 1327, 6-3-2009) 
12.24.020 - Permit required. 
    Any person desiring to move an oversized vehicle over city streets shall apply in advance for a permit from the city of Toledo. The application shall be on forms provided by the city of Toledo. 
(Ord. No. 1327, 6-3-2009) 
12.24.030 - Fee. 
    An appropriate application fee shall be set by city council resolution and shall comply with regulations of ORS 818.270 and OAR 734-070-0035. 
(Ord. No. 1327, 6-3-2009) 
12.24.040 - Application review. 
    The city manager or designee shall review the application for completeness within twenty (20) calendar days from the date the application has been filed. In addition to other information as may be required on the permit application, the applicant shall provide a business name, contact information, description of vehicle(s), provide insurance and bond company information, and shall be signed by the applicant. 
    Approval or denial of the application shall be based on consideration of all available evidence indicating whether the applicant meets the requirements for the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1327, 6-3-2009) 
12.24.050 - Approval or denial of permit application. 
1.  Approval of Permit. One copy of the approved permit shall be mailed to the applicant within five days after the date of approval. The applicant shall keep a copy of the permit in each of the vehicles identified on the approved permit form. 
2.  Denial of Permit. If the city determines that the application does not qualify for issuance of the permit, applicant shall be notified in writing that the application has been denied. The notice shall state the reason(s) for denial and shall be mailed within five days after the decision. 
(Ord. No. 1327, 6-3-2009) 
12.24.060 - Suspension. 
    Any annual transportation permit will be suspended if any of the following reasons are found: 
1.  Any commercial transportation company whose employee or employees collectively receive four or more convictions for traffic or city of Toledo ordinance violations within a twelve-month period, or 
2.  Any commercial transportation company whose employee receives a citation for any traffic or city ordinance violation issued by the city of Toledo while under their employment, and 
a.  Employee fails to appear or fails to comply with a citation or court order issued by the City of Toledo Municipal Court. 
    The police chief shall provide applicant with written notice of suspension by certified mail. The notice of suspension shall be mailed thirty (30) days prior to the suspension date and shall direct applicant an opportunity to respond within five days of receipt of the letter. 
(Ord. No. 1327, 6-3-2009) 
12.24.070 - Appeal of suspension. 
    An applicant shall have the right to appeal the suspension decision of the police chief by submitting a written appeal to the city manager's office within ten (10) days from the date of suspension. The application for appeal shall specify the reason(s) the permit should not be suspended. 
    The city manager shall schedule the matter for city council review as soon as practicable at a regularly scheduled city council meeting and notify the appellant no less than ten (10) days prior to the date of city council review. The city council shall conduct a hearing during a public meeting and determine whether there is substantial evidence in the record to support the suspension or overrule the suspension. A final written decision shall be provided to the applicant within five days of the decision. The city council decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1327, 6-3-2009) 
12.24.080 - Renewal. 
    Annual transportation permits shall be valid from the date of issue to the following December 31 st and shall be renewable annually for one year beginning January 1 st . 
(Ord. No. 1327, 6-3-2009) 
12.24.090 - Severability. 
    In the event any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or phrase of this ordinance or any administrative policy adopted herein is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, the validity of the remainder of the ordinance shall continue to be effective. 
(Ord. No. 1327, 6-3-2009) 
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters: 
Chapter 13.04 - STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC WORKS 
Sections: 

13.04.010 - Document adopted. 
    The city adopts the February, 2010 Public Infrastructure Design Standards Manual - Guidelines for Development to be in accordance with Ordinance No. 1228 and in conjunction with the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction manual, published by the American Public Works Association, Oregon Chapter, with revisions. New factual information may be added to the Public Infrastructure Design Standards Manual as updates becomes available from city's engineer, without further action by the city council. 
(Ord. 1250, 1996: Ord. 1228 § 1, 1994) 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 1, 2-17-2010) 
13.04.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of administration of the provisions of this chapter, the term, "owner," in the manual, shall refer to the city of Toledo and the term "contractor" shall refer to the person, persons or firm responsible for the construction, reconstruction, repair and maintenance of the improvements. The term "director of public works" or "engineer" shall refer to the city of Toledo director of public works or appointed designee. 
(Ord. 1228 § 2, 1994) 
13.04.030 - Exceptions. 
    Exceptions and additions to the plans and specifications contained in the manual may be authorized or required by the director of public works. With regard to a particular project or class of project, any specifications or material otherwise permitted may be changed if, in the opinion of the director of public works, the use of the specification or material would not be suitable or would not serve the best interests of safety, engineering and construction practice. 
(Ord. 1228 § 3, 1994) 
13.04.040 - Charges and fees. 
    The cost and fees for review and permits of public facility construction shall be established and may be revised by resolution of the council. The resolution shall set the amount of the charge and the type of permit to which the charge applies. 
(Ord. 1228 § 4, 1994) 
Chapter 13.08 - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 
Sections: 

13.08.010 - Initiation of proceedings and report from the city manager. 
    Whenever the council shall deem it necessary, upon its own motion or upon the petition of the owners of one-half of the property to benefit specially from the improvement, to make any street, sewer, sidewalk, drain or other public improvement to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment according to benefits, then the council shall, by motion, direct an appropriate city employee or agent to make a survey and written report for such project and file the same with the city recorder. Whenever the council acts upon the petition of owners of one-half of the property to benefit specially from the improvement, the council may require that the petitioners pay all or part of the costs of preparing the survey and written report if the project is abandoned in accordance with Section 13.08.020 or 13.08.030 of this chapter. A payment may be secured by bond, cash deposit or other means as the council deems appropriate. Unless the council shall direct otherwise, such report shall contain the following matters: 
A.  A map or plat showing the general nature, location and extent of the proposed improvement and the land to be assessed for the payment of any part of the cost thereof; 
B.  Plans, specifications and estimates of the work to be done; provided, however, that where the proposed project is to be carried out in cooperation with any other governmental agency, the report may adopt the plans, specifications and estimates of such agency; 
C.  An estimate of the probable cost of the improvement, including any legal, administrative and engineering costs attributable thereto; 
D.  An estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the specially benefitted properties; 
E.  A recommendation as to the method of assessment to be used to arrive at a fair apportionment of the whole or any portion of the cost of the improvement to the properties specially benefitted; 
F.  The description and assessed value of each lot, parcel of land, or portion thereof to be specially benefitted by the improvement, with the names of the record owners thereof and, when readily available, the names of the contract purchasers thereof; 
G.  A statement of outstanding assessments against property to be assessed. 
(Ord. 1068, 1979: Ord. 991 § 1, 1976) 
13.08.020 - Council's action on report. 
    After the report shall have been filed with the city recorder, the council may thereafter by motion approve the report, modify the report, and approve it as modified; require additional or different information for such improvement; or it may abandon the improvement. 
(Ord. 991 § 2, 1976) 
13.08.030 - Resolution and notice of hearing. 
    After the council shall have approved the report as submitted or modified, the council shall, by resolution, declare its intention to make such improvement, provide the manner and method of carrying out the improvement, and shall direct the recorder to give notice of such improvement by two publications one week apart in a newspaper of general circulation within the city of Toledo and by mailing copies of such notice by registered or certified mail to the owners to be assessed for the costs of such improvement, which said notice shall contain the following matters: 
A.  That a written report on the improvement is on file in the office of the recorder and is subject to public examination; 
B.  That the council will hold a public hearing on the proposed improvement on a specified date, which shall not be earlier than ten (10) days following the first publication of notice, at which objections and remonstrances to such improvement will be heard by the council, and that if, prior to such hearing, there shall be presented to the recorder valid, written remonstrances on forms provided by the city of two-thirds of the owners of the property to be specially affected and assessed for a proposed public improvement, then the improvement will be abandoned for at least six months. For the purpose of this section "owner" shall mean the record holder of legal title to the land, except that if there is a purchaser of the land according to a recorded land sale contract or according to a verified writing by the record holder of legal title to the land filed with the city recorder, the purchaser shall be deemed the "owner." 
C.  A description of the property to be specially benefitted by the improvement, the owners of such property, and the estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the property to be specially benefitted, and the total cost of the improvement to be paid for by special assessments to benefitted properties. 
(Ord. 991 § 3, 1976) 
13.08.040 - Manner of doing work. 
    The council may provide in the improvement resolution that the construction work may be done in whole or in part by the city of Toledo, by a contract, or by any other governmental agency, or by any combination thereof. 
(Ord. 991 § 4, 1976) 
13.08.050 - Hearing. 
    At the time of the public hearing on the proposed improvement, if the written remonstrances shall represent less than the amount of property required to defeat the proposed improvement, then, on the basis of the hearing of written remonstrances and oral objections, if any, the council may, by motion, at the time of the hearing or within sixty (60) days thereafter, order the improvement to be carried out in accordance with the resolution; or the council may, on its own motion, abandon the improvement. 
(Ord. 991 § 5, 1976) 
13.08.060 - Call for bids. 
A.  The council may, in its discretion, direct the city recorder to advertise for bids for construction of all, or any part of, the improvement project on the basis of the council-approved report and before the passage of the resolution, or after the passage of the resolution and before the public hearing on the proposed improvement, or at any time after the public hearing; provided, however, that no contract shall be let until after the public hearing has been held to hear remonstrance and oral objections to the proposed improvement. In the event that any part of the work of the improvement is to be done under contract bids, then the council shall determine the time and manner of advertisement for bids, and the contracts may be let to the responsible bidder whose bid is in the best interests of the city as determined in the sole discretion of the council; provided, that the council shall have the right to reject any or all bids when they are deemed unreasonable or unsatisfactory in the council's discretion. The city shall provide for the bonding of all contractors for the faithful performance of any contract let under its authority, and the provisions thereof in the case of default shall be enforced by action in the name of the city of Toledo. 
B.  If the council finds, upon opening bids for the work of such improvement, that the bid in the best interest of the city is substantially in excess of the estimate, it may, in its discretion, provide for holding a special hearing of objections to the proceeding with the improvement on the basis of such bid; and it may direct the city recorder to publish one notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of Toledo. 
(Ord. 991 § 6, 1976) 
13.08.070 - Assessment ordinance. 
    If the council determines that the local improvement shall be made, when the estimated cost thereof is ascertained on the basis of the contract award or city departmental cost, or after the work is done and the cost thereof has been actually determined, the council shall determine whether the property benefitted shall bear all or a portion of the cost. The recorder or other person designated by the council shall prepare the proposed assessment to the respective lots within the assessment district and file it in the appropriate city office. Notice of such proposed assessment shall be mailed or personally delivered to the owner of each lot proposed to be assessed, which notice shall state the amounts of assessment proposed on that property and shall fix a date by which time objections shall be filed with the recorder. Any such objection shall state the grounds thereof. The council shall consider such objections and may adopt, correct, modify or revise the proposed assessments and shall determine the amount of assessment to be charged against each lot within the district, according to the special and peculiar benefits accruing thereto from the improvement, and shall by ordinance spread the assessments. 
(Ord. 991 § 7, 1976) 
13.08.080 - Method of assessment and alternative methods of financing. 
    The council, in adopting a method of assessment of the costs of the improvement, may: 
A.  Use any just and reasonable method of determining the extent of any improvement district consistent with the benefits derived; 
B.  Use any method of apportioning the sum to be assessed as is just and reasonable between the properties determined to be specially benefitted; 
C.  Authorize payment by the city of all, or any part of, the cost of any such improvement when, in the opinion of the council, the topographical or physical conditions, or unusual or excessive public travel, or other character of the work involved warrants only a partial payment or no payment by the benefitted property of the costs of the improvement. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall preclude the council from using any other available means of financing improvement, including federal or state grants-in-aid, sewer charges or fees, revenue bonds, general obligation bonds, or any other legal means of finance. In the event that such other means of financing improvements are used, the council may, in its discretion, levy special assessments according to the benefits derived to cover any remaining part of the costs of that improvement. 
(Ord. 991 § 8, 1976) 
13.08.090 - Remedies. 
    Subject to the curative provisions of Section 13.08.160 and the rights of the city to re-assess as provided in Section 13.08.170 of this chapter, proceedings for writs of review and suits in equity may be filed no later than sixty (60) days after the passage by the council of the ordinance spreading the assessment; providing, that the property owner shall have filed a written objection to the proposed assessment as provided in Section 13.08.070. A property owner who has filed a written objection with the city recorder, as required by Section 13.08.070, shall have the right to apply for a writ of review based on the grounds that the council, in the exercise of judicial functions, has exercised such functions erroneously or arbitrarily, or has exceeded its jurisdiction, to the injury of some substantial right of such owner, if the facts supporting such ground have been specifically set forth in the written objection as required in Section 13.08.070. A property owner who has filed a written objection with the city recorder, as required by Section 13.08.070, may commence a suit for equitable relief based on a total lack of jurisdiction on the part of the city; and if notice of the improvement shall not have been sent to the owner, and if the owner did not have knowledge of the proposed improvement prior to the hearing, then the owner may file written objections alleging lack of jurisdiction with the city recorder within thirty (30) days after receiving notice or knowledge of the improvement. No provision of this section shall be construed so as to lengthen any period of redemption, or so as to affect the running of any statute of limitation or equitable defense, including laches. Any proceeding on a writ of review or suit in equity shall be abated if proceedings are commenced and diligently pursued by the city council to remedy or cure the alleged errors or defects. 
(Ord. 991 § 9, 1976) 
13.08.100 - Notice of assessment. 
    Within ten (10) days after the ordinance levying assessment has been passed, the city recorder shall send by registered or certified mail a notice of assessment to the owner of the assessed property and shall publish notice of such assessment twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of Toledo, the first publication of which shall be made not later than ten (10) days after the date of the assessment ordinance. The notice of assessment shall recite the date of the assessment ordinance and shall state that, upon the failure of the owner of the property assessed to make application to pay the assessment in installments within ten (10) days from the date of the first publication of notice, or upon the failure of the owner to pay the assessment in full within thirty (30) days from the date of the assessment ordinance, then interest will commence to run on the assessment and that the property assessed will be subject to foreclosure; and said notice shall further set forth a description of the property assessed, the name of the owner of the property, and the amount of each assessment. 
(Ord. 991 § 10, 1976) 
13.08.110 - Lien records and foreclosure proceedings. 
    After passage of the assessment ordinance by the council, the city recorder shall enter in the docket of city liens a statement of the amounts assessed upon each particular lot, parcel of land or portion thereof, together with a description of the improvement, the name of the owners, and the date of the assessment ordinance. Upon such entry in the lien docket, the amount so entered shall become a lien and charge upon the respective lots, parcels of land or portions thereof, which have been assessed for such improvement. All assessment liens of the city of Toledo shall be superior and prior to all other liens or encumbrances on property insofar as the laws of the state of Oregon permit. Interest shall be charged at a rate to be specified by the council in the assessment ordinance, which rate shall apply until paid on all amounts not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the assessment ordinance; and after expiration of sixty (60) days from the date of such assessment ordinance, the city may proceed to foreclose or enforce collection of the assessment liens in the manner provided by the general law of the state of Oregon; provided, however, that the city may, at its option, enter a bid for the property being offered at a foreclosure sale, which bid shall be prior to all bids except those made by persons who would be entitled under the laws of the state of Oregon to redeem such property. 
(Ord. 1134, 1981: Ord. 1076, 1979: Ord. 991 § 11, 1976) 
13.08.120 - Errors in assessment calculations. 
    Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the attention of the city recorder, who shall determine whether there has been an error in fact. If the recorder shall find that there has been an error in fact, he shall recommend to the council an amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct such error; and upon enactment of such amendment, the city recorder shall make the necessary correction in the docket of city liens and send a correct notice of assessment by registered or certified mail. 
(Ord. 991 § 12, 1976) 
13.08.130 - Deficit assessment. 
    In the event that an assessment shall be made before the total cost of the improvement is ascertained, and if it is found that the amount of the assessment is insufficient to defray the expenses of the improvement, the council may, by motion, declare such deficit and prepare a proposed deficit assessment. The council shall set a time for a hearing of objections to such deficit assessment and shall direct the city recorder to publish one notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of Toledo. After such hearing, the council shall make a just and equitable deficit assessment by ordinance, which shall be entered in the docket of city lines as provided by this chapter; and notices of the deficit assessment shall be published and mailed, and the collection of the assessment shall be made in accordance with Sections 13.08.100 and 13.08.110 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 991 § 13, 1976) 
13.08.140 - Rebates. 
    If, upon the completion of the improvement project, it is found that the assessment previously levied upon any property is more than sufficient to pay the costs of such improvements, then the council must ascertain and declare the same by ordinances; and when so declared, the excess amounts must be entered on the lien docket as a credit upon the appropriate assessment. In the event that any assessment has been paid, the person who paid the same, or his legal representative, shall be entitled to the repayment of such rebate credit, or the portion thereof which exceeds the amount unpaid on the original assessment. 
(Ord. 991 § 14, 1976) 
13.08.150 - Abandonment of proceedings. 
    The council shall have full power and authority to abandon and rescind proceedings for improvements made under this chapter at any time prior to the final completion of such improvements; and if liens have been assessed upon any property under such procedure, they shall be canceled, and any payments made on such assessments shall be refunded to the person paying the same, his assigns or legal representatives. 
(Ord. 991 § 15, 1976) 
13.08.160 - Curative provisions. 
    No improvement assessment shall be rendered invalid by reason of a failure of the report to contain all of the information required by Section 13.08.010 of this chapter; or by reason of a failure to have all of the information required to be in the improvement resolution, the assessment ordinance, the lien docket, or notices required to be published and mailed; not by the failure to list the name of, or mail notice to, the owner of any property as required by this chapter; or by reason of any other error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity, or other act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in any of the proceedings or steps herein specified, unless it appears that the assessment is unfair or unjust in its effect upon the person complaining, and the council shall have the power and authority to remedy and correct all such matters by suitable action and proceedings. 
(Ord. 991 § 16, 1976) 
13.08.170 - Reassessment. 
    Whenever any assessment, deficit or reassessment for any improvement which has been made by the city has been, or shall be, set aside, annulled, declared or rendered void, or its enforcement restrained by any court of this state, or any federal court having jurisdiction thereof, or when the council shall be in doubt as to the validity of such assessment, deficit assessment, or reassessment, or any part thereof, then the council may make a reassessment in the manner provided by the laws of the state of Oregon. 
(Ord. 991 § 17, 1976) 
Chapter 13.12 - WATER SERVICE SYSTEM 
Sections: 

13.12.010 - Water department created. 
    There is by this chapter created in the city of Toledo, Oregon, a department acting under the authority of the city council to be known as the city of Toledo water department. The superintendent of the department shall have charge of the maintenance and operation of the water source, treatment plant, pumping equipment, and all lines and all appurtenances of the water system. The superintendent shall perform his duties under the supervision and direction of the city manager. 
(Ord. 1093 § 1, 1980) 
13.12.020 - Collection of charges. 
    The city shall collect the charges, deposits and fees established by the council for each user of the water system facilities, and all charges shall be shown on a regular monthly bill. Revenues when collected by the city shall be paid over to the city treasurer and into a fund designated as "sale of water." 
(Ord. 1093 § 2, 1980) 
13.12.030 - Definitions. 
    The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall be construed as follows, unless the context indicates a different meaning: 
    "Air gap" means the vertical physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of the potable supply line and the overflow rim of the receiving vessel. This separation must be at least twice the inside diameter of the supply line, but never less than one inch. 
    "Applicant" means a person, corporation, association or agency applying for water service. 
    "Atmospheric vacuum breaker (AVB)" means a device, which contains a float check (poppet), a check seat, and an air inlet vent. This device is not approved by the city of Toledo for use on irrigation systems. 
    "Backflow device installer" means a person who is a plumber, an irrigation installer, public works employee, or a pipe fitter all licensed by the state of Oregon. All installers are required to obtain a permit from the city of Toledo in order to perform the work." 
    "Certified backflow assembly tester" means a person who is certified by the Oregon State Health Division, holds a contractors license with the construction contractor's board, and is approved by the city of Toledo to test backflow prevention assemblies. 
    "Certified cross connection control specialist/inspector" means a person who is certified by the Oregon State Health Division to administer a cross connection control program and to conduct a cross connection survey. 
    "Cross connection" means a cross connection is any actual or potential physical connection between a potable water line and any pipe or vessel containing a non-potable fluid so that it is possible to introduce the new non-potable fluid into the potable system by "backflow". 
    "City" means the city of Toledo, a municipal corporation of the state of Oregon. 
    "City manager" means the city manager or his authorized representative. 
    "Customer" means a person, corporation, association or agency receiving water service from the city water utility. 
    "Date of presentation" means the date upon which a bill or notice is mailed or delivered personally to the customer. 
    "Department" means the public works department of the city of Toledo. 
    "Discontinued water service" means the termination of the arrangement between the customer and the city water utility for the supply of water and normally shutting off the city valve at the meter. 
    "Domestic customer" means a customer who receives water for use in a residence. 
    "Double check detector assembly (DCDA)" means an approved assembly consisting of two approved double check valve assemblies, set in a parallel manner, equipped with a meter on the bypass line to detect small amounts of water leakage or use. 
    "Double check valve assembly (DCVA)" means an approved assembly consisting of two independently operating check valves, loaded to the closed position by springs or weights, and installed as a unit with and between two resilient seated shutoff valves and having suitable connections for testing. 
    "Fire department inlet connection" means a connection, sometimes referred to as a Siamese connection, through which the fire department can pump water into a standpipe system or sprinkler system. 
    "Fire protection service" means provision of water to premises for automatic fire protection. 
    "Industrial customer" means a customer who receives water for use in any capacity other than a residence. 
    "Mains" means distribution pipelines located in streets, highways, public ways or private rights-of-way which are used to serve the general public. 
    "Main extension" means extension of distribution pipelines, exclusive of service connections, beyond existing facilities. 
    "Person" means an individual, corporation, business, firm or agency. 
    "Premises" means the integral property or area, including improvements thereon, to which water service is or will be provided. 
    "Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (PVBA)" means an approved assembly consisting of a spring loaded check valve loaded to the closed position, an independently operating air inlet valve loaded to the open position and installed as a unit with and between two resilient seated shutoff valves and having suitable connections for testing. 
    "Rate schedule" means the entire body of effective rates, rentals, charges and regulations as adopted by resolution of the city council. 
    "Reduced pressure backflow assembly (RPBA)" means an approved assembly consisting of two independently operating check valves, spring loaded to the closed position, separated by a spring loaded differential pressure relief valve loaded to the open position, and installed as a unit with and between two resilient seated shutoff valves and having suitable connections for testing. 
    "Reduced pressure detector assembly (RPDA)" means an approved assembly consisting of two reduced pressure backflow assemblies, set in a parallel manner, equipped with a meter on the bypass line to detect small amounts of water leakage or use. 
    "Service connection" means the pipe, valves and other facilities by means of which the water utility conducts water from its distribution mains to and through the meter, but does not include the piping from the meter to the property served. 
    "Service protection" means the appropriate type or method of backflow protection at the service connection, commensurate with the degree of hazard of the consumer's potable water system. 
    "Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker" means an assembly containing an independently operating internally loaded check valve and independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly is to be equipped with a properly located resilient seated test cock, a properly located bleed/vent valve, and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly. 
    "Standard" means the quality of materials and standards for sizing and design adopted by the city of Toledo for the construction of improvements to be added to or served from the city water system. 
    "Surplus water" means that water from time to time available to the city at points of connection and remaining after unrestricted use of water for any and all purposes within the city. 
    "Water department" means the water department of the city of Toledo. 
(Ord. 1093 § 3, 1980) 
(Ord. No. 1320, § 1, 3-19-2008) 
13.12.040 - Water service-Boundaries. 
    The department will furnish water to all of that area within the boundaries of the city of Toledo where facilities are available and to such other areas as in the sole discretion of the city council may be in the best interest of the city of Toledo to serve. The city council or the department shall not dispose of or sell any water except surplus water to any person outside the city boundaries. 
(Ord. 1093 § 4, 1980) 
13.12.050 - Water service- Application-Locations not previously served. 
    Applicants requesting service in a location not previously served or a change in the size of an existing service shall submit a written application for water service accompanied by the prescribed connection fees and deposit as set forth in the rate schedule adopted by the council by resolution. The application shall state the following information. 
A.  The date of application; 
B.  The location of premises to be served; 
C.  The date on which applicant will be ready for service; 
D.  Whether the premises have ever before been supplied by the city water utility; 
E.  The purpose for which the service is to be used; 
F.  The size of the service; 
G.  The address to which bills are to be mailed or delivered; 
H.  Whether the applicant is an owner or tenant of, or agent for, the premises; 
I.  An agreement to abide by all rules, regulations and ordinances of the city water utility, as now existing or as hereafter changed or amended, and that any delinquent water bills shall be and become a lien against said premises; and 
J.  Such other information as the city water utility may reasonably request. 
(Ord. 1093 § 5, 1980) 
13.12.060 - Water service- Application-Locations previously served. 
    Applicants requesting service in a location previously served by the city water utility may make their request by either writing, telephoning or personally contacting the utility office in the city hall. All customers, after having given such notice for the commencement of water service, shall submit a properly filled out and signed application for water service to the city water utility office and shall pay the prescribed fees and deposits as set forth in the rate schedule adopted by the council by resolution before water service is begun. 
(Ord. 1102 § 1, 1980: Ord. 1093 § 6, 1980) 
13.12.070 - Water service-Appropriate meter size. 
    Since a water meter has both minimum and maximum measuring capabilities, the city manager may review the type, size and arrangement of meters, piping and flow-detecting devices; and, if he should consider the sizes requested to be improper for the flows and use desired, he may require that the application be amended accordingly. 
(Ord. 1093 § 7, 1980) 
13.12.080 - Water service-Deposit. 
    A deposit in the amount set by the rate schedule adopted by the council by resolution shall be required with each application for water service. Upon the permanent discontinuance of water service, said amount shall be paid to the depositor, provided such depositor has complied with all of the rules and regulations contained herein and has made payment of all of the water charges imposed by this chapter. In case of the failure of the depositor to pay all of the water charges imposed, the amount of the delinquent water charges shall be deducted from the deposit, and the surplus, if any remains, shall be paid over to the depositor upon request. The city water utility, at its option, may refund a deposit at any time after a customer's credit has been established. 
(Ord. 1093 § 8, 1980) 
13.12.090 - Water meters generally. 
A.  All persons using city water shall be served water through meters. The kind or make of said meters shall be approved or be as designated by the department. Meters shall be installed at the termination of the service connection. 
B.  All new or replacement meters shall be owned and maintained by the department. 
C.  Where a water meter or meters are used to measure the total water used for water districts or for group customers and where a meter is used to measure the total water used, as in apartment houses, the city will not furnish or read auxiliary meters or submeters used for the customer's convenience. 
D.  It is the customer's responsibility to keep the water meter clear of all obstructions (including but not limited to landscaping, vehicles or structures) so it may be read. The city shall notify the customer of any obstruction. If an obstruction is not removed ten (10) calendar days after notice from the city, the city may terminate service or remove the obstruction and bill the customer for the cost of removal plus a twenty-five (25) percent administrative fee. If the cost of removal is not paid within thirty (30) days, the premises may be liened plus interest will accrue at a rate of nine (9) percent per annum until paid. 
(Ord. 1295 §§ 1, 2, 2002; Ord. 1093 § 9, 1980) 
13.12.100 - Location of service pipe and meter. 
    The location of the service pipe and meter shall be at the discretion of the city water utility. If a customer requests that a service pipe and meter be installed at a location other than that proposed by the city water utility and if there is an additional expense involved, the customer must pay the regular connection fee, plus the additional expenses to have the service pipe and meter installed at his preferred location. 
(Ord. 1093 § 10, 1980) 
13.12.110 - Number of services to separate premises. 
    Separated premises under single control or management will each be supplied through individual service connections unless the city water utility elects otherwise. 
(Ord. 1093 § 11, 1980) 
13.12.120 - Service to multiple units. 
A.  Buildings with combined living or business quarters on the same premises under a single control or management may be served at the option of the applicant by either of the following methods: 
1.  Through separate service connections to each or any unit; provided, that the pipeline system from each service is independent of the others, and is not interconnected; 
2.  Through a single service connection to the entire premises, on which only one minimum charge will be applied. 
B.  The responsibility for payment of charges for all water furnished to combined units, supplied through a single service connection of approved capacity, must be assumed by the applicant. 
(Ord. 1093 § 12, 1980) 
13.12.130 - Fire protection service. 
    Fire protection connections will be allowed inside and outside of buildings under the following conditions: 
A.  The city water utility shall require a service meter of approved pattern to be furnished and maintained by the owner of any service system or combination hose and sprinkler system. The connection with the city main and the setting of the meter and the construction of a suitable meter chamber shall be made by the city water utility upon the payment of the connection fee as set by the council by resolution. 
B.  When the owner of a building desires, or when the building code calls for, a certain size pipe to supply water to a wet or dry system without hose connections, such pipe or pipes may be covered by an approved proportional meter or a detector check. The owner or agent of such building shall agree in writing that water supplied through this service will not be used for any purpose except for extinguishing a fire. If at any time it is found that hose connections have been added to the system or that registration is recorded on the meter or detector check, the immediate installation of an approved meter may be required by the utility. Such water registered shall be charged for at double the regular meter rates. 
C.  No charge will be made for water used in the extinguishing of fires if the owner or agent reports such use to the city water utility in writing within ten (10) days of such usage. 
D.  Monthly standby charges for automatic fire service shall be as prescribed by the rate schedule adopted by the council by resolution. The charges shall be based on wet or dry sprinkling systems without hose or other connections. Combined systems will pay the regular meter minimums and the regular meter rates. 
E.  Water for Fire Storage Tanks. Water may be obtained from a fire service for filling a tank connected with the fire service, but only if written permission is secured from the city water utility in advance and an approved means of measurement is available. The rates for general use will apply. 
F.  Ownership of service connection and all equipment appurtenant thereto, excluding the meter, shall be the sole property of the city water utility, and no part of the cost thereof will be refunded to the applicant. 
G.  Pressure and Supply. The city water utility assumes no responsibility for loss or damage because of lack of water pressure and merely agrees to furnish such quantities and pressures as are available in its general distribution system. The service is subject to shutdowns and variations required by the operation of the system. 
(Ord. 1093 § 13, 1980) 
13.12.140 - Temporary water service during construction. 
    An owner or contractor who requires temporary water service for construction or any other purpose shall be supplied with water by meter measurement and pay the customary connection fee, deposits and water user rates set forth by the rate schedule adopted by the council by resolution. 
    The customer shall use all possible care to prevent damage to the meter or to any other loaned facilities of the city water utility which are involved in furnishing the temporary service from the time they are installed until they are removed, or until forty-eight (48) hours' notice in writing has been given to the city water utility that the contractor or other person is through with the meter or meters and the installation. If the meter or other facilities are damaged, the cost of making repairs shall be paid by the customer. 
(Ord. 1093 § 14, 1980) 
13.12.150 - Discontinuance of water service. 
    When a change of occupancy or legal responsibility takes place on any premises being served by the city water utility, or a customer wishes to have his water service discontinued, notice shall be given as set forth in Section 13.12.180. If notice is not given, the outgoing customer or one having legal responsibility will be required to pay for water service until such notice has been received by the city water utility. The closing bill for the outgoing customer or one discontinuing legal responsibility will be calculated and mailed in the manner prescribed in Section 13.12.420. 
(Ord. 1093 § 15, 1980) 
13.12.160 - Application to reestablish discontinued water service. 
    Application in the form prescribed in Section 13.12.050 of this chapter shall be made to the city water utility to reestablish discontinued water service to a property. If the discontinued service pipe and meter is, in the opinion of the city manager, still capable of being used, a reconnection charge shall be made as set forth in the rate schedule adopted by the council by resolution; otherwise, the applicable connection fee as set forth in the rate schedule shall be payable. 
(Ord. 1093 § 16, 1980) 
13.12.170 - Notices to customers. 
    Notices required to be given by the city water utility to a customer will normally be given in writing and may be either delivered or mailed to him personally or delivered or mailed to him at the address to which his service is rendered. 
(Ord. 1093 § 17, 1980) 
13.12.180 - Notice from customers. 
    Notice from the customer to the city water utility shall be given by him or his authorized representative by writing or telephoning the city water utility office or orally at the city water utility office in the city hall. 
(Ord. 1093 § 18, 1980) 
13.12.190 - Repair of leaks. 
A.  Every customer shall maintain his pipes, fittings, and fixtures in proper order and free from leakage or wastage. Where water is wastefully or negligently used on a customer's premises, seriously affecting the general service, the utility may discontinue the service if such conditions are not corrected within ninety-six (96) hours after giving the customer written notice. 
B.  Where there is a leak between the main and the meter, the city water utility shall make all repairs free of charge. When a service pipe at the proper grade is damaged or destroyed by contractors or others, the person, contractor or company responsible for such damage or destruction shall pay the utility for the cost of repairing or replacing such pipes on the basis of the cost to the city in labor and in material, as defined in Section 13.12.330(A). 
(Ord. 1093 § 19, 1980) 
13.12.200 - Admission of city employees. 
    Employees of the city shall be admitted during reasonable hours to customer's properties in order to inspect any water pipe, meter, appliance or fixture upon such premises. Such employees shall, on request, show proper identification. 
(Ord. 1093 § 20, 1980) 
13.12.210 - Use of water. 
A.  Except where it forms part of a manufactured product, no water shall be sold or conveyed beyond the property served without permission of the city water utility. 
B.  The customer shall install a suitable valve, as close to the meter location as practicable, the operation of which will control the entire water supply from the service. 
C.  The operation by the customer of the city water utility's valve in the meter box is not permitted. 
(Ord. 1093 § 21, 1980) 
13.12.220 - Abatement of noises and pressure surges. 
A.  No apparatus, fitting or fixture shall be connected, allowed to remain connected, or operated in a manner which will cause noises, pressure surges or other disturbances which may, in the opinion of the city manager, result in annoyance or damage to other customers or the waterworks system. 
B.  If any such condition exists, the city manager may give notice to the customer to correct the fault within ninety-six (96) hours or such lesser period as may be specified in the notice. 
C.  If the customer fails to comply with such notice within the time specified, the city manager may have the service shut off until the fault has been corrected. 
(Ord. 1093 § 22, 1980) 
13.12.230 - Prevention of contamination. 
A.  No person shall connect, cause to be connected, or allow to remain connected, any piping, fixture, fitting, container or other appliance in a manner which, under any combination of circumstances, may allow water from a source other than the city water utility's system, or wastewater, or any other harmful liquid or substance, to enter the city water utility's system. 
B.  If a condition exists which, in the opinion of the city manager, is contrary to this section, he may give notice to the customer to correct the fault within ninety-six (96) hours or such lesser period as may be specified in the notice. 
C.  If the customer fails to comply with such notice within the time specified, the city manager may have the service shut off until the fault has been corrected. 
(Ord. 1093 § 23, 1980) 
13.12.240 - Cross-connection. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance, in conjunction with the regulations set forth in Chapter 10 of the Uniform Plumbing Code of the State of Oregon, the Uniform Fire Code, and the current edition of the Cross Connection Control Manual - Accepted Procedure and Practice published by the Pacific Northwest Section, American Water Works Association, and regulated by the State of Oregon Department of Human Services is to protect the health of the water consumer and the potability of the water in the distribution system. Inspection and regulation of all actual or potential cross connections between potable and non-potable systems is required in order to minimize the danger of contamination or pollution of the public potable water supply. Controlling or preventing cross connections is accomplished by either removing the cross connection or installing an approved backflow prevention assembly to protect the public potable water supply. 
B.  System Control. The city of Toledo is required to eliminate or control all cross connections throughout its service area. All persons who submit an application for service, and all customers receiving service shall comply with the regulations set forth in this ordinance. The owner of the property upon which a cross connection occurs shall be fully responsible for all damages caused as a result of the cross connection. 
C.  Enforcement and Device Standards. The city manager will enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The city manager may delegate the enforcement responsibilities to a certified cross connection control specialist/inspector. The provisions of this ordinance may supersede State of Oregon Health Division Regulations but in no case shall they be less stringent. All standards shall be approved by the department and the city manager. All backflow prevention assemblies required by this ordinance shall conform with the models approved by the Oregon State Health Division. 
    Approved backflow prevention assemblies required by this ordinance shall be installed under the direction of the public works director and/or under the supervision of the cross connection control specialist/inspector, and shall comply with city of Toledo Standard Specifications. 
D.  Device Testing. All DCVAs, DCDAs, PVBAs, RPBAs, RPDAs, and SPVBA's are required to be tested immediately after installation and annually thereafter by a certified backflow device tester. All air gaps and AVBs installed in lieu of an approved backflow prevention assembly shall, at a minimum, be inspected on an annual basis. Reports for initial testing must be submitted to the department within three business days of installation. Annual testing of devices must occur within thirty (30) days of receipt of the annual test due notification from the department, and a completed test report must be submitted to the department within three business days of device testing. Test and inspections may be required on a more frequent basis at the discretion of the director. 
    All testers testing in the city of Toledo service area for the first time shall provide an opportunity for the cross connection inspector to witness a test performed by them in order for that test and all subsequent tests to be accepted by the city of Toledo. Any tester or company providing testing inside the Toledo service area shall contact the cross connection inspector of the city of Toledo prior to doing business in Toledo and provide a copy of their contractor's license, state certification and current test equipment calibration record. It is the responsibility of any tester or company to keep all licensing, certification and calibration records current and to communicate in writing annually to the city any and all changes related to this requirement which may have occurred during the previous year. 
E.  Right of Inspectors and Public Works Department Personnel to enter Premises. Authorized employees of the city of Toledo with proper identification shall have free access at reasonable hours of the day to all areas of a premises or building to which water is supplied, for the purpose of evaluating the need for backflow protection. The city may refuse to supply service, or may terminate service, for failure to allow necessary inspections. 
    Failure of the customer to cooperate in the installation, maintenance, repair, inspection, or testing of a backflow prevention assembly required by this ordinance shall be grounds for termination of water service, or for the requirement of an air gap separation. The city may elect to install an appropriate backflow protection device at the property line if the immediate health of the citizens of Toledo is threatened. All costs associated with such installations by the city shall be the responsibility of the property owner, due and payable within one month of installation completion. 
F.  Violations. Any person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to the penalty polices established in Toledo Municipal Code Section 13.12.490. 
(Ord. 1295 §§ 9, 10, 2002) 
(Ord. No. 1320, 3-19-2008) 
13.12.250 - Restrictions on use of water-Shortages. 
    If a shortage of water exists at any time for any reason, the department shall have the authority at any time to restrict the use of water for lawn and garden sprinkling, car washing or any other nonessential use of water. 
(Ord. 1093 § 25, 1980) 
13.12.260 - Shutoffs-Repairs. 
A.  The department may at any time and without notice shut off water from the mains for repairs or other necessary purposes, and the department will not be responsible for any resulting damages. Reasonable efforts will be made to give notice of such shutoffs whenever possible. 
B.  No water for steam boilers for power purposes shall be furnished by direct pressure from city lines. When water is temporarily shut off from the lines, the occupants of premises shall keep open all hot-water faucets to allow steam to escape from water heaters. The owner of the premises shall pay the city for all damages to any meter caused by steam or hot water. 
(Ord. 1093 § 26, 1980) 
13.12.270 - Tampering with city facilities-Generally. 
    No person shall tamper or interfere with the city's water utility system, and no person shall, except as authorized by the city manager, connect to or operate any pipe, valve, meter, hydrant or other part of the city's water utility system. 
(Ord. 1093 § 27, 1980) 
13.12.280 - Tampering with city facilities-Pollution. 
    No person shall throw or place in any water reservoir, water line or headworks, or any other part of the city's water system any dirt, rubbish, filth, wood, stones or any other substances or in any way pollute the water in any reservoir, supply line, headworks or other part of the water system. 
(Ord. 1093 § 28, 1980) 
13.12.290 - Tampering with city facilities-Connections, alterations turning on/off water. 
    No person shall make connections with the water lines, make any alterations in any conduit pipes or other connection, connect lines when they have been disconnected, or turn water off or on to any premises without permission from the superintendent of the department. 
(Ord. 1093 § 29, 1980) 
13.12.300 - Tampering with city facilities-Liability for damage to system. 
    The customer shall be liable for any damage to a meter or other equipment or property owned by the city water utility which is caused by an act of the customer, his tenants or agents. The city water utility shall be reimbursed by the customer for any such damage promptly on presentation of a bill. 
(Ord. 1093 § 30, 1980) 
13.12.310 - Pressure, supply and quantity. 
A.  The city water utility does not guarantee pressure or continuous supply of water, and does not accept responsibility at any time for the maintenance of pressure on its lines or for increases or decreases in pressure. The city water utility reserves the right at any and all times, without notice, to change operating water pressures, to shut off water, or otherwise to interrupt water service for the purposes of making repairs, extensions, alterations or improvements or for any other reason, and to increase or reduce pressure at any time. Neither the city water utility nor its officers, employees or agents shall incur any liability of any kind whatever by reason of the cessation in whole or in part of water pressure or water supply, or changes in operating pressures, or by reason of the water containing sediments, deposits or other foreign matter. 
B.  Customers depending on a continuous and uninterrupted supply of water or having processes or equipment that require particularly clear or pure water shall provide such emergency storage, oversize piping, pumps, tanks, filters, pressure regulators, check valves, additional service pipes, or other means for a continuous and adequate supply of water suitable to their requirements. 
(Ord. 1093 § 31, 1980) 
13.12.320 - Removal and relocation of facilities. 
    Property owners or others desiring the removal or relocation of city water utility owned facilities including service pipes, meters, valves, chambers, hydrants or other fittings and appurtenances, shall bear all costs of such removal or relocation. The city council may refuse to permit the removal or relocation of facilities, if, in their opinion, fire protection or the operation or control of any portion of the city water system or other public or private facilities would be endangered. 
(Ord. 1093 § 32, 1980) 
13.12.330 - Work done "at cost." 
    Any person having work done at cost may select one of the following alternatives: 
A.  Cost. Cost will include the amount expended by the city water utility for gross wages and salaries, employees' fringe benefits, materials, equipment rentals at rates paid by the city water utility or set by the city water utility for its own equipment or any other expenditures, incurred in doing the work, plus twenty (20) percent of the total of the items expended to cover administrative expenses. 
    The city water utility will supply an estimate of cost and will require an advance payment prior to commencement of the work. Any additional cost shall be paid to the city water utility and any surplus shall be refunded. 
(Ord. 1295 § 3, 2002; Ord. 1093 § 33, 1980) 
13.12.340 - Replacement of old service pipes. 
    The city water utility will replace, at no cost to the customer, the city's service pipe when it has deteriorated to the point of leaking or significantly losing capacity with a new service pipe equal in size and capacity of the original installation. 
(Ord. 1093 § 34, 1980) 
13.12.350 - Ownership of service pipes and meters. 
    The service connection and meter, whether located on public or private property, are the property of the city water utility, and the city water utility reserves the right to repair, replace and maintain it, as well as to remove it after discontinuance of service for a period of one year or longer. A new service shall be placed only upon the owner making an application and paying for a new connection in the regular manner. 
(Ord. 1093 § 35, 1980) 
13.12.360 - Ownership of private service pipes. 
    Every private service pipe, beyond the meter, whether on private property or on the street, shall remain the property of the customer and he shall be responsible for its maintenance. If, in the installation, maintenance or removal of any private service pipe, it is necessary for any person to occupy or excavate in the street or to remove or relay any sidewalk or other street improvement, he shall do so in a manner satisfactory to the city manager, and shall obtain any permits required and pay the appropriate fees or charges. 
(Ord. 1093 § 36, 1980) 
13.12.370 - Changes in customers' equipment. 
A.  Wherever excessive flow or consumption periodically overloads the capacity of a meter used to supply service to any premises, the city manager may so notify the customer. The customer shall thereupon supply an estimate of his flow requirement and other pertinent data required by the city manager to enable him to estimate the size of an adequate meter and service pipe and to estimate the cost of its installation. The installation of an adequate meter and service pipe shall be at the cost of the customer. 
B.  The city manager will notify the owner to apply for a larger meter and service pipe. If the application and deposit are not made within thirty (30) days, then the city may proceed with the work and charge the full cost to the owner, or the city water utility may discontinue service. 
(Ord. 1093 § 37, 1980) 
13.12.380 - Discontinuance of service- Unsafe apparatus. 
    The city water utility may refuse to furnish water and may discontinue service to any premises where apparatus, appliances or equipment using water is dangerous, unsafe or is being used in violation of laws, ordinances or legal regulations. 
(Ord. 1093 § 38, 1980) 
13.12.390 - Discontinuance of service- Service detrimental to others. 
    The city water utility may refuse to furnish water and may discontinue service to any premises where excessive demands by one customer will result in inadequate service to others. 
(Ord. 1093 § 39, 1980) 
13.12.400 - Discontinuance of service- Penalty for turning on water without authority. 
    Should the water be turned on by any water consumer or other person without authority from the city water utility, the water may then be shut off at the main or the meter removed. 
(Ord. 1093 § 40, 1980) 
13.12.410 - Extension of a water main. 
A.  The extension of a water main to serve premises not previously served by the city water system shall be made at the discretion of the city council. The city water utility shall have the absolute right to determine the size and all other matters involved in the extensions of water mains. All necessary excavation and construction shall be done by the city or under the direct supervision of the city, and all water mains, pipes, fittings and other appurtenances shall remain the sole property of the city water utility, regardless of who pays for the extension of the water mains. 
B.  Upon a request for water main extension, the city water utility may conduct a study of the projected annual income from water service charges resulting from the extension. If the annual income equals or exceeds fifteen (15) percent of the total cost of construction of the main extension, the city may construct the main extension at its own expense. If the annual income is less than fifteen (15) percent of the cost of construction, the owners of the property benefitted by the extension shall bear the entire cost of the water main construction. If it is in the best interest of the city to install a water main which is larger than necessary for present demand and if the owners of the property benefitted by the extension are paying for the cost of the water main construction, the city may contribute to the project an amount equal to the additional cost of installing the larger water main over the cost of installing the smaller main. 
(Ord. 1093 § 41, 1980) 
13.12.420 - Billing practices. 
A.  Meters will ordinarily be read at regular intervals for the preparation of monthly bills and as required for the preparation of opening, closing and special bills. The city water utility reserves the right to estimate meter readings in cases where actual meter readings are not available and to adjust consumptions when actual readings are obtained. 
B.  Bills for water service will ordinarily be rendered monthly, unless otherwise provided in the rate schedule. The city water utility reserves the following options and rights: 
1.  To read meters and render bills for lesser or longer periods than one month; 
2.  To render bills on an estimated consumption basis in cases where the city water utility is unable to obtain actual meter readings; and 
3.  To include with the regular service billing the amount of any valid obligation due the city water utility; or a deposit amount sufficient to bring the customer's total deposit to the full deposit limit. 
C.  All bills for water service are due and payable in full at the city water utility office on or before the tenth day following the date of mailing the statement of said account or the date of presentation of said account. A reminder of the delinquency shall be sent at the next billing date on or about twenty (20) days after the account becomes delinquent. If payment of the delinquent bill has not been made within ten (10) days after presentation of the delinquent notice, a delinquent payment fee, as set by the council by resolution, shall be assessed and collected, and the account is subject to disconnection without further notice. A reconnection fee, as set by the council by resolution, payment in full of the delinquent bill and the delinquent payment fee, and the amount necessary to bring the deposit for the delinquent account to the full deposit limit shall be collected before service is restored where the service was turned off because of a delinquent account. The city manager, in cases of extreme hardship, shall have the discretion of renewing service to a delinquent account upon receipt of a plan for the payment of the overdue amount in installments. 
D.  Closing bills for water service will ordinarily be prepared by the billing office within two weeks of the customer's request to discontinue water service. If there is an amount due, it will be due and payable as set out above. If there is a refund due the customer, a check will be sent with the closing bill. 
(Ord. 1295 § 4, 2002; Ord. 1171, 1985; Ord. 1102 § 2, 1980: Ord. 1093 § 42, 1980) 
13.12.430 - Responsibility for payment of bills. 
A.  The property owner of record shall be responsible for payment of all charges prescribed in this chapter. If the property is rented, the owner will be billed for water/sewer usage, unless the owner executes an agreement requesting the renter be billed directly and agrees to assume responsibility of all unpaid billings. However, the owner shall be notified at the same time the turnoff notice is sent. Such notice shall be sufficient if sent to the last known address of the property owner, his agent or assignee as determined from the records of the city. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to inform the city when his property is occupied by a different renter. 
B.  Any necessary repair to meters damaged by the owner or tenants of serviced premises shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises. 
(Ord. 1295 §§ 5, 6, 2002) 
13.12.440 - Liens and other collection enforcement procedures. 
    Water and sewer use charges shall be a lien against the premises served from and after the date of billing and entry on the ledger or other records of the city pertaining to its water/sewer system; and such ledger records or other records (lien docket) shall be accessible for inspection by anyone interested in ascertaining the amount of such charges against the property. Whenever a bill for water or sewer service remains unpaid ninety (90) days after it has been rendered, the lien thereby created may be foreclosed in any manner provided by general state laws and/or city ordinances. After a charge has been unpaid for ninety (90) days an administrative fee of twenty-five (25) percent shall be added to the charge and interest shall accrue at nine percent per annum. 
(Ord. 1295 §§ 7, 8, 2002) 
13.12.450 - Meter error-Test. 
A.  Prior to installation, each meter will be tested and no meter found to register more than two percent fast or slow under conditions of normal operation will be placed in service. 
B.  On Customer Request. 
1.  A customer may, giving not less than one week's notice, request the utility to test the meter serving his premises. 
2.  The utility may require the customer to deposit an amount to cover the cost of the test, which amount shall be set by the council by resolution. 
3.  This deposit will be returned if the meter is found to register more than two percent fast. The customer will be notified not less than five days in advance of the time and place of the test. 
(Ord. 1093 § 45, 1980) 
13.12.460 - Meter error-Adjustment of bills. 
A.  Fast meters. When, after a test, a meter is found to be registering more than two per-fast under conditions of normal operation, the city water utility may refund to the customer the full amount of the overcharge based on corrected meter readings for a period not exceeding three months that the meter was in use for service to that customer. 
B.  Slow Meters. 
1.  When, after a test, a meter used for domestic or residential service is found to be registering more than twenty-five (25) percent slow, the city water utility may bill the customer for the amount of the undercharge based upon corrected meter readings for a period not exceeding one month that the meter was in use for service to that customer. 
2.  When, after a test, a meter used for other than domestic or residential service is found to be registering more than five percent slow, the utility may bill the customer for the amount of the undercharge based upon correct meter readings for a period not exceeding one month that the meter was in use for service to that customer. 
C.  Nonregistering Meters. The city water utility may bill the customer for water consumed while the meter was not registering. The bill will be at the minimum monthly meter rate or will be computed upon an estimate of consumption based either upon the customer's prior use during the same season of the year or upon a reasonable comparison with the use of other customers receiving the same class of service during the same period and under similar circumstances and conditions. 
D.  Adjustments on Account of Underground Leaks. Where a leak exists underground between the meter and the building and the leak is repaired within ten (10) days after the owner, agent or occupant of the premises has been notified of the leakage, the utility may allow an adjustment of fifty (50) percent of the estimated excess consumption. 
(Ord. 1093 § 46, 1980) 
13.12.470 - Billings of separate meters. 
    Each meter on a customer's premises will be considered separately, and the readings of two or more meters will not be combined unless specifically provided for in the rate schedule or unless the city water utility's operating convenience requires the use of more than one meter. The minimum monthly charge for such combined meters will be based on the diameter of the total combined discharge areas of the meters. 
(Ord. 1093 § 47, 1980) 
13.12.480 - Water user charges. 
    Water user rates, charges, deposits, fees or other amounts of money to be collected shall be fixed by the city council by resolution, and may in like manner be amended or altered from time to time at the discretion of the city council. 
(Ord. 1093 § 48, 1980) 
13.12.490 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of any section of this chapter will constitute a Class B infraction. 
(Ord. 1244 § 4, 1996) 
13.12.500 - Water system boundary regulations. 
    All of the regulations and other provisions contained in this chapter shall apply to all of the customers of the water utility system whether inside or outside of the boundaries of the city of Toledo. 
(Ord. 1093 § 50, 1980) 
Chapter 13.16 - SEWER SYSTEM USE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
Article I. - Definitions 

13.16.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
    "BOD" (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at twenty (20) degrees C, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    "Building drain" means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which received the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewers, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building walls. 
    "Building sewer" means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    "Garbage" means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    "Industrial wastes" means the liquid wastes from any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under the following divisions. 
1.  Division A, Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing. 
2.  Division B, Mining. 
3.  Division D, Manufacturing. 
4.  Division E, Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services. 
5.  Division I, Services. 
    A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
    "Natural outlet" means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group. 
    "pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    "Properly shredded garbage" means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    "Public sewer" means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    "Sanitary sewer" means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    "Sewage" means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present. 
    "Sewage treatment plant" means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    "Sewage works" means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    "Sewer" means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
    "Slug" means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    "Storm drain" (sometimes termed "storm sewer") means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    "Superintendent" means the director of public works of the city of Toledo or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    "Suspended solids" means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    "Watercourse" means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. I §§ 1-21, 1990) 
Article II. - Use of Public Sewers Required 

13.16.020 - Unlawful to deposit waste. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city of Toledo, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. II § 1, 1990) 
13.16.030 - Unlawful to discharge sewage to natural outlets. 
    It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city of Toledo, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. II § 2, 1990) 
13.16.040 - Unlawful to use private sewage systems. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. II § 3, 1990) 
13.16.050 - Connection to city sewer system required. 
    The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city, and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within one hundred fifty (150) feet (45.72 meters) of the property line. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. II § 4, 1990) 
Article III. - Private Sewage Disposal 

13.16.060 - Use of private system. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 13.16.050, the building sewer shall be connected to a private disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. III § 1, 1990) 
13.16.070 - Permit required. 
    Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from Oregon DEQ, or its contract agent. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. III § 2, 1990) 
13.16.080 - Connection to city sewer system. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Section 13.16.050, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned in accordance with state law at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. III § 3, 1990) 
13.16.090 - Operation and maintenance. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. III § 4, 1990) 
13.16.100 - Additional requirements. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Oregon DEQ. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. III § 5, 1990) 
Article IV. - Building Sewers and Connections 

13.16.110 - Permits required. 
A.  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. The permit may be granted when the procedures for connection or installation have been reviewed and approved by the superintendent and when the applicant has agreed to the inspection of the new line from the main pipeline to the user's premises. 
B.  No person, firm or corporation shall cover a lateral or service sewer pipeline or cause such work to be done without first obtaining the approval of the superintendent after the official has personally inspected the line from the main line to the premises, including all new connections. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. IV § 1, 1990) 
13.16.120 - Permits-Classes- Application. 
    There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (a) for residential and commercial service, and (b) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. IV § 2, 1990) 
13.16.130 - Installation and connection-Costs. 
A.  Any connection to or extension of main sewer pipeline or installation of a lateral or service line shall be performed by the city of Toledo public works department if the department is available and able to perform the work as determined by the city managers; if not, the work shall be done under the inspection of and to the satisfaction of the city of Toledo. 
B.  All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
C.  If the department performs the above work, the user shall pay to the city the actual cost of the labor, materials and equipment required for the project plus twenty (20) percent of the total cost for administrative overhead. Regardless of who performs the work, the user shall pay the inspection fee set by the council by resolution. All charges and fees are due and payable before final connection to the sewerage system. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. IV § 3, 1990) 
13.16.140 - Separate sewers required. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. IV § 4, 1990) 
13.16.150 - Use of existing sewers in new construction. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. IV § 5, 1990) 
13.16.160 - Requirements for construction. 
    The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. IV § 6, 1990) 
13.16.170 - Elevation. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. IV § 7, 1990) 
13.16.180 - No connection of surface water collection systems. 
    No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. IV § 8, 1990) 
13.16.190 - Requirements for connection. 
    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. IV § 9, 1990) 
13.16.200 - Inspections. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. IV § 10, 1990) 
13.16.210 - Excavations-Restoration of public property. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. IV § 11, 1990) 
13.16.220 - Laterals. 
A.  Each user of the sewerage system shall own and maintain the lateral or service sewer pipeline, regardless of who installed it, from the main sewer line to the user's premises. 
B.  If the city determines that a lateral is causing infiltration of surface, storm, or ground water into the sewerage system, the lateral shall be repaired at the expense of the user within sixty (60) days after the date of official notice to the legal owner of the property to repair the lateral. No user shall cover or cause to be covered any such repair work before the city building official has inspected and approved the work. 
C.  All storm sewers which are on private property and which connect directly to the sewer laterals or sewer lines shall be disconnected and properly capped at the expense of the user within thirty (30) days after the date of official notice to the legal owner of the property. 
D.  The city reserves the right to enter private property at reasonable times for the purposes of inspecting and testing the sewer laterals. 
E.  If the user fails to correct such infiltration, whether surface, storm, or ground water, within the prescribed time limit, the city may declare the lateral piping nonconforming. The user shall then be assessed and pay a monthly charge of three times the regular assessment for usage of the system. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. IV § 12, 1990) 
Article V. - Use of the Public Sewers 

13.16.230 - No discharge of surface waters. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. V § 1, 1990) 
13.16.240 - Discharge to storm sewers. 
    Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by Oregon DEQ. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer, or natural outlet approved by the Oregon DEQ. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. V § 2, 1990) 
13.16.250 - Prohibited discharges. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
A.  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
B.  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two mg/l or CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 
C.  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
D.  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not be limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and flesh-ings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. V § 3, 1990) 
13.16.260 - Limited discharges. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as to quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
A.  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degree F (sixty-five (65) degrees C). 
B.  Any water or waste containing fats, gas, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees F (zero and sixty-five (65) degrees C). 
C.  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. 
D.  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
E.  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the superintendent for such materials. 
F.  Any waters or wastes containing phenols, or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction of such discharge to the receiving waters. 
G.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
H.  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
I.  Materials which exert or cause: 
1.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate); 
2.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions); 
3.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works; 
4.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein. 
J.  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. V § 4, 1990) 
13.16.270 - Requirements for discharge of special wastes. 
    If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 13.16.260, and which in the judgment of the superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
A.  Reject the wastes; 
B.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
C.  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
D.  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of Section 13.16.320. If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. V § 5, 1990) 
13.16.280 - Interceptors. 
    Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. V § 6, 1990) 
13.16.290 - Pretreatment or flow equalization. 
    Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. V § 7, 1990) 
13.16.300 - Manholes. 
    When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. V § 8, 1990) 
13.16.310 - Sampling and testing. 
    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four (24) hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.) 
(Ord. 1194 Art. V § 9, 1990) 
13.16.320 - Special arrangements. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. V § 10, 1990) 
Article VI. - Protection from Damage 

13.16.330 - Damage-Disorderly conduct. 
    No authorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. VI § 1, 1990) 
Article VII. - Powers and Authority of Inspectors 

13.16.340 - Inspections-Right of entry. 
    The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The superintendent or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. VII § 1, 1990) 
13.16.350 - Liability. 
    While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Section 13.16.340, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in Section 13.16.300. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. VII § 2, 1990) 
13.16.360 - Easements. 
    The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. VII § 3, 1990) 
Article VIII. - Violation-Penalty 

13.16.370 - Notice. 
    Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except Article VI shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. VIII § 1, 1990) 
13.16.380 - Continued violation- Infraction. 
    Continued violation beyond the time limit provided for in Section 13.16.370 will constitute a Class A infraction. 
(Ord. 1244 § 19, 1996: Ord. 1194 Art. VIII § 2, 1990) 
13.16.390 - Liability. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. 1194 Art. VIII § 3, 1990) 
Chapter 13.20 - SEWER SYSTEM SERVICE CHARGES 
Sections: 

13.20.010 - Purpose. 
    In order to protect the waters within and adjacent to the city of Toledo (hereinafter referred to as the "city") from pollution and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents, a sanitary sewerage system has been constructed and is operated and maintained by the city of Toledo for the collection, treatment, and disposal of wastewater; and 
    In order to carry out its authorized function of sewage collection, treatment and disposal, it is necessary and in the public interest that the city establish and maintain charges for sewerage service in amounts sufficient to pay the expenses of operating and maintaining such facilities, to provide for replacement, and to provide a margin for reserve; and 
    The city has entered into a grant agreement with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for construction of sewage collection, treatment and disposal facilities, in which the city has agreed that the costs of operating and maintaining the sewage collection, treatment and disposal works shall be distributed among all users of such collection, treatment and disposal works in general proportion to each user's contribution to the total wastewater loading of the sewerage system. 
(Ord. 1195 § 1, 1990) 
13.20.020 - Definitions. 
    The definitions contained in Chapter 13.16 are incorporated into this chapter. In addition, the following additional definitions shall be used: 
    "Collection, treatment and disposal works" means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. "Treatment works," "treatment system" and "sewerage system" shall be equivalent terms for "collection, treatment and disposal works." 
    "Collection system" means the system of public sewers to be operated by the city designed for the collection of sanitary sewage. 
    "Commercial user" means any premises used for commercial or business purposes which are not an industry as defined in this chapter. 
    "City engineer" means the consulting engineer retained by the city and so designated. 
    "Domestic waste" means any wastewater from dwellings. 
    "Operation and maintenance" means activities required to ensure the dependable and economical function of the collection and treatment works. 
1.  "Maintenance" means preservation of functional integrity and efficiency of equipment and structures. This includes preventive maintenance, corrective maintenance, and replacement of equipment. 
2.  "Operation" means control of the unit processes and equipment that make up the collection and treatment works. This includes keeping financial and personnel management records, laboratory control, process control, safety and emergency operation planning, employment of attorneys and consultants, payment of court costs, and payment of any costs or fees reasonably associated with any of the above. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, company, private or governmental entity, association, society, corporation or group. 
    "Public treatment works" means a treatment works owned and operated by a public authority. 
    "Replacement" means obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances that are necessary during the design or useful life, whichever is longer, of the collection and treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. 
    "Residential user" means user of a single family dwelling. 
    "Nonresident user" means any other user. 
    "Service area" means all the area served by the collection and treatment works and for which there is one uniform user charge system. 
    "User" means every person using any part of the public collection and treatment works of the city of Toledo. 
    "User charge" means a charge levied on users of the collection and treatment works, paid by a user for the user's proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance (including replacement) of such works under Section 204(b)(1)(A) of the Clean Water Act. 
    "Wastewater" means sewage or those liquids or water-carried pollutants, including any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the publicly owned treatment works. 
(Ord. 1195 § 2, 1990) 
13.20.030 - Sewer user charges. 
A.  There are levied and imposed upon all users of the sewerage system, both inside and outside the city of Toledo, just and equitable charges for service, maintenance, operation, replacement taxes and other administrative costs of such collection and treatment works. 
B.  The just and equitable rates and charges shall be fixed and thereafter amended from time to time by resolution of the council. 
C.  The just and equitable charge to be paid by all users, except industrial users, of the sewerage system of the city of Toledo, Oregon, shall be a flat rate based on each one thousand (1,000) gallons of treated city water used on an average for the months of January through April. This charge is exclusive of the first one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used during a month (see subsection E of this section). The same charge shall remain in effect for the remaining months of the year until the average is calculated again. If there is no history for an account, the monthly average shall be established by the city manager based on the history of similar users. 
    If a user of the sewerage system is not also a user of the water system of the city of Toledo, Oregon, the charge to that user for sewerage service shall be based on the average monthly usage of all water users, except industrial users. 
D.  Effective July 1, 1988, the just and equitable charge to be paid by all industrial users of the sewerage system of the city of Toledo, Oregon, shall be, at the option of the user, the charge set out in above and based on water usage by the customer or per one thousand (1,000) gallons of metered sewage flow. If the customer chooses the latter method, the customer shall install and maintain to the city's satisfaction a flow meter in the sewer lines carrying the customer's sewage. 
E.  In addition to the above charges, each user of the sewerage system shall pay a base charge for each month of service billed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. This charge covers the first one thousand (1,000) gallons of treated city water used to calculate the charge paid by the user under subsection C of this section. 
F.  Every new user of the sewerage system shall pay a fee, set by resolution, for the inspection of the work performed in order to connect to the system. 
G.  For all users who reside outside the boundaries of the city of Toledo the fees and charges payable in subsections C, D, E and F of this section shall be assessed a fair and appropriate "surcharge," set by resolution, and payable on their monthly bills equivalent to their equitable share of the system's investment costs being borne by their corresponding "in-city" users. 
H.  In the case of new users, the sewer user charge for all occupied property shall begin sixty (60) days after the sewer service becomes available, or shall begin the day that connection is made to the public sewers, whichever occurs first. Should the owner of an occupied property provide to the city a letter from Oregon DEQ, or its contract agent, certifying the existence of a working private sewage disposal system, and it can be shown that said property is not using the collection system, the sewer user charge may be waived. Recertification of said private sewage disposal system shall be required every five years. The sewer user charge for all vacant, new property shall begin within thirty (30) days after the property is ready for occupancy or on the first day of occupancy, whichever occurs first. All unoccupied property which is ready for occupancy at the time that the sewer service becomes available shall be treated as occupied property. Once the sewer user charge has commenced, no credit shall be given for vacancy unless it can be demonstrated that water service to that property from any and all sources has been discontinued. In that case, the user charge shall be reinstated as soon as water service to that property from any source has begun. If the date on which the user charge is commenced or altered does not fall on the first day of a billing period, the charges shall be prorated. 
I.  Each user shall be notified, on not less than an annual basis in conjunction with a regular bill, of that portion of the user charges which are attributable to the operation, maintenance and replacement of the wastewater collection treatment and disposal system. 
J.  A just and equitable surcharge set by resolution shall be added to the monthly charge of those users discharging above unusual strength wastes into the sewage system. 
(Ord. 1195 § 3, 1990) 
13.20.040 - Review and revision of charges. 
    The sewer user charges established by resolution shall, as a minimum, be reviewed annually at the first city council meeting in March; and revised periodically to reflect actual costs of operation, maintenance and replacement of the collection and treatment works, and to maintain the equitability of the user charge based on the costs of operation and maintenance in proportion to each user's contribution to the total wastewater loading of the collection and treatment works. 
(Ord. 1195 § 4, 1990) 
13.20.050 - Responsibility, payment, delinquencies and penalties. 
A.  The person who owns the premises served by the sewerage system shall be responsible for payment of the sewer user charge for that property, notwithstanding the fact that the property may be occupied by a tenant or other occupant who may be required by the owner to pay said charges. If the premises are owned by more than one person, each person shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of the user charge. 
B.  The users of the sewerage system shall be billed on a monthly basis for services after they are rendered, at a charge to be established by resolution. 
C.  The date of billing shall be the last day of the month for which the sewer user charge is calculated. 
D.  Sewer user charges shall be due and payable to the city recorder no later than thirty (30) days after the date of billing. 
E.  Sewer user charges levied in accordance with this chapter shall be a debt due to the city and lien upon the property served. If this debt is not paid within forty (40) days after it is due and payable, it shall be deemed delinquent and may be recovered by civil action in the name of the city against the property owner. Such lien may be foreclosed in a civil action in the name of the city against the property owner. 
F.  In the event of a delinquency in the payment of sewer use charges, the city council shall, by resolution, set appropriate fees and charges to be added to outstanding sewer charges. Whenever a bill for sewer use charges is delinquent for twenty (20) days or more, interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month shall also be charged. Interest or delinquent sewer use charges shall be charged for the entire month if the bill be delinquent for any day in that month. 
G.  In the event of failure to pay sewer charges after they have become delinquent, the city shall have the right to remove or close sewer connections, or to discontinue city water services, and enter upon the property to accomplish such purposes. The expense of such discontinuance, removal or closing, as well as the expense of restoring service shall be a debt due to the city and a lien upon the property, and may be recovered by civil action in the name of the city against the property owner, the person or both. 
H.  Sewer service shall not be restored until all charges, including interest accrued and the expense of removal, closing, and restoration shall have been paid. 
I.  Change of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent shall not be cause for reducing or eliminating these charges. No new service will be provided or reconnected until all unpaid fees and penalties plus interest have been paid in full. 
J.  The city council may adopt standards for waiver of all or part of the sewer charges in appropriate cases; provided, however, that any such waiver shall be limited to hookup charges, connection fees, and any debt service charges. Sewer charges for system operation, maintenance and replacement shall not be waived except in accordance with the rules and regulations of the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
K.  If any portion of a bill remains unpaid after ninety (90) days of the billing date, the city may disconnect the service as provided in subsection G of this section. The city recorder shall first give notice of such disconnection by registered or certified mail to the last known address of the user, no later than seven days before the scheduled date of disconnection. The city recorder may use the tax rolls of Lincoln County to give such notice. The failure of such owner or purchaser to receive such notice shall not invalidate the notice. If the user desires to be heard, the user shall, prior to the date of scheduled disconnection, submit any written grounds for such hearing to the city recorder, who shall transmit the same to the council for consideration at its next regular or special council meeting. The council shall hear and decide the matter at such next meeting and the customer shall be given the opportunity to be heard. If disconnection occurs, reconnection shall be made only by persons authorized by the city. Reconnection shall be made only if outstanding billings, and the costs of disconnection (by discontinuance, removal or closing) and the costs of reconnec-tion have been paid. The disconnection and reconnection fees shall be either one hundred and fifty (150) percent of the city's actual costs, or one hundred dollars ($100.00) whichever is less. 
(Ord. 1195 § 5, 1990) 
13.20.060 - Handling of funds. 
A.  Bills for sewer user charges shall be mailed to the address of the legal owner of the property receiving service, or in the case of new connections to that address specified in the application for permit to make the connection, unless or until a different owner or user of the property is reported to the city. 
B.  All collections of sewer user charges shall be made by the treasurer for the city. Sewer user charges shall be computed as provided in Section 13.20.030 of this chapter and shall be payable as provided in Section 13.20.050 of this chapter. 
C.  The city treasurer is directed to deposit in the sewer fund all of the gross revenues received from charges and fees collected for the use of the sewerage system as herein provided. 
D.  The revenue thus deposited in the sewer fund shall be used exclusively for the operation, maintenance, replacement and repair of the sewerage system; reasonable administration costs; expenses of collection of charges imposed by this chapter and of connection fees provided for in the city of Toledo sewerage system use and regulation ordinance, together with any attorney fees, investigative fees or court costs incurred therein; and payments of the principal and interest on any debts in connection with the sewerage system of the city of Toledo. 
(Ord. 1195 § 6, 1990) 
13.20.070 - Appeals. 
A.  Any sewer user who feels that that person's sewer user charge is unjust and inequitable as applied to that person's premises under the foregoing provisions may, within ten (10) days of the city council's resolution establishing charges, make written application to the city council requesting a review of his/her user charge. Said written request shall, where necessary, show the actual or estimated average flow of that person's wastewater in comparison with the values upon which the charge is based, including how the measurements or estimates were made. 
B.  Review of the request shall be made by the city council and the city manager. The city manager shall advise the council if the request is substantial or not, or recommend further study of the matter by the city manager. 
C.  If the city council determines the request is substantiated, the user charge for the user shall be recomputed, based on the approved revised flow or strength data, and the new charges thus recomputed shall be applicable retroactively up to six months, as appropriate. 
D.  Any appeal undertaken herein shall not excuse the user from paying all sewer user charges as they are assessed. Failure to pay such charge shall subject the user to the penalties provided in Section 13.20.050. A subsequent ruling on appeal favorable to the sewer user shall not act to extinguish any penalties or interest assessed against the user for nonpayment of any user fees; provided, however, that such penalties and interest shall be recomputed consistent with any reduction in user fees allowed on appeal. 
(Ord. 1195 § 7, 1990) 
13.20.080 - Conformity with the law. 
    This chapter shall not substitute for or eliminate the necessity of conformity with any and all laws or rules of the state of Oregon or its agencies, or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city of Toledo. 
(Ord. 1195 § 8, 1990) 
Chapter 13.24 - UTILITY SERVICE AND DEVELOPMENT CHARGE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1335, § 1, adopted June 7, 2010, repealed the former Ch. 13.24, §§ 13.24.010-13.24.080, and enacted a new Ch. 13.24 as set out herein. The former Ch. 13.24 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 928, §§ 1-8, adopted 1973; Ord. 1100, §§ 1-3, adopted 1980; and Ord. No. 1162, adopted 1984. 

13.24.010 - Purpose. 
    This chapter is intended to provide authorization for system development charges for capital improvements pursuant to ORS Revised Statutes 223.297 through 223.314 for the purpose of creating a source of funds to pay for the installation, construction, and extension of capital improvements for water, wastewater, storm drainage, transportation, and parks. These charges shall be collected at the time of the development and redevelopment of properties which increase the use of capital improvements and generate a need for those facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 3, 6-7-2010) 
13.24.020 - Scope. 
    The system development charge imposed by this ordinance is separate from and in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge or fee otherwise provided by law or imposed as a condition of development or based upon the ownership of property. The system development charge imposed by this section is not classified by the city, or intended to be, a tax on property or on a property owner as a direct consequence of ownership of property within the meaning of Article XI Section 11B, of the Oregon Constitution or the legislation implementing that section. The system development charge imposed herein is also found to be an incurred charge within the meaning of Section 11b and Article XI of the Oregon Constitution and the statutes implementing it. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 4, 6-7-2010) 
13.24.030 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this ordinance, the following mean: 
    "Applicant" shall mean the owner or other person who applies for a residential, commercial, industrial, or other connection to the city's water supply system or sanitary sewer system and/or who develops property within the city's Urban Growth Boundary. 
    "Building" shall mean any structure, either temporary or permanent, built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons or property of any kind and for any public, commercial, industrial, or other use. This term shall not include temporary construction sheds or trailers erected to assist in construction and maintenance during the term of a building permit. 
    "Capital improvements" means public facilities or assets used for: 
(a)  Wastewater collection, transmission, treatment and disposal, or any combination. 
(b)  Water supply, treatment, distribution, storage, metering, fire protection, or any combination. 
(c)  Drainage and flood control. 
(d)  Transportation facilities including vehicle and pedestrian. 
(e)  Parks and recreation. 
    "Citizen or other interested person" shall mean any person whose legal residence is within the service area of the city, as evidenced by registration as a voter within the city, or by other proof of residency; or a person who owns, occupies, or otherwise has an interest in real property which is located within the city service area; or a person who owns, occupies, or otherwise has an interest in real property which is served by the city's water supply system or sanitary sewer systems; or is otherwise subject to the imposition of systems development charges, as outlined in this chapter. 
    "City" means the city of Toledo. 
    "Development" means all improvements on a site, including buildings, other structures, parking and loading areas, landscaping, paved or graveled areas, and areas devoted to exterior display, storage or activities. Development includes redevelopment of property, dividing of land into two or more parcels (including partitions and subdivisions), and creating or termination of a right of access. Development includes improved open areas such as plazas and walkways, but does not include natural geologic forms or unimproved lands. Development also includes making any physical change in the use of a structure or land which increases the usage of any capital improvements or which may contribute to the need for additional or enlarged capital improvements, as determined by city. 
    "Improvement fee" means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the date fee is established pursuant to Section 13.24.040 of this ordinance. 
    "Land area" means the area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane with the exception of any portion of the parcel within a recorded right-of-way or easement subject to servitude for a public street or for a public scenic or preservation purpose. 
    "Methodology" shall mean the system development charge methodology required by ORS 223.304 (1) and(2). 
    "Owner" means the owner or owners of record title or the purchaser(s) under a recorded land sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in the described real property. 
    "Parcel of land" means a lot, parcel, block, or other tract of land that is occupied or may be occupied by a structure, or structures, or other use, and that includes the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning, subdivision, and other development ordinances. 
    "Permittee" means the owner to whom a building permit, development permit, a permit or plan approval to connect to the sewer system, or right-of-way access permit is issued. 
    "Qualified public improvement," means a capital improvement that is: 
(a)  Required as a condition of development approval; 
(b)  Identified in the plan adopted pursuant to Section 13.24.080 of this chapter, and is either: 
(1)  Not located on or contiguous to a parcel of land that is the subject of the development approval; or 
(2)  Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee is related. 
    "Reimbursement fee" means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements constructed or under construction on the date the fee is established pursuant to Section 13.24.040 of this ordinance. 
    "System development charge" means a reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit or building permit, or at the time of connection to the capital improvement. "System development charge" includes that portion of a sewer or water system connection charge that is greater than the amount necessary to reimburse the city for its average cost of inspecting and installing connections with water and sewer facilities. "System development charge" does not include fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 5, 6-7-2010) 
13.24.040 - System development charge established. 
A.  The system development charges shall be established and may be revised by resolution of the council relying on an approved methodology and system development charge project plan. The system development charge project plan, methodology and amount of charge may be adopted in a single resolution, and more than one type of SDC (water, sewer, storm, transportation and park) can be included in a single resolution. 
B.  Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter, or other local or state law, a system development charge is imposed upon all development within the city, upon connection to the water and/or sewer system, and upon all development outside the boundary of the city that connects to or which will other use or create a need for sewer facilities, water facilities, storm sewers, streets, or parks and open space of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 6, 6-7-2010) 
13.24.050 - Methodology. 
A.  The methodology used to establish the reimbursement fee shall consider the cost of then-existing facilities, prior contributions by then-existing users, the value of unused capacity, rate-making principles employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by the city council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future systems users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities. 
B.  The methodology used to establish the improvement fee shall consider the cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the systems to which the fee is related. 
C.  The methodology used to establish improvement fees or reimbursement fees, or both, shall be adopted by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 7, 6-7-2010) 
13.24.060 - Authorized expenditures. 
A.  Reimbursement fees shall only be applied to capital improvements associated with the system for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness. 
B.  Improvement fees. 
1.  Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity increasing capital improvements, including expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities or providing new facilities. The portion of the capital improvements funded by improvement fees must be related to demands created by current or projected development. 
2.  A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues derived from the improvement fee shall be included in the plan adopted by the city pursuant to Section 13.24.080 of this ordinance. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsection B(1) and B(2) of this section, system development charge revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing system development charge methodologies, and providing an annual accounting of system development charge expenditures and other costs directly related to or required for the administration and operation of this system development charge program. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 8, 6-7-2010) 
13.24.070 - Expenditure restrictions. 
A.  System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements. 
B.  System development charges shall not be expended for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 9, 6-7-2013) 
13.24.080 - Improvement plan. 
A.  Prior to the establishment of a system development charge, the council shall adopt a capital improvement plan that includes a list of: 
1.  The capital improvements that the city intends to fund in whole or in part with the improvement fee revenues; and 
2.  The estimated cost and time of construction of each improvement. 
B.  In adopting this plan, the city may incorporate by reference all or a portion of any public facilities plan, master plan, capital improvements plan or similar plan that contains the information required by this section. 
C.  The city may modify such plan and list at any time. If the amount of system development charges will be increased by a proposed modification to the list of capital improvements to the capital improvement plan, the city shall: 
1.  Provide at least thirty (30) days' notice prior to adopting the modification to those who have requested notice; and 
2.  Hold a public hearing if a written request for a hearing is received at least seven days prior to the date scheduled for adoption of the proposed modification. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 10, 6-7-2010) 
13.24.090 - Amending the methodology. 
A.  Before amending the methodology, the council shall: 
1.  At least ninety (90) days prior to an amendment to the methodology, provide written notice to persons who have requested notice pursuant to Section 13.24.140; 
2.  Council shall hold a public hearing if the city receives a written request for a hearing on the proposed modification within seven days of the date of the proposed modification is scheduled for adoption; 
3.  Make the revised methodology available to the public at least sixty (60) days prior to the first public hearing of the amendment; 
4.  The failure of a person on the list to receive a notice that was mailed does not invalidate the action of the city. 
B.  Legal action intended to contest the methodology use for calculating a system development charge may not be filed after sixty (60) days following modification of the system development charge ordinance or resolution. 
C.  A change in the amount of a reimbursement fee or an improvement fee is not a modification of the system development charge methodology if the change is based on a change in project costs, including cost of materials, labor and real property, or on a provision for a periodic adjustment included in the methodology or adopted by separate ordinance or resolution, consistent with state law. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 11, 6-7-2010) 
13.24.100 - Collection of charge. 
A.  The system development charge is payable upon issuance of: 
1.  A building permit; 
2.  A development permit for development not requiring the issuance of a building permit; 
3.  A permit to connect to the water system; or 
4.  A permit to connect to the sewer system. 
B.  The system development fee charge for subsection A shall be assessed at the rate in effect at the time of permit application. For property annexed to the city after application for but prior to issuance of a building permit, the system development charge shall be assessed at the rate payable in the city at the time of permit application. 
C.  If development is commenced or connection is made to the water system, sewer system, or stormwater system without an appropriate permit, the system development charge is immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required. 
D.  The city manager or the city manager's designee shall collect the applicable system development charge(s) from the permittee. 
E.  The city manager or the city manager's designee shall not issue such permit or allow such connection until the charge has been paid in full, or until provision for installment payments has been made pursuant to Section 13.24.110, or unless an exemption is granted pursuant to Section 13.24.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 12, 6-7-2010) 
13.24.110 - Installment payment. 
A.  When a system development charge is due and collectable, the owner of the parcel of land subject to the development charge may apply for payment in twenty (20) semi-annual installments, to include interest on the unpaid balance, in accordance with ORS 223.208. A shorter payment plan is acceptable if approved by the council. 
B.  The city manager shall provide application forms for installment payments which shall include a waiver of all rights to contest the validity of the lien, except for the correction of computational errors. 
C.  An applicant for installment payment shall have the burden of demonstrating the applicant's authority to assent to the imposition of a lien on the property and that the interest of the applicant is adequate to secure payment of the lien. 
D.  The city manager shall report to the council the amount of the system development charge, the dates on which payments are due, the name of the owner, and the description of the parcel. 
E.  The city manager shall docket the lien in the lien docket. From that time the city shall have a lien upon the described parcel for the amount of the system development charge, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the rate established by resolution of the council. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223 and shall be superior to all other liens pursuant to ORS 223.230. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 13, 6-7-2010) 
13.24.120 - Exemptions. 
A.  Additions to single-family dwelling that do not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the Zoning Code pursuant to Chapter 17.04 of this code are exempt from all portions of the system development charge. 
B.  An alteration, addition, replacement or change in use that does not increase the parcel's or structure's use of a capital improvement are exempt from all portions of the system development charge. 
C.  Any structure which is built to replace a structure that was destroyed, demolished or removed shall not be assessed systems development charges if construction of the new structure is completed within eighteen (18) months of the time that the original structure was destroyed, demolished, or removed; provided, however, that any new structure does not increase the usage of any capital improvement. 
D.  The city of Toledo. 
E.  A building or other structure for which a building permit application was filed prior to the effective date of the charge or increase in the charge, providing the information accompanying the application was sufficiently complete to meet the requirements for issuance of a building permit for the entire structure, and substantial construction begins within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date the permit was issued. Accordingly, an owner shall otherwise remain responsible for those system development charges existing at the time charges are established and/or revised by resolution of the council pursuant to Section 13.24.040. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 14, 6-7-2010) 
13.24.130 - Credits. 
A.  When a development occurs that is subject to a system development charge, the system development charge for the existing use, if applicable, shall be calculated. If this amount is less than the system development charge for the use that will result from the development, the difference between the system development charge for the existing use and the system development charge for the proposed use shall be the system development charge. If a change in use results in the system development charge for the proposed use being less than the system development charge for the existing use, no system development charge shall be required. No refund or credit shall be given. 
B.  A credit of the improvement fee portion of the system development charge only shall be given to the permittee against the cost of the system development charge charged, for the cost of a qualified public improvement, upon acceptance by the city of the public improvement. The credit shall not exceed the amount of the improvement fee even if the cost of the capital improvement exceeds the improvement fee. 
C.  If a qualified public improvement is located in whole or in part on or contiguous to the property that is the subject of the development approval and is required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project, a credit shall be given for the cost of the portion of the improvement that exceeds the city's minimum standard facility size or capacity needed to serve the particular development project or property. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that a particular improvement qualifies for credit under this subsection. The request shall be filed in writing no later than 60 days after acceptance of the improvement by the city. The city may deny the credit provided for in this section if the city demonstrates that the application does not meet the requirements of this section or if the improvement for which credit is sought was not included in the improvement plan pursuant to Section 13.24.080 of this ordinance. 
D.  When construction of a qualified public improvement located in whole or in part or contiguous to the property that is the subject of development approval gives rise to a credit amount greater than the improvement fee that would otherwise be levied against the project, the credit in excess of the improvement fee for the original development project may be applied against improvement fees that accrue in subsequent phases of the original development project. 
E.  Credit shall not be transferable from one development to another. 
F.  Credit shall not be transferable from one type of system development charge to another. 
G.  Credits shall be used within ten (10) years from the date the credit was given. 
H.  For all credits under any portion of this section, the property owner is responsible for providing the facts justifying a credit. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 15, 6-7-2010) 
13.24.140 - Notice. 
A.  The city shall maintain a list of persons who have made a written request for notification prior to adoption or modification of a methodology for any system development charge. Written notice shall be mailed to persons on the list at least forty-five (45) days prior to the first hearing to adopt or amend a system development charge, and the methodology supporting the adoption or amendment shall be available at least thirty (30) days prior to the first hearing to adopt or amend. The failure of a person on the list to receive notice that was mailed does not invalidate the action of the city. 
B.  The city may periodically delete names from the list, but at least thirty (30) days prior to removing a name from the list, the city must notify the person whose name is to be deleted that a new written request for notification is required if the person wishes to remain on the notification list. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 16, 6-7-2010) 
13.24.150 - Segregation and use of revenue. 
A.  All funds derived from a system development charge are to be segregated by accounting practices from all other funds of the city. That portion of the system development charge calculated and collected on account of a specific facility system shall be used for no purpose other than those set forth in this chapter. 
B.  The city manager shall provide the city council with an annual accounting, based on the city's fiscal year, for system development charges showing the total amount of system development charge revenues collected for each type of charge and the projects funded from each account in the previous fiscal year. A list of the amounts spent on each project funded in whole or in part, with system development charge revenues shall be included in the annual accounting. 
C.  The moneys deposited into the system development charge account shall be used solely as allowed by this chapter and state law, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Design and construction plan preparation; 
2.  Permitting and fees; 
3.  Land and materials acquisition, including any cost of acquisition or condemnation; 
4.  Construction of capital improvements; 
5.  Design and construction of new facilities required by the construction of capital improvements and structures; 
6.  Relocating utilities required by the construction of improvements; 
7.  Landscaping; 
8.  Construction management and inspection; 
9.  Surveys, soils, and material testing; 
10.  Acquisition of capital equipment; 
11.  Repayment of moneys transferred or borrowed from any budgetary fund of the city which were used to fund any of the capital improvements as herein provided; 
12.  Payment of principal and interest, necessary reserves and cost of issuance under bonds or other indebtedness issued by the city to fund capital improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 17, 6-7-2010) 
13.24.160 - Refunds. 
A.  Refunds may be given by the city upon finding that there was a clerical error in the calculation of the system development charge. 
B.  Refunds shall not be allowed for failure to timely claim credit or for failure to timely seek an alternative system development charge rate calculation at the time of submission of an application for a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 18, 6-7-2010) 
13.24.170 - Appeal procedure. 
A.  A person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of system development charge revenues may appeal the decision of the expenditure to the council by filing a written request with the city manager describing with particularity the decision and the expenditure from which the person appeals. An appeal of the expenditure must be filed within two (2) years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure. 
B.  Appeals of any other decision required or permitted to be made by the city manager under this ordinance must be filed in writing with the city manager within ten (10) days of the decision. 
C.  After providing notice to the appellant, the city council shall determine whether the city manager's decision or the expenditure is in accordance with this chapter and the provision of ORS 223.297 to 233.314 and may affirm, modify, or overrule the decision. If the council determines that there has been an improper expenditure of system development charge revenues, the council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent. The decision of the council shall be reviewed only as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100, and not otherwise. 
D.  A legal action challenging the methodology adopted by the city council pursuant to Section 13.24.050 shall not be filed later than 60 days after adoption. A person shall contest the methodology used for calculating a system development charge only as provided in ORS 34.010 to ORS 34.100, and not otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 19, 6-7-2010) 
13.24.180 - Prohibited connection. 
    No person may connect to the water or sewer system of the city or obtain a building permit unless the appropriate system development charges have been paid, or the installment payment method has been applied for and approved. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 20, 6-7-2010) 
13.24.190 - Penalty. 
    Violation of this chapter is a Class B infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 21, 6-7-2010) 
13.24.200 - Severability. 
    The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and it is the intention to confer the whole or any part of the powers herein provided for. If any clause, section or provision of this ordinance shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason or cause, the remaining portion of this ordinance shall be in full force and effect and be valid as is such invalid portion thereof had not been incorporated herein. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 22, 6-7-2010) 
Chapter 13.28 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DEFERRALS FOR SENIOR CITIZENS 
Sections: 

13.28.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to permit qualified senior citizens to have deferred the special assessments that may be levied against their residence for streets, curbs, storm sewers, sanitary sewers and related improvements. 
(Ord. 937 § 1, 1974) 
13.28.020 - Senior citizen defined. 
    A "senior citizen" is one who is sixty-five (65) years of age or more on or before January 1st of the year in which the assessment in question is to be levied. 
(Ord. 937 § 2, 1974) 
13.28.030 - Qualifications of senior citizens. 
    To qualify for this senior citizen assessment deferral program: 
A.  The property to be assessed must be owned by a senior citizen, or if owned by a husband and wife then only one of them needs to be a senior citizen. 
B.  The property to be assessed must be the residence of the senior citizen. 
C.  The senior citizen shall have an income not to exceed three thousand six hundred dollars ($3,600.00) and if he is married, then their joint income shall not exceed four thousand one hundred dollars ($4,100.00) and further, not to exceed an increase of more than four hundred dollars ($400.00) for each additional dependent that is living with them during the calendar year preceding the one in which the assessment is to be levied. 
(Ord. 937 § 3, 1974) 
13.28.040 - Deferral of assessment. 
    To the extent that funds are conveniently available to the city, a qualified senior citizen may choose to have deferred the special assessment for streets, curbs, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, and related improvements that are to be levied against his or her residence. Such assessments shall bear interest from the date of assessment against the residence until paid in full at the rate established in the local improvement district formed to make the specific improvement. If the property ceases to be the residence of the senior citizen and his or her spouse for the reason of sale or rental of the property or the death of both the senior citizen and his or her spouse or for any other reason, the amount deferred to that date, including interest due on that amount, shall become due and payable. 
(Ord. 1111, 1980: Ord. 937 § 4, 1974) 
13.28.050 - Investigation of status of land. 
    As frequently as appears appropriate, the staff shall review the county records relating to deferred special assessments and shall also make such investigations as appear appropriate to learn of any other material changes in the status of the subject land. 
(Ord. 937 § 5, 1974) 
13.28.060 - Assessment to be a lien. 
    Any special assessment that is deferred by the terms of this chapter shall become a lien on the land just as though the ordinance codified in this chapter had not been adopted. When such assessment becomes due by the terms of Section 13.28.040 of this chapter, it may be enforced and collected as provided in state law for the collection of assessments or by any other means provided by law. 
(Ord. 937 § 6, 1974) 
13.28.070 - Election. 
    A qualified senior citizen who elects to have a special assessment deferred pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall enter into a contract with the city to be prepared by the city attorney evidencing said election and the terms thereof. 
(Ord. 937 § 7, 1974) 
Chapter 13.32 - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES 
Sections: 

13.32.010 - Required. 
    All persons or parties owning real property within the city of Toledo and receiving utility services thereon, including, but not limited to, electricity, telephone, telegraph and cable television, shall provide for receiving such services through underground facilities within ninety (90) days after receiving written notification from the suppliers of such services that underground facilities for the distribution of such services are available. Thereafter, all wires, cables, transformers, circuit breakers, insulators and other equipment and facilities for receiving electrical, telephone, telegraph and cable television service shall be located underground, except service meters located at the structure, surface-mounted connection boxes, and surface-mounted equipment. 
(Ord. 1034 § 1, 1977) 
13.32.015 - Telecommunications conduit-Placement. 
A.  All developments shall be required to obtain and install telecommunications conduit, to run from structures to publicly maintained and owned streets and roadways not incorporated within the development. This conduit is for the purpose of installation of fiber-optic cable or similar telecommunications cabling, as available, as follows: 
1.  Conduit shall be obtained and installed while other utility lines and piping for each structure are being installed below ground, i.e., while the earth is disturbed; 
2.  This section shall apply to both residential and commercial/industrial developments; 
3.  Conduit shall be installed in cases both of original construction and any significant renovation or reconstruction, should such project require the disturbance of the ground for other utility purposes; and 
4.  This section shall not apply in cases of emergency repair or maintenance of utility lines or piping. 
B.  Conduit shall be placed at horizontal and vertical locations, and with such capacity, as determined by the public works director. Owner shall submit the approved site plan drawn to scale and identifying the locations and depth of the conduit. 
C.  In cases where development includes streets or roadways to be converted to city ownership and maintenance, conduit once installed becomes the property of the city and shall be documented on the development improvement plans. 
(Ord. No. 1353, § 2, 2-19-2014) 
13.32.020 - Variance. 
    The city council, upon appeal, is authorized to grant a variance in the requirements of this chapter when the applicant can show that by reason of peculiar and exceptional conditions the strict application of this chapter would result in real and unnecessary hardship and the council through investigation and based upon the evidence before it is satisfied that the granting of the variance will alleviate a hardship and will not be detrimental to the welfare of the city and adjacent property. In granting such variance, the city council may impose such requirements upon the applicant as may be necessary under the circumstances to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1034 § 2, 1977) 
13.32.030 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of this chapter will constitute a Class A infraction. 
(Ord. 1244 § 3, 1996) 
Chapter 13.36 - STREET LIGHTING UTILITY FEE 
Sections: 

13.36.010 - Purpose. 
    The city council finds and determines that it is an obligation for occupancy of residential, commercial, and industrial property to provide sufficient lighting of streets and public places adjoining said properties in such a manner as to promote traffic safety, increase visibility that will enhance personal security and deter crimes against persons and property, and generally promote the safety of persons using said streets and public places. 
    The structure of this lighting utility is intended to be a fee for service and not a charge against property. The person responsible for paying the city's water and sewer utility charges is responsible for paying the street lighting fee which in most cases is the occupant of improved property. Therefore, the fee is not necessarily imposed on the owner of the property. 
(Ord. 1303 § 2, 2004) 
13.36.020 - Imposition of street lighting fee. 
A.  The obligation to pay street lighting fees arises when a person responsible uses street lighting services. It is presumed street lighting services are used whenever there is an improved occupied premises. 
B.  Unless another person responsible has agreed in writing to pay and a copy of that writing is filed with the city, the person(s) paying the city's water and/or sewer utility charges shall pay the street lighting fee of two dollars ($2.00) per month. On or before July 1st annually hereafter the city council shall, by resolution, set the amount of the monthly street lighting fee. A request for water or sewer service will automatically initiate appropriate billing for street lighting services. 
(Ord. 1303 § 3, 2004) 
13.36.030 - Collection. 
    Street lighting utility fees shall be collected monthly. Statements for the user fees shall be included in the city utility billing sent to those addresses located within the city limits of Toledo and fees collected pursuant to Municipal Code Chapters 13.12 and 13.20. 
(Ord. 1303 § 4, 2004) 
13.36.040 - Lighting service charge account. 
    All street lighting utility fees shall be placed in the general fund on a separate line item and shall be used only for the operation of street lights. 
(Ord. 1303 § 5, 2004) 
Chapter 13.40 - ROAD MAINTENANCE FUND 
Sections: 

13.40.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Road Maintenance Fund". 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 1, 5-6-2009) 
13.40.020 - Purpose. 
    For the purpose to establish a stable funding source to maintain safe road conditions and provide for periodic improvements to road segments before reaching poor conditions. 
    The structure of this maintenance fund is intended to be a fee for service and not a charge against property. The person responsible for paying the city's water and sewer utility charges is responsible for paying the road maintenance fee, which in most cases is the occupant of improved property. Therefore, the fee is not necessarily imposed on the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 1, 5-6-2009) 
13.40.030 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, as used within this chapter, have the following definitions and meanings: 
    "Developed property." A parcel or portion of real property on which an improvement exists. Improvement on developed property includes, but is not limited to, buildings, parking lots, and outside storage. 
    "Gross square footage." The calculated area of all structures, located on a site, measured along the exterior walls of such structures, including but not limited to enclosed courtyards, stairwells, and square footage on each level of multi-story structures, but not including fences and parking areas which are not enclosed within a building. 
    "ITE Manual." Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual. 
    "Multi-family residential." Property for residential use consisting of three or more dwelling units. For purposes of this chapter, condominiums and individual mobile home units in a mobile home park are also classified as multi-family residences. 
    "Non-residential." A use of property which is primarily not for personal, domestic accommodation. 
    "Pavement condition index (PCI)." A uniform way to measure pavement distress with a rating scale from 1 to 100, with higher values indicating better condition. 
    "Single-family residential." A dwelling unit which is occupied by one or more persons of which there shall be only one dwelling unit per lot and which provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including, but not limited to, permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. Two dwelling units and accessory dwelling units shall be considered as part of a single-family residence. 
    "Street or road." A public road or right-of-way within the city, which is under the jurisdiction or control of the city. For purposes of this chapter, county, state and federal roads are excluded. 
    "Truck." A multi-axel motor vehicle having six or more tires in contact with the pavement surface. 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 1, 5-6-2009) 
13.40.040 - Regulatory program. 
1.  There is hereby created a road maintenance regulatory program for the purpose of maintaining a safe, functioning city street maintenance system. 
2.  A road maintenance program is hereby established. Revenues collected pursuant to this chapter shall be dedicated to the road maintenance program and used exclusively to fund a road maintenance program to provide for a safe, functioning street system. In the event that road maintenance fees collected are insufficient to maintain city streets, additional funding may be allocated by the city council from other non-dedicated city funds provided, however, the city council may direct the reimbursement to such other fund if additional road maintenance fees are collected. 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 1, 5-6-2009) 
13.40.050 - Administrative policies. 
1.  The use of the city's streets and roads involves a complex mixture of interdependent uses between categories of residentially developed property and non-residentially developed property. The blending makes exact calculations difficult, but the most reasonable apportionment is approximately fifty (50) percent use attributable to residential development and approximately fifty (50) percent use to non-residential development. In keeping with this division, approximately fifty (50) percent of the total revenues needed to be generated by the road maintenance program fee on an annualized basis shall come from residential developments and approximately fifty (50) percent shall come from non-residential developments. 
2.  To avoid significant fluctuation in billing fees, road maintenance program fees shall be an average annualized revenue requirement based on a five-year estimate of road maintenance/reconstruction needs, as determined by the public works director with approval of the city council. 
3.  The city manager is authorized and directed to review the operation of this chapter and where appropriate, recommend changes in the form of administrative procedures for adoption by the city council by resolution. Such procedures, if adopted by the city council, shall be given full force and effect, and unless clearly inconsistent with this chapter, shall apply uniformly throughout the city. 
4.  The initial road maintenance fee shall not be increased for the first three years of the maintenance program. During the third year and every three years thereafter, the city manager, public works director and the finance director will meet for the purpose of reviewing the road maintenance fee. Any proposed changes to the fee structure will be presented to the city council for consideration and approval. The review shall occur sooner than the third year in the event the city receives substantial new sources of funds from federal, state, regional, or county programs earmarked for street system maintenance/improvements. 
5.  The provisions of this chapter may be appealed by writ of review within sixty (60) days of its effective date. The amount of a road maintenance fee may be appealed in accordance with the criteria and procedures specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 1, 5-6-2009) 
13.40.060 - Road maintenance user fee. 
1.  A road maintenance fee is hereby established and shall be assessed to street users as defined herein by the development category and classification. A request for water or sewer service will automatically initiate appropriate billing for the road maintenance fee. Billing shall be as a line item on the city's water/sewer utility bill. 
2.  Undeveloped properties shall not be charged a road maintenance fee. 
3.  Each residential developed property within the city limits will be designated to one of two billing categories: single-family dwelling unit or multi-family dwelling unit. The road maintenance fee for a single-family dwelling unit shall be greater than the corresponding fee for a multi-family dwelling unit. The fee difference shall be proportionate to trip generation rates as established in the ITE Manual. 
4.  Each non-residential developed property within the city limits shall be assigned to a billing category based on the following three factors associated with road usage: "Intensity" of vehicle trips generated per one thousand (1,000) (gross) square feet of developed area, or equivalent. Statistical data from the ITEM Manual is to be used to establish levels of intensity, and "magnitude" of development as measured by gross square feet of developed area, or equivalent. "Trucks" per day serving the development. 
5.  The methodology for classification of the categories of residential and non-residential developed property, the fair apportionment to each classification, and the amount of the road maintenance fee shall be initially established by city council resolution. Changes shall also be adopted by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 1, 5-6-2009) 
13.40.070 - Appeal procedure. 
1.  Any owner who disputes any interpretation given by the city as to the category of use assigned to such owner's property pursuant to this chapter may request a review and appeal of such interpretation, but only in accordance with this section. The dispute must first be presented in writing to the public works director for review and thereafter may be appealed to the city council in accordance with this section. Failure to appeal an interpretation made under this chapter within the time and in the manner provided below shall be sufficient cause to deny the relief requested. Disputes which result in changes in the street maintenance fee charged under this chapter shall become effective with the next billing cycle. 
2.  A utility customer may request a review of the category of use assigned. A written request for review must be submitted within fourteen (14) days of the new assignment or fourteen (14) days after a change in category has been made by the city. The public works director shall conduct the review, considering all relevant evidence presented by the customer related to their actual trip generation patterns. Such evidence may include business records, parking lot usage, square footage of building, and traffic studies completed by the property owner. The public works director shall make a determination to approve or deny the request to reassign the category of use based on the evidence provided and must provide written notice to the customer. 
3.  A customer who wishes to dispute an interpretation made by the public works director as to the assigned category of use under this chapter shall submit a written appeal to the city manager's office within ten (10) business days from the date of notice from the public works director's determination under paragraph 2 of this section, together with a filing fee in the amount established by the city council resolution. The application for appeal shall specify the reasons and include an engineering study prepared by a license professional engineer in conformance with the methodology outlined in the ITE Manual. Appeals shall be limited to the issue of whether the appropriate category of use has been assigned to the property. 
4.  The city manager shall schedule the matter for city council review and notify the appellant no less than ten (10) business days prior to the date of such city council review. The city council shall conduct a hearing during a public meeting and determine whether there is substantial evidence in the record to support the interpretation given by the public works director. The city council may continue the hearing for purposes of gathering additional information. The city council shall make a tentative oral decision and shall adopt a final written decision together with appropriate category of use. The decision of the city council with respect of the category of use shall be limited to whether the appellant has been assigned to the appropriate category of use. If the city council should determine that a different category of use should be assigned, it shall so order. No refund of prior road maintenance fees shall be given. Only where the city council decision results in a change in category of use will the filing fee on the appeal be refunded. The city council decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 1, 5-6-2009) 
13.40.080 - Enforcement. 
1.  In the event funds received from city utility billings are inadequate to satisfy in full all of the water, sewer, streetlight, and road maintenance fees, credit shall be applied proportionately. 
2.  In addition to other lawful enforcement procedures, the city may enforce the collection of charges required by this chapter by withholding delivery of water to any premises where road maintenance fees are delinquent or unpaid. 
3.  Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, the city may institute any necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to injunctive relief and collection of charges owing. The city's enforcement rights shall be cumulative. 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 1, 5-6-2009) 
13.40.090 - Severability. 
1.  In the event any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or phrase of this chapter or any administrative policy adopted herein is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, the validity of the remainder of the chapter shall continue to be effective. 
2.  Nothing contained herein shall be construed as limiting the city's authority to levy special assessments in connection with public improvements pursuant to applicable law. 
3.  The fees and charges herein are not intended to be taxes, nor are they subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Section 11(b), of the Oregon Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 1, 5-6-2009) 
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters: 
Chapter 15.04 - BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM 
Sections: 

15.04.010 - Designation required. 
    All houses, buildings and other structures shall hereinafter be designated by a number as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 423 § 1, 1931) 
15.04.020 - Generally. 
    All of the numbering on streets running east and west or in an easterly and westerly direction shall begin at Main Street and that all of said numbering on streets running north and south shall begin on Graham Street. 
    There shall be one hundred (100) numbers to each block, the even numbers on the east side of the streets running north and south or in a northerly and southerly direction and on the north side of the streets running east and west or in an easterly and westerly direction, and odd numbers on the west side of streets running north and south or in a northerly and southerly direction and on the south side of streets running east and west or in an easterly and westerly direction. 
(Ord. 876, 1971: Ord. 423 § 2, 1931) 
15.04.030 - North and south streets. 
    In the first block on all streets running north and south or in a northerly and southerly direction beginning at Graham Street and extending both north and south therefrom or in a northerly and southerly direction, on the east side of the street the numbers shall begin with one hundred (100) and go up to and include one hundred ninety-eight (198), using even numbers only, and on the west side of the street the numbers shall begin with one hundred one (101) and go up to and include one hundred ninety-nine (199), using odd numbers only. In the second block from Graham Street on the east side of the street, the numbers shall begin with two hundred (200) and go up to and include 298, using even numbers only, and on the west side of the street, the numbers shall begin with two hundred one (201) and go up to and include two hundred ninety-nine (299), using odd numbers only and so on, in like manner, using one hundred (100) numbers to the block to the northern and southern extremities of the city. 
(Ord. 423 § 3, 1931) 
15.04.040 - East and west streets. 
    In the first block on all streets running east and west or in an easterly or westerly direction, beginning at Main Street and extending both east and west therefrom or in an easterly and westerly direction, on the north side of the street the numbers shall begin with one hundred (100) and go up to and include one hundred ninety-eight (198), using even numbers only, and on the south side of the street the numbers shall begin with one hundred one (101) and go up to and include one hundred ninety-nine (199), using odd numbers only; in the second block from Main Street on the north side of the street, the numbers shall begin with two hundred (200) and go up to and include two hundred ninety-eight (298), using even numbers only, and on the south side of the street the numbers shall begin with two hundred one (201) and go up to and include two hundred ninety-nine (299), using odd numbers only, and so on, in like manner, using one hundred (100) numbers to the block to the eastern and western extremities of the city. 
(Ord. 423 § 4, 1931) 
15.04.050 - Tags or plates to be affixed. 
    All owners or persons in charge of dwelling houses, buildings or other structures within the corporate limits of the city of Toledo shall, within thirty (30) days from passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, obtain from the city recorder the proper numbers for all dwelling houses, buildings, or other structures of which they are the owners or are in charge and procure at his or their cost suitable metal tags or number plates not less than three inches in height and of uniform size and shape to be prescribed by the city recorder, and affix said metal tags or number plates to all dwelling houses, buildings or other structures of which they are owners or are in charge. 
(Ord. 423 § 5, 1931) 
15.04.060 - Removal or destruction of tags or plates. 
    No persons shall tear down, destroy or remove any number or plate thus affixed to any of said buildings without permission of the city recorder so to do. 
(Ord. 423 § 6, 1931) 
15.04.070 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, company or corporation who shall in any manner fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter will be in violation of this chapter. Violation of this chapter will constitute a Class D infraction. 
(Ord. 1244 § 15, 1996: Ord. 423 § 7, 1931) 
Chapter 15.08 - BUILDING CODES 
Sections: 

15.08.010 - Standards applicable to building. 
    In addition to compliance with this and other ordinances of the city, building and related activities shall comply with provisions of each of the specialty codes making up the 1991 Edition of the Uniform Building Code, the 1992 Edition of the CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code, the 1990 Edition of the Uniform Mechanical Code, adopted by the state of Oregon Building Code Agency; the 1991 Uniform Fire Code, adopted by the State Fire Marshal; and the 1991 Edition of the Uniform Sign Code. No person shall conduct building or related activities without compliance with these standards. 
(Ord. 1220 § 1, 1994) 
15.08.020 - City code administration. 
    The city shall provide for the administration of a plan checking, permit and inspection program for structural and mechanical work. This city program is applicable to public building, include state building, as well as private building. 
(Ord. 1220 § 2, 1994) 
15.08.030 - Excavation and grading. 
    Chapter 70, Excavation and Grading, of the appendix to the 1991 Edition of the Uniform Building Code, published by the International Conference of Building Officials shall be in effect in this city. 
(Ord. 1220 § 3, 1994) 
15.08.040 - Local interpretation. 
    In addition to the appropriate provisions of the Uniform Building Code and similar provisions of other specialty codes, the building official may approve a method of construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter; provided, that the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and that the material, method or work offered is for the purpose intended at least the equivalent of that specifically prescribed by this chapter in quality, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety and energy conservation, and that the director of the department of commerce has not issued a report disapproving the material or method for the purpose. The building official may refer the proposed design to the city board of appeals, as provided in the appropriate provisions of the Uniform Building Code and a person affected by a ruling on the design by the building official may appeal such ruling to the board of appeals within thirty (30) days of the date of the ruling. 
(Ord. 1220 § 4, 1994) 
15.08.050 - Board of appeals. 
    For application in this city, the board of appeals section of the Uniform Building Code and similar provisions of the Mechanical Specialty Code are replaced with the following: 
    In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction, there is created a Board of Appeals consisting of three voting members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building and related activities. The Building Official shall be an ex officio nonvoting member and shall act as secretary of the board. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the City Council and hold office at its pleasure. The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the Building Official with a duplicate copy to the appellant. The Board of Appeals has no authority to grant variances to the provisions of the state specialty codes or the fire and life safety codes. With regard to these codes, the Board may rule on the suitability of alternative materials and methods of construction. 
(Ord. 1220 § 5, 1994) 
15.08.060 - Fees. 
    For application in Toledo, Section 304 of the Uniform Building Code is revised, and all fees shall be set by and, if necessary, amended by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1220 § 6, 1994) 
15.08.070 - Violation-Penalty. 
    It shall be a violation for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain nay building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to any provisions of this chapter. A violation of this chapter will constitute a Class B infraction. Each day or portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter is committed shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. 1244 21, 1996: Ord. 1220 § 7, 1994) 
Chapter 15.12 - ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 
Sections: 

15.12.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter: 
    "Dangerous building" means and includes: 
1.  A structure which, for the want of proper repairs or by reason of age and dilapidated condition or by reason of poorly installed electrical wiring or equipment, defective chimney, defective gas connection, defective heating apparatus, or for any other cause or reason, is especially liable to fire and which is so situated or occupied as to endanger any other building or property or human life; 
2.  A structure containing combustible or explosive material, rubbish, rags, waste, oils, gasoline or inflammable substance of any kind especially liable to cause fire or danger to the safety of such building, premises or to human life; 
3.  A structure which has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or other natural force to a point that it is a danger to other building or property or human life; 
4.  A structure which is kept or maintained or is in a filthy or unsanitary condition, especially liable to cause the spread of contagious or infectious disease or diseases; 
5.  A structure in such weak or weakened condition, or dilapidated or deteriorated condition, as to endanger any person or property by reason of probability of partial or entire collapse. 
    "Person" means and includes every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation. 
(Ord. 1101 § 1, 1980) 
15.12.020 - Nuisance. 
    Every building or part thereof which is found by the city council to be a dangerous building is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the procedures specified in this chapter, or a suit for abatement may be brought by the city. 
(Ord. 1101 § 2, 1980) 
15.12.030 - Initial action. 
    Whenever a city official finds or is of the opinion that there is a dangerous building in the city, that official may prepare a report and submit it to the city council. The council then shall, within a reasonable time, fix a time and place for a public hearing on the matter. 
(Ord. 1101 § 3, 1980) 
15.12.040 - Hearing-Mailed notice. 
    Notice shall be sent by the city recorder by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record of the premises where the building in question is located, notifying the owner in general terms that a hearing will be held concerning the nuisance character of the property and the time and place of the hearing. A copy of this notice shall also be posted on the property. At the stated time and place, or at such other time or place as the council may adjourn to, the hearing shall be held. The council shall determine by resolution whether or not the building is dangerous. The council may, as a part of the hearing, inspect the building, and the facts observed by the council at the inspection may be considered by it in determining whether or not the building is dangerous. At the hearing, the owner or other person interested in the property or building shall have the right to be heard. At the hearing, the council may order the building declared to be dangerous and to be removed and abated if in its judgment removal or abatement is necessary in order to remove the dangerous condition, or the council may order the building made safe and prescribe what acts or things must be done to render the building safe. 
(Ord. 1101 § 4, 1980) 
15.12.050 - Published and posted notice. 
    Notice of a hearing shall be published at least ten (10) days before the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or shall be posted in three public places in the city for the same period of time. If the notice is published or posted as required by this section, no irregularity or failure of delivery the mailed notice shall invalidate the proceedings. 
(Ord. 1101 § 5, 1980) 
15.12.060 - Council orders-Notice. 
    Notice of the findings and orders made by the city council at the hearing shall be delivered to or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record of the premises, his agent, or other person controlling the building. If the orders are not obeyed and the building rendered safe within the time specified by the order (being not less than five days), then the council may order the building removed or made safe at the expense of the owner of the property on which the building is situated. 
(Ord. 1101 § 6, 1980) 
15.12.070 - Abatement by city. 
    If the council orders are not complied with, the council may specify the work to be done, file a statement thereof with the recorder, and have the work performed by the city public works department or advertise for bids for doing the work in the manner provided for advertising for bids for public improvement work. If bids are requested, they shall be received, opened and the contract let. 
(Ord. 1101 § 7, 1980) 
15.12.080 - Assessment. 
    The city council shall determine the total cost of the work performed, including an administrative cost of twenty (20) percent if the city performs the work, and assess that cost against the property on which the building is situated. The assessment shall be declared by resolution, entered in the docket of city liens, and shall then become a lien against the property. The creation of the lien and the collection and enforcement of the cost shall all be performed in substantially the same manner as in the case of the cost of street improvements, but irregularities or informalities in the procedure shall be disregarded. 
(Ord. 1101 § 8, 1980) 
15.12.090 - Summary abatement. 
    The procedures of this chapter pertaining to council declaration of a dangerous building need not be followed where a building is unmistakably dangerous and imminently endangers human life or property. In that in stance, the chief of the fire department, the fire marshal or the chief of police may proceed summarily to abate the building. 
(Ord. 1101 § 9, 1980) 
15.12.100 - Violation-Penalty. 
    A person who is the owner of or is in possession of or is in responsible charge of a dangerous building within the city of Toledo, and who knowingly permits the building to remain dangerous beyond the time period set forth in the order as required by Section 15.12.060 of this chapter, will be in violation of this chapter. This violation will constitute a Class A infraction. This remedy is not intended to be exclusive, and the city of Toledo may pursue any other remedy available to it by law. 
(Ord. 1244 § 14, 1996: Ord. 1118, 1980: Ord. 1101 § 10, 1980) 
Chapter 15.16 - FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTION 
Sections: 

15.16.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "floodplain ordinance" of the city of Toledo, Oregon. 
(Ord. 1181 § 1, 1987) 
15.16.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    "Appeal" means a request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
    "Area of special flood hazard" means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Designation on maps always includes the letter A or V. 
    "Base flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the "one hundred (100) year flood." Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V. 
    "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard. 
    "Elevated building" means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, post, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    "Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the adopted floodplain management regulations. 
    "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    "Flood or flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    "Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    "Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter found at Section 15.16.160(A)(2). 
    "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for more that one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles. 
    "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    "New construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
    "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of adopted floodplain management regulations. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    "Start of construction" includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, or reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundation or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not included as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
    "Structure" means a walled or roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
    "Substantial damage" means any damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    "Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either: 
1.  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
2.  If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
    For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration to any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or 
(2)  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
    "Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
(Ord. 1289 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1181 § 2.0, 1987) 
(Ord. No. 1329, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2009) 
15.16.030 - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of Toledo, Lincoln County, Oregon. 
(Ord. 1181 § 3.1, 1987) 
15.16.040 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Lincoln County, Oregon, and Incorporated Areas" dated December 18, 2009, with accompanying Flood Insurance Maps are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at Toledo City Hall, 206 N. Main Street, Toledo, Oregon. The best available information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in Section 15.16.120(B) shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued which incorporates the data utilized under Section 15.16.120(B). 
(Ord. 1181 § 3.2, 1987) 
(Ord. No. 1329, § 3, 10-7-2009) 
15.16.050 - Noncompliance-Violation-Penalty. 
    Any structure or land which is constructed, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations will be in violation of this chapter. Violation of this chapter will constitute a Class A infraction. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 1244 § 18, 1996: Ord. 1181 § 3.3, 1987) 
15.16.060 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. 1181 § 3.4, 1987) 
15.16.070 - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. 1181 § 3.5, 1987) 
15.16.080 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection under this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, and any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. 1181 § 3.6, 1987) 
15.16.090 - Development permit required. 
    A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.16.040. The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured homes, as set forth in the definitions, and for all development including fill and other activities, also as set forth in the definitions. 
(Ord. 1181 § 4.1-1, 1987) 
15.16.100 - Development permit-Application. 
A.  Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city of Toledo and may include but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. 
B.  Specifically, the following information is required: 
1.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 
2.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed; 
3.  Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in Section 15.16.160(B); and 
4.  Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Ord. 1181 § 4.1-2, 1987) 
15.16.110 - Administrator-Designation of the city manager. 
    The city manager or his/her designate is appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
(Ord. 1181 § 4.2, 1987) 
(Ord. No. 1329, § 4, 10-7-2009) 
15.16.120 - Duties and responsibilities of the city manager. 
    Duties of the city manager shall include but not be limited to: 
A.  Permit Review. 
1.  Review all permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
2.  Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 
3.  Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of Section 15.16.170(A) are met. 
B.  Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.16.040, the city manager shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer Sections 15.16.160 and 15.16.170. 
C.  Information to be Obtained and Maintained. 
1.  Where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study or required as in subsection B of this section, obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement. 
2.  For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures: 
a.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level); and 
b.  Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Section 15.16.100(B)(3). 
3.  Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Alteration of Watercourses. 
1.  Notify adjacent communities, the Division of State Lands, and the Department of Land Conservation and Development prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
2.  Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
E.  Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between the mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation. Such appeals shall be granted consistent with the standards of Section 60.6 of the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program (44 CFR 59-76). 
(Ord. 1181 § 4.3, 1987) 
15.16.130 - Variance-Appeal board. 
A.  The city of Toledo planning commission shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the city manager in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
C.  An appeal from an action or ruling by the planning commission as authorized by this chapter shall be made to the city council within fifteen (15) days after the action or ruling by filing written notice with the city manager. If no appeal is taken within the fifteen (15) day period, the action or ruling of the planning commission shall be final. If an appeal is filed, the council shall receive a report and recommendation from the appropriate city official and shall hold a public hearing and consider the appeal de novo. Notice of the public hearing shall be by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than five days nor more than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
    In order to have standing for an appeal, a person must have been mailed written notice or have participated in writing or in person at the planning commission public hearing or have been substantially affected by the action or ruling. 
D.  In passing upon such applications, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and; 
1.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to the flooding or erosion damage; 
7.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
9.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
11.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after the flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
E.  Upon consideration of the factors of subsection D of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
F.  The city manager shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. 
(Ord. 1181 § 4.4-1, 1987) 
15.16.140 - Variance-Conditions. 
A.  Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items in Section 15.16.130(D) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
B.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in this section. 
C.  Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
E.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
1.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in Section 15.16.100, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
F.  Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece or property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare. 
G.  Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry-floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria except Section 15.16.140(A), and otherwise complies with Sections 15.16.150(A) of the general sandards. 
H.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(Ord. 1181 § 4.4-2, 1987) 
(Ord. No. 1329, § 5, 10-7-2009) 
15.16.150 - Flood hazard reduction- General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required: 
A.  Anchoring. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
2.  All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of the over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA's "Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas" guidebook for additional techniques). 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
2.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
3.  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
C.  Utilities. 
1.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
2.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
3.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
D.  Subdivision Proposals. 
1.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
2.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
3.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
4.  Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least fifty (50) lots or five acres (whichever is less). 
E.  Review of Building Permits. Where elevation data is not available either through the Flood Insurance Study or from another authoritative source (Section 15.16.120(B)) applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, and photographs of past flooding where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates. 
(Ord. 1181 § 5.1, 1987) 
15.16.160 - Flood hazard reduction-Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in Section 15.16.040 or Section 15.16.120(B), the following provisions are required: 
A.  Residential Construction. 
1.  New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation. 
2.  Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
B.  Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 
1.  Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
2.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; 
3.  Be certified by a professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in Section 15.16.120(C)(2); 
4.  Nonresidential structures which are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in subsection (A)(2) of this section; 
5.  Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the floodproofed level (such as a building constructed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below that level). 
C.  Manufactured Homes. 
1.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM: 
a.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, 
b.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision, 
c.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or 
d.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood. 
    Shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.16.150(A)(2). 
2.  Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that are not subject to the provisions of (1) above, be elevated so that either: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is one foot above the base flood elevation, or 
b.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
D.  Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the applicable FIRM either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or as permitted in Toledo Municipal Code 8.08, whichever is less, 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
3.  Meet the requirements of Section 15.16.160 (C) above and the elevation and anchoring for manufactured homes. 
(Ord. 1289 §§ 3-5, 2001; Ord. 1181 § 5.2, 1987). 
(Ord. No. 1329, §§ 6-8, 2, 10-7-2009) 
15.16.170 - Floodways. 
    Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.16.040 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
B.  If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Sections 15.16.150, 15.16.160 and 15.16.170. 
(Ord. 1181 § 5.3, 1987) 
15.16.180 - Before regulatory floodway. 
    In areas where a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(Ord. No. 1329, § 9, 10-7-2009) 
Chapter 15.20 - EROSION CONTROL STANDARDS, DRAINAGE CONTROL, AND GEOLOGIC HAZARDS 
Sections: 

15.20.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this ordinance is to protect life, property, and the natural environment by establishing erosion control, drainage control, and geologic hazard standards to prevent and to minimize the impact that development of lands and construction of structures can have when conducted without proper regard for geologic hazards. This ordinance is intended to protect the property owner/developer, subsequent property owners, and adjacent property owners from development activities that without proper safeguards can lead to the loss of life and property and adversely impact the natural environment to the detriment of the individual and the public. The ordinance attempts to meet these goals by establishing erosion control standards and drainage control standards generally applicable to development in all areas including geologically hazardous areas and by establishing, more specific requirements for development in an identified geologically hazardous area. 
(Ord. 1288 § 1 (part), 2001) 
15.20.020 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions are provided for use within Chapter 15.20. 
    "City manager" means the city manager or the manager's designee. 
    "Clearing" means the mechanical removal of both vegetation and earth material. 
    "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to constructing, erecting, and/or placing buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, and drilling operations. Development does not include common gardening and/or landscaping practices that do not result in a significant change in existing drainage patterns of water flowing off the property, that do not result in sediment laden water entering streets, waterways or storm water drainage systems, and that do not result in a significant change in the existing topography of the property such that adjacent properties may be adversely impacted. Development also does not include: 1) the regraveling of existing driveways, roads or parking lots, 2) the digging of cemetery graves, 3) refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations, 4) exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers or engineering geologists, 5) excavations for wells or tunnels, or 6) the stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate, or clay for use offsite. 
    "Earth material" means any rock, natural soil or fill or any combination thereof. 
    "Erosion/Sedimentation Control (ESC) facilities" are physical structures or items such as silt fences, netting, weirs, fabric filters, hay bales, mulch, fences, ditches, etc. designed to control water flows, run-off and sedimentation of soils. 
    "Excavation" means the mechanical removal of earth material. 
    "Fill" means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial mechanical means. 
    "Grading" means any excavating or filling or combination thereof. 
(Ord. 1288 § 1 (part), 2001) 
15.20.030 - Erosion/sedimentation control standards. 
    The following erosion/sedimentation control standards shall apply to development on all properties within the city limits of Toledo: 
A.  An excavation/fill permit shall be obtained from the city of Toledo prior to any of the following activities: 
1.  Filling any site with more than twenty (20) cubic yards of soil or when placement of fill would obstruct an existing drainageway; 
2.  Excavating more than a surface area of five hundred (500) square feet on slopes of less than fifteen (15) percent; 
3.  Excavating on any area of slopes of fifteen (15) percent or more; 
4.  Grading of land; and/or 
5.  Clearing of land involving cuts of more than six inches into the ground. 
B.  All development that requires an excavation/fill permit shall meet the following specifications for erosion control: 
1.  The boundaries of the fill/excavation/ grading/clearing limits shall be clearly flagged in the field prior to construction. During the construction period no disturbance beyond the flagged limits shall be permitted. The flagging shall be maintained by the contractor for the duration of construction. 
2.  The erosion/sedimentation control (ESC) facilities must be constructed in conjunction with all excavation/fill permit activities, and in such manner as to ensure that sediment laden water does not leave the site and/or enter the drainage system or violate applicable standards. 
3.  During the construction period ESC facilities shall be upgraded as needed for unexpected storm events and to ensure that sediment laden water does not leave the site. 
4.  Inspection and Maintenance of the ESC facilities: 
a.  On active sites, ESC facilities shall be inspected daily by the contractor and/or the property owner and maintained as necessary to ensure their continuing function. 
b.  On inactive sites, ESC facilities shall be inspected by the contractor and/or the property owner and maintained a minimum of once a month and within twenty-four (24) hours following a storm event. 
c.  All ESC facilities materials shall be installed and maintained in good physical condition to provide proper sediment retention. 
5.  An ESC facilities plan shall be submitted with the excavation/fill permit for approval of the city manager. Unless the applicant submits an equal or better ESC facilities plan that the city manager determines will provide adequate erosion/sedimentation control, the ESC facilities plan shall include a combination of the following as approved by the city manager: 
a.  Stabilized construction entrances shall be installed at the beginning of construction and maintained for the duration of the project. Additional measures may be required to ensure that all paved areas, including any transport routes and/or fill sites, are kept clean for the duration of the project. 
b.  Filter fabric/cloth. Where practical the filter fabric shall be purchased in a continuous roll cut to the length of the barrier to avoid use of joints. When joints are necessary, filter cloth shall be spliced together only at a support post, with a minimum six inch overlap, and both ends securely fastened to the post. 
c.  Storm inlets protection shall be installed to prevent sediment from entering storm drains prior to permanent stabilization of disturbed areas. 
d.  Seeding/mulching/landscaping. 
1.  For projects with exposed ground surfaces anticipated between October 1 and April 30, seeding and/or mulching to occur immediately after ground surfaces are exposed from grading/clearing operations. 
2.  Loose, weed-free straw mulch shall be applied at a rate of no less than four thousand (4000) pounds (two tons) per acre. And shall have a minimum depth in place of two inches. 
3.  For slopes with a grade of ten (10) percent or more, mulch must be stabilized in place by hand or machine punching the straw into the soil, spraying it with a tacking agent, or covering it with an erosion blanket. 
e.  At the end of site construction, permanent site revegetation with an establishment of a healthy stand of grass (or alternative vegetation as approved) must occur prior to removal of site erosion control measures. 
1.  Revegetation seeding. Top soil should be prepared according to landscaping plans or recommendations of grass seed supplier. Bonding agents shall use tackifier per supplier recommendations to apply grass seeding to disturbed areas. Recommended erosion control grass seed mixes are as follows. Similar mixes designed to achieve erosion control may be substituted if approved by the city manager: 
a. Dwarf grass mix (low height, low maintenance): 
elka dwarf perennial ryegrass, 80% by weight 
creeping red fescue, 20% by weight 
Application rate: 100 pounds minimum per acre 
b. Standard height grass mix: 
annual ryegrass, 40% by weight 
turf type fescue, 60% by weight 
Application rate: 100 pounds minimum per acre 
2.  Fertilization for grass seed. Fertilization should be as per recommendations of the manufacturer. Areas within fifty (50) feet of water bodies and wetlands must use a non-phosphorus fertilizer. 
3.  Netting and anchors should be used for disturbed areas on slopes. Biodegradable netting is desirable and may be used instead of bonding agents to provide a stable area for seeding. Netting should be anchored per manufacturer's recommendations. 
4.  Watering. Seeding and landscaping should be supplied with adequate moisture. Supply water as needed especially in abnormally hot or dry weather or on adverse sites. Water application rates should be controlled to provide adequate moisture without causing run-off. 
5.  Reseeding. Areas which fail to establish vegetative cover adequate to prevent erosion shall be reseeded as soon as such areas are identified. 
(Ord. 1288 § 1 (part), 2001) 
15.20.040 - Drainage control. 
A.  Drainage control is required for all development requiring an excavation/fill permit and/or a building permit. 
B.  A drainage control plan shall be submitted with the application for an excavation/fill permit and/or building permit for the approval of the city manager. A drainage control plan can be included as part of the excavation/fill permit plan and/or building permit plan. 
C.  The city manager shall review the drainage control plan to determine whether or not the plan adequately addresses the control of drainage from the proposed development. The city manager may require conditions of approval on the drainage control plan with the excavation/fill permit and/or building permit in order to prevent the proposed development from adversely impacting the existing drainage control system or the surrounding properties. 
D.  An approved drainage control plan must be implemented and maintained. It is the responsible of the property owner to maintain adequate drainage control on their property in a working manner. 
(Ord. 1288 § 1 (part), 2001) 
15.20.050 - Geologic hazard areas. 
A.  The following are geologic hazard areas requiring additional investigation and development control to which the standards of Section 15.20.060 shall apply: 
1.  Landslide areas designated as Geologically Recent Slides, Massive Ancient Slides, or Minor Slope Sloughing on map numbers 32, 33, and 34 of the 1977 RNKR/CH2MHILL Geologic Hazards Associated with Lincoln County Coastal Shorelines. 
2.  Other locally known areas of landslide hazards based on documented evidence of past occurrences. 
3.  Areas where development will occur on soils with slopes exceeding twenty-five (25) percent. 
B.  If the geologic hazard areas are not to be disturbed or the development activities are so minor in nature that hazards are not increased beyond those prior to development, then the city manager may waive/modify the requirements for a geotechnical report required in Section 15.20.060. In making this determination, the city manager may require a finding by a licensed geologist that a report is not needed. 
(Ord. 1288 § 1 (part), 2001) 
15.20.060 - Geologic hazard standards. 
    All development within a geologic hazard area listed in 15.20.050 shall require a geologic report prepared by a licensed geologist, engineer, or engineering geologist having professional experience analyzing the relevant geologic hazards in accordance with generally accepted principles and practices. Structural recommendations must be stamped by a registered professional engineer. The boundaries of the study area shall be determined by the city manager. It shall include plan and sectional diagrams of the area showing property boundaries and the geographic information required below: 
A.  In landslide areas in Section 15.20.050 (A)(1) and Section 15.20.050(A)(2) above; 
1.  Soils and bedrock types, 
2.  Slope (before and after development), 
3.  Orientation of bedding planes in relation to the dip of the surface slope, 
4.  Soil depth, 
5.  Other relevant soils engineering data, 
6.  Water drainage patterns, and 
7.  Identification of visible landslide activity in the immediate area. 
B.  The geologic hazards report shall recommend development standards that will protect development on the property and surrounding properties. These should include standards for: 
1.  Development density (when more than one use is possible or the property will be used for residential uses), 
2.  Locations for structures and roads, 
3.  Land grading practices, including standards for cuts and fills, 
4.  Vegetation removal and re-vegetation practices, 
5.  Foundation design (if special design is necessary), 
6.  Road design (if applicable), and 
7.  Management of storm water runoff during and after construction. 
C.  The geologic hazard report shall include the following summary findings and conclusions: 
1.  The type of use proposed and the adverse effects it might have on adjacent areas, 
2.  Hazards to life, public and private property, and the natural environment which may be caused by the proposed use and development design, 
3.  Methods for protecting the surrounding area from any adverse effects of the development, 
4.  Temporary and permanent stabilization programs and the planned maintenance of new and existing vegetation, and 
5.  A conclusion that the proposed development is designed to minimize adverse environmental effects. 
D.  The geologic hazard report is required prior to approval of building permits and all developments which require an excavation/fill permit except that a report prepared for a subdivision, planned development or partition pursuant to the requirements of this section may be used to satisfy these requirements for subsequent building and/or development permits if the original report provided recommendations on building placement and construction or land development and the report recommendations are followed. 
(Ord. 1288 § 1 (part), 2001) 
15.20.070 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Violation of the provisions of this chapter or an approved permit issued under this chapter shall constitute a Class A infraction. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 1288 § 1 (part), 2001) 
15.20.080 - Fees. 
    Permit fees may be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1288 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 16.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

16.04.010 - Title. 
    The title of this title is the Toledo land division ordinance. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.04.020 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this title is to prescribe standards and procedures for minor and major partitions and subdivisions of land and planned development within the city of Toledo and to aid in the implementation of the Toledo comprehensive land use plan. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.04.030 - Application date. 
    This title shall apply to all land divisions which have not been filed with the city manager before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.04.040 - Definitions. 
    The terms and phrases used in this title are defined as follows: 
    "Alley" means a public way of not over twenty (20) feet wide providing a secondary means of access to private property. 
    "Bicycle path" means a bicycle way with concrete or similar permanent surfacing. 
    "Building line" means a line on a plat, parallel to the road right-of-way, indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be erected, or the minimum distance as prescribed by the Toledo zoning ordinance between the front property line abutting a road and the closest point of the roof line of any building or structure on the land often referred to as a setback line. 
    "City" means the city of Toledo, Oregon. 
    "City manager" means the city manager of the city of Toledo, Oregon, or his/her designate(s). 
    "City recorder" means the city recorder of the city of Toledo, Oregon, or his/her designate(s). 
    "City street" means a public roadway which has been dedicated to the public and accepted by the city and created to provide ingress or egress to one or more lots, parcels, areas or tracts of land, including the terms "street," "highway," "lane," "avenue," "road" or similar designations. For the purpose of Title 16, the term "city street" includes improved public roadways dedicated to the public and accepted and maintained by either Lincoln County or the Oregon Department of Transportation. 
    "Collector road" means a moderate traffic volume street that accommodates shorter local trips and balances the need for local property access and through traffic. Collector streets connect residential traffic on local streets with other collector and arterial streets. 
    "Commercial road" means a low speed, low traffic volume street that is within or adjacent to land zoned commercial or industrial with a high percentage of freight truck traffic. Commercial streets provide frontage and direct access for commercial and industrial uses. 
    "Comprehensive land use plan" means the plan adopted by the city to serve as a guide to the orderly growth, development and improvement of the city, including a written text with goals and policies, a diagrammatic map of desired land use allocations, and any amendments to such text and map. 
    "Commission" means the Toledo planning commission. 
    "Council" means the Toledo city council. 
    "Curbline" means the line indicating the edge of the vehicular roadway within the overall right-of-way. 
    "Dividing or division of land" means to segregate an area or tract of land into two or more parcels. 
    "Easement" means the grant of a right-of-way use for a specific purpose, such as an easement for utility purposes across a parcel of land. 
    "Expedited land division" means a division of land for which an applicant specifically applies for an expedited land division and which meets the standards of ORS Section 197.360 as modified by city of Toledo standards noted in Section 16.20.030. 
    "Flooding" means the rise of a natural stream or other water body to the level at or above the intermediate regional flood, otherwise known as the one hundred (100) year flood, as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, which periodically covers an area of land that is not under water at other times. 
    "Local road" means a low speed, low traffic volume street that connects local traffic to collector and arterial streets and prioritizes local access to residences and businesses over through traffic. 
    "Lot" means a unit of land that is created by a partition or subdivision of land as defined by this title. 
    "Lot line adjustment" means a modification to lot lines or parcel boundaries which do not result in the creation of new lots and includes the consolidation of lots. 
    "Major partition" means the partition of land which does not meet the standards for an expedited land division and which necessitates the creation of a street as a method of providing access. 
    "Manufactured dwelling" means a structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy that is being used for residential purposes and that was constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards and regulations in effect at the time of construction. For general classification purposes, manufactured dwellings also include: 
1.  Residential trailers constructed before January 1, 1962. 
2.  Mobile homes constructed between January 1, 1962, and June 15, 1976, which met state construction standards then in effect; and 
3.  Manufactured homes constructed to federal standards. 
    "Minor partition" means the partition of land which does not meet the standards for an expedited land division and which does not necessitate the creation of a street. 
    "Multi-use path" means a pathway used by cyclists, pedestrians, skaters, joggers, wheelchair users and others that are physically separated from and prohibit motorized traffic. Multi-use paths may be located within a street right-of-way and the surface may be paved, gravel, or accommodated with a boardwalk. Paths can be used for either recreational or transportation purposes. See standards under Section 16.06.030. 
    "Natural hazard" means a natural event which can result in personal injury or property damage, such as flooding, landslides, soil erosion, or other damage resulting from water or soil movement. 
    "Owner" means the person who has ownership of land. 
    "Ownership" means the existence of legal or equitable title to land. 
    "Parcel" means a tax lot created by the division of land. 
    "Partitioning or partitioned land" means to divide a tract of land into two or three parcels (including the parent parcel) within one year of the date of the first segregation where such area or tract of land existed as a unit or contiguous units of land under a single ownership at the time of such segregation. "Partitioned land" does not include division of land resulting from the creation of cemetery lots; and "partitioned land" does not include any adjustment of a lot line by the relocation of a common boundary where an additional parcel is not created and where the existing parcel reduced in size by the adjustment, is not reduced below the minimum lot size established by the zoning ordinance. "Partitioned land" does not include the sale of a lot in a recorded subdivision, even though the lot may have been acquired prior to sale with other contiguous lots or properties by a single ownership. 
    "Pedestrian or bicycle way" means a right-of-way for pedestrian or bicycle traffic. 
    "Person" means and includes a natural person, firm, partnership, association, domestic or foreign corporation, joint stock company, trust or any incorporated organization. 
    "Planned development" means the development of an area of land as a single entity for a number of dwelling units or a number of uses, according to a plan which does not correspond in lot size, bulk or type of building, density, lot coverage or required open space to the regulations otherwise required by the city of Toledo zoning ordinance. 
    "Plat" means the map, diagram, replat and other writing containing the description, location, specifications, dedications, provisions and all other requirements pursuant to Chapters 16.12, 16.16 and 16.20 of this title regulating subdivisions and planned developments within the city. 
    "Principal arterial road" means a high traffic volume and limited access street that accommodates long-distance trips between and through urban areas. Principal arterials have little to no local residential and commercial access and prioritize through movement, connecting mainly to arterials and collectors. U.S. 20 is the only principal arterial road in the city and is owned and maintained by the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT). 
    "Record" means to submit documents to the clerk of Lincoln County for the purpose of placing them in official public evidence. 
    "Replat, major" means the reconfiguring of lots in a recorded subdivision plat that results in either the creation of four or more additional lots or the deletion of four or more lots within a twelve (12) month period. 
    "Replat, minor" means the reconfiguring of a portion of the lots in a recorded subdivision or partition plat that results in three or fewer lots being created or deleted within a twelve (12) month period. 
    "Shared-use shoulder" means a paved shoulder adjacent to a street travel lane for use by bicyclists and pedestrians. Shared-use shoulders occur on streets that do not include a constructed curb and gutter and lack sidewalks or bikeways. 
    "Sidewalk" means a hard-surfaced walkway within a public street right-of-way that is generally located adjacent to and separated from the roadway by a curb or planter strip. See standards in Section 16.06.030. 
    "Single ownership" means a person or group of persons who either singularly or jointly own a contiguous unit of land. 
    "Structure" means a building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some manner and which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on the ground. 
    "Subdivide land" means to divide an area or tract of land into four or more parcels (including the parent parcel) within one year of the date of the first segregation when such area or tract of land existed as a unit or contiguous units under a single ownership at the time of such segregation. 
    "Subdivision" means an area of land that has been subdivided. 
    "Subdivider" means any person who undertakes the subdivision of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development at any time, whether immediate or future. 
    "Tract" means a contiguous area of land which exists or has existed in single ownership. 
    "Transportation facilities" means a physical facility used to move people and goods from one place to another (i.e., streets, sidewalks, pathways, bike lanes, transit stations, bus stops, etc.). 
    "Transportation improvements" means a transportation facility improvement to include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Normal operation, maintenance, repair, and preservation activities associated with existing transportation facilities. 
2.  Installation of culverts, pathways, medians, fencing, guardrails, lighting, and similar types of improvements within the existing right-of-way. 
3.  Projects specifically identified in the city's adopted Transportation System Plan. 
4.  Landscaping as part of a transportation facility. 
5.  Emergency measures necessary for the safety and protection of property or the public. 
6.  Construction of a street or road as part of an approved subdivision or partition consistent with the city's adopted Transportation System Plan. 
7.  Construction of a street or road as part of an approved subdivision or land partition approved in accordance with the applicable land division ordinance. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 1355, §§ 1-3, 9-17-2014) 
16.04.050 - General requirements and minimum standards of design and development. 
    The following are the minimum requirements and standards to which partitions and subdivisions must conform before approval: 
A.  Conformity to the Comprehensive Plan. All partitions and subdivisions shall conform with all adopted portions of the Comprehensive Plan, Transportation System Plan, and all applicable ordinances and design standards of the city. Traffic facilities (including streets, pedestrian paths and bicycle paths), community and neighborhood facilities and recreational areas should be placed in approximately the same locations designated by the comprehensive plan and Transportation System Plan. 
B.  Access. The partitioning and subdividing of land shall provide each lot or parcel, by means of a fully developed city street, satisfactory vehicular access to an existing street pursuant to Chapter 16.06 of this code. The city street for the entire length which is adjacent to the parcel or lot which is being partitioned or subdivided must be a fully developed city street unless an exception is granted as per the following standards and procedures: 
1.  Partitions and subdivision of land that require the creation of a public street to serve the proposed lots shall comply with the requirements of the adopted street standards and shall include the public dedication of the required right-of-way in the adopted street standards, except as varied under Section 16.30; 
2.  Partitions and subdivision of land with frontage along an existing city, county, or state street or that are accessed via an existing city, county, or state street shall be required to make such improvements as necessary to address the impacts of the proposed development on those streets provided the required improvements are roughly proportional to the impacts created by the proposed development. If the required improvements are roughly proportional to the impacts created by the proposed development, but the planning commission determines that because of the existing street conditions, topography, or other similar factor that requiring the improvements to be completed prior to platting the property is an inefficient method of obtaining the improvements, the planning commission can allow the applicant to provide a deferred improvement agreement, bond, irrevocable petition for public improvements, or similar mechanism for obtaining the completion of the required improvements at a later date. 
C.  Relation to the Adjoining Street System. Major partitions and subdivisions shall provide for the continuation of the city streets existing in the adjoining neighborhood and for the proper street extensions when the adjoining properties are divided or developed. If the city adopts a plan for the neighborhood or area of which the partition or subdivision is a part, the partition or subdivision shall conform to such neighborhood or area plan. If the topographical conditions make such continuation or conformity impractical, adjustments or variances may be approved under Section 16.30. 
D.  Density. All subdivisions within residential zones shall create enough lots to allow building residential units to meet the higher of the following density standards: 
1.  Fifty (50) percent or more of the maximum net density permitted (based upon the minimum lot size for a single-family residence); or 
2.  Eighty (80) percent or more of the maximum net density permitted (based upon the minimum lot size for a single-family residence) minus all areas which have slopes of fifteen (15) percent or more, are wetlands or have other topographical features which, in the opinion of the planning commission, preclude development of portions of the site because to develop those portions would require noncompliance with the comprehensive plan, development ordinances or design standards: 
3.  Example: 
a.  The following example is to act as a guide to meeting this standard. A ten (10) acre parcel is to be subdivided. A street will be provided and dedicated to the public. The street will remove two acres from the usable space for lots leaving a net of eight acres. The property is zoned RG which has a minimum lot size of six thousand (6,000) square feet. Thus the calculation for the minimum number of lots to be provided is: 
10 acres - 2 acres = 8 acres net buildable 
8 acres x 43,560 square feet = 348,480 square feet 
348,480 square feet/6,000 square feet = 58.08 lots 
58.08 lots x .50 = 29.04 units 
29.04 units is rounded to 29 units minimum required 
b.  The following example is to act as a guide to meeting this standard. A ten (10) acre parcel is to be subdivided. A street will be provided and dedicated to the public. The street will remove two acres from the usable space for lots leaving a net of eight acres. However, there are three acres of wetlands and one and one-half acres which have greater than fifteen (15) percent slopes. Thus the net, net developable area is three and one-half acres. The property is zoned RG which has a minimum lot size of six thousand (6,000) square feet. Thus the calculation for the minimum number of lots to be provided is: 
10 acres - 2 acres = 8 acres net 
8 acres - 3 acres - 1.5 acres = 3.5 acres net buildable 
3.5 acres x 43,560 square feet = 152,460 square feet 
152,460 square feet/6,000 square feet = 25.41 lots 
25.41 lots x .80 = 20.33 
20.33 units is rounded to 20 units minimum required 
Twenty-nine (29) units required is greater than twenty (20) units required, therefore twenty-nine (29) lots must be created for the subdivision to be approved. 
These units will have to be clustered away from the wetlands and the fifteen (15) percent slope areas. As a special note to provide additional guidance to the planning commission: if there are areas which cannot be served due to topographical reasons such as the roads cannot be built to meet the city's standards, all of the undevelopable area could be excluded by the planning commission in calculating the minimum density required. 
4.  All partitions within residential zones where the subject parcel can be further partitioned, shall be partitioned in a manner that does not preclude the efficient division of land in the future. 
E.  Lots, Parcels, Topography, or Past Development Patterns. 
1.  Every lot and parcel shall abut and take primary ingress and egress from a city street, county road, or state highway and the frontage of each shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet in nonresidential zones, twenty (20) feet in the R-G zone and R-S zone. 
2.  Lots and parcels with double frontage shall not be permitted unless, in the opinion of the planning commission, an odd-shaped tract, existing street layout, or existing topography makes such a lot or parcel unavoidable. 
3.  Each side line shall be as close to perpendicular to the adjacent street line or radial to a curved street line as possible. 
4.  Flag lots shall not have an interior flag portion measurement of more than one hundred (100) feet in length or a "pole" less than twenty (20) feet wide for residential and twenty-five (25) feet for non-residential. See illustration. 

5.  The pole portion of a flag lot shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet long and a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) feet long. Existing circumstances that make this minimum and maximum impossible can be considered as a variance by the planning commission as set forth in the zoning ordinance. 
6.  Lots and parcels under twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet in area must not exceed a depth to width ratio of two and one-half to one. Lots and parcels over twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet in area must not exceed a depth to width ratio of three and one-half to one. 
7.  Flag lots may not be created such that more than two driveways for individual lots are in less than seventy-five (75) foot of street frontage. 
8.  Existing natural and piped drainages must be preserved or replaced on the site and easements must be granted for drainage as long as the easements required are roughly proportional to the impact of the proposed development. 
F.  All parcels and lots in partitions and subdivisions shall be served by a public water system. No plat of a partition or subdivision shall be approved unless the city has received and accepted: 
1.  A certification by the public works director that water will be available from the nearest point of supply; and 
2.  A performance agreement, bond, contract or other assurance that a water supply system will be installed by or on behalf of the partitioner to the boundary line of each and every lot or parcel depicted on the proposed partition or subdivision. 
G.  All parcels and lots in partitions and subdivisions shall be served by a public sewer system unless in possession of a sewer exception stipulated in writing by the public works director and city council (Public Improvement Requirements and Design Standards). No plat of a partition or subdivision shall be approved unless the city has received and accepted: 
1.  A certification by the director of public works that sewage service will be available at the nearest point of collection; 
2.  A performance agreement, bond, contract or other assurance that sewage disposal lines will be installed by or on behalf of the partitioner to the boundary line of each and every lot or parcel depicted in the proposed partition. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 4, 9-17-2014) 
16.04.060 - Approval of expedited land divisions, partitions, subdivisions and major replats. 
A.  No plat or replat of an expedited land division shall be recorded or have any validity unless and until it has the written approval of the city manager or is appealed to and subsequently approved by the referee or by court action. 
B.  No plat or replat of a partition or a subdivision shall be recorded or have any validity unless and until it has the approval of the planning commission or is appealed to and subsequently approved by the city council or by court action. 
C.  No person shall dispose of, transfer, sell, or agree to offer or negotiate to sell any lot in any partition which requires approval by any ordinance or regulation adopted under ORS 92.044 and 92.048 until such approval is obtained and the plat of that partition is recorded. 
D.  No person shall dispose of, transfer, sell, or agree to offer or negotiate to sell, any lot in any subdivision by reference to, exhibition of, or other use of a plat (or plan) of such subdivision before the plan for such partition has been so recorded. 
E.  A person may offer or negotiate to sell any parcel in a partition prior to approval of the preliminary plan for such partition, but no person may dispose of, transfer, sell or agree to sell any parcel in a major partition or in a minor partition prior to such approval. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.04.070 - Notice for public hearings. 
    The city manager shall give notice of public hearing required by this title by publishing a notice consistent with Type III procedure requirements in a newspaper of general circulation in the city ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing and by mailing written notice to owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of the entire contiguous site for which the application is made. The list shall be compiled from the most recent property tax assessment roll. Notice shall also be provided to a neighborhood or community organization recognized by the city and whose boundaries include the site (see Section 16.04.080 also). The notice shall: 
A.  State that issues which may provide the basis for an appeal to the council shall be raised in writing prior to the expiration of the comment period or in person at the hearing. Issues shall be raised with sufficient specificity to enable the decision makers to respond to the issue; 
B.  List, by commonly used citation, the applicable criteria for the decision; 
C.  Set forth the street address or other easily understood geographical references to the subject property; 
D.  State the place, date and time that comments are due; 
E.  State that copies of all evidence relied upon by the applicant are available for review, and that copies can be obtained at cost; 
F.  Include the name and phone number of a local government contact person; 
G.  Provide notice of the decision to the applicant and any person who submits comments under subsection A of this section. Notice of the decision must include an explanation of appeal rights; 
H.  Briefly summarize the decision making process for the decision being made; and 
I.  The city manager shall have an affidavit of notice be prepared and made a part of the file. The affidavit shall state the date that the notice was mailed to the persons who must receive notice. The failure of any adjacent property owner to receive notice shall not invalidate any proceeding or action taken at any meeting. For purposes of this notice, the requirement shall be met by the provision of an affidavit or other certification that such notice was given. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.04.080 - Appeals. 
    An appeal from an action by the city manager shall go to the planning commission and an appeal from an action by the planning commission as authorized by the ordinance codified in this chapter, other than for an expedited land division, shall be made to the city council. Appeals shall be made by filing written notice with the city recorder. If no appeal is taken within fifteen (15) days of the effective date of the action, the action of the city manager or planning commission shall be final. If an appeal is filed, the council shall receive a report and recommendation from the appropriate city official and shall hold a public hearing and consider the appeal de novo. 
    In order to have standing for an appeal, a person must have been mailed written notice or have participated in writing or in person during a staff level decision or at the planning commission public hearing or have been substantially affected by the action. 
    Content of Notice. Notice of an appeal of a Type II administrative decision or a Type III hearing to be mailed and published per Section 16.04.070 shall contain the following information: 
A.  The nature of the application and the proposed land use or uses which could be authorized for the property; 
B.  The applicable criteria and standards from the development code(s) that apply to the application; 
C.  The street address or other easily understood geographical reference to the subject property; 
D.  The date, time, and location of the public hearing; 
E.  A statement that the failure to raise an issue in person, or by letter at the hearing, or failure to provide statements or evidence sufficient to afford the decision-maker an opportunity to respond to the issue, means that an appeal based on that issue cannot be filed with the State Land Use Board of Appeals; 
F.  The name of a city representative to contact and the telephone number where additional information on the application may be obtained; 
G.  A statement that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence submitted by or for the applicant, and the applicable criteria and standards can be reviewed at city hall at no cost and that copies shall be provided at a reasonable cost; 
H.  A statement that a copy of the city's staff report and recommendation to the hearings body shall be available for review at no cost at least seven days before the hearing, and that a copy shall be provided on request at a reasonable cost; 
I.  A general explanation of the requirements to submit testimony, and the procedure for conducting public hearings; 
J.  The following notice: "Notice to mortgagee, lienholder, vendor, or seller: The Toledo Municipal Code requires that if you receive this notice it shall be promptly forwarded to the purchaser." 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.04.090 - Amendments. 
    Amendments to this title shall be legislative amendments and are reviewed using the Type IV land use procedure as set forth by Ordinance 1287 and stipulated in Toledo City Charter. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
Chapter 16.06 - TRANSPORTATION FACILITY STANDARDS 

16.06.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to establish standards for city streets and pathways that minimize improvement width and total right-of-way consistent with the operational needs of the facility and provide safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle access in compliance with the city Transportation System Plan and the Oregon Transportation Planning Rule (OAR 660-012). 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 5, 9-17-2014) 
16.06.020 - Street and multi-use path design standards. 
    For new streets and multi-use paths, the rights-of-way and improvements shall be the widths in Section 16.06.030. An adjustment or variance authorized under Section 16.30 is necessary to vary the standards for new street and multi-use paths. Existing streets and multi-use paths are exempt from these standards. Where an existing street or multi use path in a subdivision or major partition is substantially rebuilt 1 [] and cannot meet these standards, then they may be waived following the process in Section 16.30. Section 16.06.030 lists the standards for arterial, collector, commercial, and local roads, as well as the unique standards recommended for Main Street in downtown Toledo. The functional classification of existing streets is shown on the city Transportation System Plan maps. 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 5, 9-17-2014) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
"Substantially rebuilt" refers to a construction project where the pavement or asphalt of the street is removed down to the base rock foundation and rebuilt. 

16.06.030 - Summary of transportation facility standards. 
Street and Multi-Use Path Design Standards 
Type of Street Right-of-Way 
Width with 
Curbs 1 Travel Lane Center Median 
or Center 
Turn Lane On-Street 
Parking Bike Lane 2 Sidewalk (ft) Arterial   3-Lane 63' Two 12' travel lanes 14' None 6' on both sides 6' on both sides   2-Lane 49' Two 12' travel lanes None None 6' on both sides 6' on both sides Collector 3 45' Two 12' travel lanes None None 5' on both sides 5' on both sides Commercial 77' Two 12' travel lanes 14' 8' on both sides 5' on both sides 6' on both sides Local   Preferred 55' Two 14' travel lanes None 8' on both sides Cyclists share the travel lane 5' on both sides   Minimum 39' Two 14' travel lanes None None Cyclists share the travel lane 5' on both sides Main Street 61' Two 12' travel lanes None 8' on both sides None 10' on both sides Multi-Use Path N/A N/A N/A N/A 12' total width (10' paved trail with 1' gravel shoulders) Boardwalk Path N/A N/A N/A N/A 12' total width with side railings; 10' if no rails are used  
;adv=6q 1 Includes sidewalks and six inch curbs on either side 
2 Bike lanes could be substituted for a four-inch shared use shoulder where topography or other right-of-way constraints exist, at the discretion of the planning commission 
3 Collector standards apply to the Special Downtown Business District on Business Loop 20 between A Street and NE 3rd Street 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 5, 9-17-2014) 
16.06.040 - Bikeway standards. 
    Pursuant to the statewide transportation planning rule (OAR 660-012), arterial and collector street widths must include width requirements for bikeways in addition to travel lanes. These bikeways must be no less than five feet wide, in each direction of travel. The planning commission will decide whether bikeways are to be bicycle lanes, shared use shoulders, or multi-use paths based on the city's evaluation of bicycle use, right-of-way constraints, and topography. Paved and boardwalk or multi-use path facility standard widths are also included in Section 16.06.030. The proposed city-wide bicycle and pedestrian network is shown on the city Transportation System Plan maps. 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 5, 9-17-2014) 
16.06.050 - Street cross section figures. 
    The standards shown in Figures 16.06.050(A) through 16.06.050(C) include the cross sections for each of the roadway classifications. 
Figure 16.06.050(A) 
Arterial Road Standards 

Figure 16.06.050(B) 
Collector and Commercial Road Standards 

Figure 16.06.050(C) 
Local Road and Main Street Standards 

(Ord. No. 1355, § 5, 9-17-2014) 
16.06.060 - Street intersection spacing standards. 
Functional Classification Public Intersection Spacing 
(measured between centerlines) Arterial 100 feet Collector 100 feet Local street (includes Main Street and streets designated as commercial streets) 50 feet  
(Ord. No. 1355, § 5, 9-17-2014) 
16.06.070 - Grades and curves. 
    Grades shall not exceed six percent on arterials, ten (10) percent on collector streets, or twelve (12) percent on any other streets. Centerline radii of curves shall not be less than three hundred (300) feet on major arterials, two hundred (200) feet on collectors, and continuing residential streets, and one hundred (100) feet on other streets and alleys and shall be rounded to an even ten (10) feet. Where existing conditions, particularly the topography, make it otherwise impracticable to provide buildable sites, the planning commission may accept steeper grades and sharper curves. 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 5, 9-17-2014) 
Chapter 16.08 - MINOR AND MAJOR LAND PARTITIONS 
Sections: 

16.08.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide the planning commission with the authority and guidelines to review all minor and major partitions in order to insure compliance with the comprehensive land use plan and all other city ordinances. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.08.020 - Approval required. 
    No person shall divide land within the city by means of a minor or major partition without first obtaining the approval of the planning commission. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.08.030 - Application process. 
A.  An applicant, requesting a minor or major partition of land, shall first submit to the city manager an application on forms provided by the city. The application shall be complete and all information shall be accurate to the best of the applicant's knowledge. 
B.  The applicant shall submit a plan with the application form. The plan shall include the following information: 
1.  Northpoint, scale and date of the completed drawing, approximate acreage and boundary lines; 
2.  Location of property(ies) by section, township, range, tax lot(s), and donation land claim are sufficient to define the location and boundaries of the partition; 
3.  Two-foot or five-foot contour lines or spot elevations at two-foot intervals are necessary, but will be specifically stipulated by staff at the preapplication conference; 
4.  Names, addresses, zip codes, and telephone numbers of all owners and engineers or surveyors responsible for laying out the partition; 
5.  Location, square footage, and dimensions of all lots and the proposed lots/parcel numbers; 
6.  Location, square footage, and dimensions of any sites allocated for a purpose other than residential; 
7.  Existing uses on the property, including locations of all existing structures; 
8.  Existing locations, widths, and names of opened and unopened roads within or adjacent to the partition, together with easements or rights-of-way and other important features, such as section lines, corners, city boundary lines, and monuments; 
9.  Location, width, name, approximate grade, and radii of curves of all proposed roads and the relationship of such roads to any projected or existing roads adjoining the potion; 
10.  Notations indicating any limitations on rights-of-access to or from roads and lots or other parcels of land proposed by the applicant; 
11.  Location of significant natural features such as rock outcroppings, marshes, wetlands, wooded areas, preservable trees, and scenic views; 
12.  Location and direction of all water courses and bodies of water and the location of all areas subject to flooding or other natural hazards; 
13.  Additional information as city manager or the planning commission deems appropriate. 
C.  A filing fee as set forth by resolution of the city council shall be paid in full at the time of filing. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.08.040 - Improvements. 
A.  The applicant shall improve or agree to improve lands dedicated for roads, alleys, pedestrian or bicycle ways, drainage channels, private easements for access, and other rights-of-way or public open space as condition preceding the acceptance and approval of the partition. 
B.  Prior to final approval of the partition, the applicant shall either install all required improvements to city standards and repair existing roads and other public facilities damaged in the development of the partition or shall execute and file with the city manager an agreement between the applicant and the city specifying the period within which all the required improvements and repairs shall be completed. The agreement shall provide that if all of the required work is not completed within the time specified, the city may complete the work and recover the full cost and expense from the applicant. If the applicant so requests, the planning commission may grant not more than one extension of time for a period not to exceed one year to complete the required improvements. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.08.050 - Performance bond. 
A.  A performance bond, pursuant to this chapter, is required with the executed agreement to complete the improvements and repairs. The applicant shall file with the agreement one of the following to assure full and faithful performance: 
1.  A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state of Oregon on a form approved by the city manager; 
2.  Cash or a certified check in an amount fixed by the city manager; or 
3.  Certification by a bank or other reputable lending institution that money is being held to cover the cost of the improvements and incidental expenses and that the money will only be released upon authorization of the city manager. 
B.  Such assurance of full and faithful performance shall be for a sum determined by the city manager as sufficient to cover the cost of the improvements and repairs that may be required prior to acceptance, including related engineering and inspection costs and may include an additional percentage as determined by the city manager to cover any inflationary costs which may be incurred during the construction period. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.08.060 - Public hearing. 
    The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing to review the application for a partition. Notice to the public of the hearing shall be in accordance with the terms of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The planning commission shall schedule the hearing as soon as practicable but only after the completed application and plan have been filed. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.08.070 - Criteria for evaluation. 
    In reviewing applications for minor and major partitions, all of the following criteria shall be met before the planning commission may approve the proposed partition: 
A.  The division of land complies with applicable ordinances and public improvement design standards adopted by the city; 
B.  The applicant has filed all the necessary information required by the land division Title 16; 
C.  If the application is for a minor partition, the division of land will not constitute a major partition or a subdivision pursuant to the definitions in this title; 
D.  If the application is for a major partition, the division of land will not constitute a subdivision and the street design has received approval from the director of public works; 
E.  The applicant has demonstrated that each lot will be served with city sewer and water and that the city has the capacity to provide those services; 
F.  The infrastructure designs have received approval from the public works department and if a bond is required to be posted for any infrastructure improvements, the applicant has agreed in writing to do so; 
G.  The applicant has demonstrated that adequate precautions have been taken to prevent damage or injury resulting from natural hazards; 
H.  The division of land will not affect a designated dredged material disposal site or mitigation site as designated in the Lincoln County estuary management plan. 
I.  The division of land will not result in any newly created parcels or lots which are entirely zoned for natural resources or which become one hundred (100) percent undevelopable due to splitting off the buildable land unless owned, created, or proposed to be used by a public utility. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.08.080 - Planning commission action. 
A.  The planning commission is authorized to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application and shall take action within forty-five (45) days of the first public hearing on the application. Approval of an application shall be valid for twelve (12) months after the effective date of the approval. If the improvements are not completed and the real property partitioned within that time, the approval is void. 
B.  If the applicant requests an extension in writing before the required time elapses, the planning commission may grant not more than one extension of time for a period not to exceed one year to complete the required improvements. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
Chapter 16.12 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Sections: 

16.12.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the requirements and standards to be followed by the planning commission in reviewing preliminary and final plats of proposed subdivisions in order to insure compliance with the comprehensive land use plan and all other city ordinances. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.12.020 - Approval required. 
    No person shall subdivide land within the city without first obtaining approval of the planning commission in accordance with this title. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.12.030 - Preapplication conference. 
A.  Any person proposing to divide land within the city shall file a letter of intent and a preliminary sketch of the proposal with the city manager. The letter of intent shall include: 
1.  The location of the proposed subdivision by township, range, section number(s) and tax lot number(s); 
2.  The proposed usage in the subdivision and the proposed lot sizes; and 
3.  Any other information relevant to the proposal. 
B.  The preliminary sketch shall be of sufficient detail to illustrate the proposed development and shall include the following: 
1.  The boundaries of the proposed subdivision and a general layout of the size and number of lots; 
2.  North arrow and scale of the drawing; 
3.  The proposed name of the subdivision and the total acreage involved in the request; and 
4.  The tentative layout of the proposed street system and the location of existing and proposed easements for access. 
C.  Within one week of the receipt of the information submitted by the applicant, the city manager shall call a conference at which the manager or any other city official requested by the manager shall be present to review and discuss the proposal with the applicant. The purpose of this conference is to inform all parties of the proposal, discuss existing and potential problems, coordinate actions and evaluation, and in general to determine whether the proposal conforms to the city's comprehensive land use plan, applicable zoning ordinance standards, and any other applicable city ordinances. The parties shall discuss the following, if applicable: potential natural hazards, the presence of a dredged material disposal site, the presence of a restoration site, relevant engineering requirements and specifications, building code requirements, permits and fees. 
D.  If the applicant fails to file a preliminary plat with the city manager within one year of the date of the conference, an additional conference to review the proposed subdivision will be required prior to the filing of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.12.040 - Filing preliminary plat. 
A.  After the preapplication conference, an applicant shall then complete and file with the city manager an application on forms provided by the city and ten (10) copies of the preliminary plat, together with the improvement plans and other supplementary information required by this title. 
B.  The preliminary plat and plans and information shall be filed no less than ten (10) days before the public hearing before the planning commission. The filing fee as set by the city council by resolution shall be paid in full at the time of filing. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.12.050 - Preliminary plat information. 
    The preliminary plat shall include the following information: 
A.  Proposed name of the subdivision. This name shall not duplicate or resemble the name of another subdivision in the city; 
B.  North point, scale (either one inch equals one hundred (100) feet or one inch equals fifty (50) feet) and date of completed drawing, approximate acreage and boundary lines; 
C.  Appropriate identification clearly stating the map is a preliminary plat; 
D.  Location of the subdivision by section, township, range, tax lot or lots and donation land claim; 
E.  Location of at least one temporary bench mark within the plat boundaries; 
F.  Contour lines related to the temporary bench mark and having two-foot or five-foot contour intervals; 
G.  Names, addresses, zip codes and phone numbers of all owners, subdividers and engineers or surveyors responsible for laying out the subdivision; 
H.  A vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to surrounding development, streets, and sewer and water services; 
I.  Location, square footage and dimensions of all lots and the proposed lot numbers; 
J.  Location, square footage and dimensions of areas proposed for public use; 
K.  Sites, if any, allocated for a purpose other than single-family dwellings; 
L.  Existing uses on the property, including location of all existing structures; 
M.  Lots not intended for sale shall be designated and the intended usage and legal status of the lot shall be noted; 
N.  Existing locations, widths and names of both opened and unopened streets within or adjacent to the subdivision, together with easements or rights-of-way and other important features, such as section lines, corners, city boundary lines and monuments; 
O.  Location, width, name, approximate grade, and radii of curves of all proposed streets and the relationship of such streets to any projected or existing streets adjoining the proposed subdivision; 
P.  Location, width and purpose of proposed easements of street access and private streets for private use and all reservations or restrictions relating to those easements and private streets; 
Q.  Location of significant natural features such as rock outcroppings, marshes, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees and scenic views; 
R.  Location and direction of all watercourses and bodies of water and the location of all areas subject to flooding; 
S.  Location of all underground utility lines; 
T.  Additional information as the city manager deems appropriate. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.12.060 - Supplementary information. 
    The applicant shall file the following information, if applicable, with the preliminary plat: 
A.  A statement of the projected water and sewer needs of the subdivision and the proposed method of providing those services; 
B.  The nature and type of improvements proposed for the subdivision, and a timetable for their installation; 
C.  A description of community facilities which would serve the subdivision, and a timetable for the completion or installation of the facilities; 
D.  Where it has been determined at the preapplication conference that all or a portion of a proposed subdivision may be subject to unstable subsurface conditions, faults or other problems related to local geologic formation, a complete geologic study of the area shall be done by an independent geologist. The independent geologist's report shall be required before any review of the preliminary plat by the planning commission. The fee for such study shall be paid by the subdivider; 
E.  Where it has been determined that flooding problems exist on the land, a showing that the subdivider can and will comply with all of the applicable provisions of the city ordinances on flood control and prevention; 
F.  A list of any restrictive covenants which are to be recorded; 
G.  A proposed plan for draining surface water, including the location and type of drainage ways to carry surface water from the development without adversely affecting adjacent properties. If any filling is proposed, the drainage plan must comply with all city ordinances and must demonstrate that adequate provisions have been made for the prevention of backup or ponding of surface water on adjacent properties as well as within the proposed development; 
H.  A statement that the proposed subdivision is not located in a designated dredged material disposal site or a mitigation site; 
I.  If the financing of the subdivision is to be through the sale of bonds under the Bancroft Bonding Act in Oregon Revised Statutes Chapter 223, a statement setting forth the benefit to the city as a result of the proposed subdivision; 
J.  A preliminary title report for the real property to be subdivided. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.12.070 - Subdivision phasing. 
A.  A subdivision may be platted in as many as three phases. All phases shall be designated on the preliminary plan with time limitations not to exceed the following: 
1.  Phase 1 shall be recorded not later than one year after preliminary plat approval; 
2.  Phase 2 shall be recorded not later than three years after preliminary plat approval; 
3.  Phase 3 shall be recorded not later than five years after preliminary plat approval. 
B.  The planning commission shall review each phase before recording, and no phase shall be recorded before the commission grants its final approval. If any of the above time limitations are exceeded, the applicant shall reapply for preliminary plat approval and comply with the requirements of this title. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.12.080 - Public hearing. 
    The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing to review the application for a subdivision and all the accompanying documents. Notice to the public of the hearing shall be in accordance with the terms of this title. The commission shall schedule the hearing as soon as practicable but only after the completed application, preliminary plat, and all supplementary information have been filed. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.12.090 - Criteria for evaluation. 
    In reviewing preliminary plats, all of the following criteria shall be met before the planning commission may approve the proposed subdivision. 
A.  The application is complete in accordance with this title; 
B.  All of the proposed lots conform to the minimum standards for lot designs as required by the city zoning ordinance; 
C.  The preliminary plat conforms with the city of Toledo comprehensive land use plan; 
D.  The preliminary plat complies with the zoning ordinance and all other applicable city ordinances; 
E.  The street design has received approval from the public works department, and if a bond is required to be posted, the subdivider has agreed in writing to do so; and 
F.  Each lot can be served with city sewer and water service and must be at the time of construction. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.12.100 - Planning commission action. 
A.  The planning commission is authorized to approve, conditionally approve or deny the application and shall take action within forty-five (45) days of the first public hearing on the application. The approval of the planning commission shall be binding upon the city and the subdivider for the purpose of preparing the final plat. 
B.  Approval by the commission of the preliminary plat shall be valid for twelve (12) months from the effective date of the approval. Unless an extension is granted under the terms of this title, that approval of the preliminary plat shall be void after the expiration of the twelve (12) month period and the proposal for subdivision shall be resubmitted to the planning commission for consideration of the preliminary plat before the filing of a final plat. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.12.110 - Extensions of time. 
    The planning commission may grant one extension of time of up to twelve (12) months to the approval of the preliminary plat of a subdivision or to the time required to complete any phase of a subdivision. Upon the receipt of a written request for such an extension, the commission may grant the extension and may attach any conditions necessary for compliance with this title. The written request shall be filed with the city manager prior to the termination of the original approval; otherwise, the commission's approval will be considered expired and the subdivider must reapply with the commission. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.12.120 - Submission of final plat. 
A.  Within twelve (12) months after the effective date or a valid extension of approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall have the subdivision surveyed and a plat drawn in accordance with the preliminary plat and the changes required by the planning commission. All owners and mortgagees of the subdivision and the engineer and surveyor responsible for laying out the subdivision shall approve and sign the final plat. 
B.  The subdivider shall then file the final plat with the city manager, who shall review it in light of the criteria of this title. The manager may consult with the subdivider and any other person during the review and may suggest to the subdivider revisions to the final plat. The manager shall submit the final plat, together with recommendations, to the planning commission at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.12.130 - Final plat information. 
    The following information shall be shown on the final plat: 
A.  The name of the subdivision, the date the plat was prepared, the scale, north point and legend; 
B.  Legal description of the subdivision boundaries; 
C.  Reference, by distance and bearings, to adjoining recorded surveys, if any and referenced to a field book or map as follows: 
1.  Stakes, monuments or other evidence found on the ground and used to determine the boundaries of the subdivision, 
2.  Adjoining corners of adjoining subdivisions, 
3.  Other monuments found or established in making the survey of the subdivision or required to be installed by provisions of this title; 
D.  Numbering of lots and blocks as follows: 
1.  Lot numbers beginning with the number "1" numbered consecutively in each block, 
2.  Block numbers beginning with the number "1" and continuing consecutively without omission or duplication throughout the subdivision; 
E.  All dimensions shall be in feet and decimals of a foot, to the nearest one one-hundredth of a foot; 
F.  Ties to any city, county or adjacent subdivisions' boundary lines; 
G.  Square footage of each parcel and total acreage of the subdivision; 
H.  All sites to be utilized for public purposes shall be clearly noted on the plat; 
I.  Exact location and width of streets and easements of access intersecting the boundary of the subdivision; 
J.  Subdivision block and lot boundary lines and street rights-of-way and centerlines with dimensions to the nearest one one-hundredth of a foot, bearings or deflection angles, radii, arch, points of curvature, chord bearings and distances and tangent bearings. Subdivision boundaries, lot boundaries and street bearings shall be shown to the nearest thirty (30) seconds with basis of bearings; 
K.  Names and width of the portion of streets being dedicated, the width of any existing right-of-way, and the width on each side of the centerline. For streets on curvature, curve data shall be based on the street centerline. In addition to the centerline dimensions, the radius and central angle shall be indicated; L. Utility and private easements of access to public streets or roads denoted by fine dotted lines, clearly identified and, if already of record, their recorded reference. If an easement is not of record, there shall be a written statement of the easement. The width of the easement, its length and bearing, and sufficient to locate the easement with respect to the subdivision must be shown. If the easement is being dedicated by the map, it shall be properly referenced in the owner's certificates of dedication; 
M.  Locations and widths of drainage channels, railroad rights-of-way, reserve strips at the end of stubbed roads or along the edge of partial width roads on the boundary of the subdivision; 
N.  Any conditions specified by the planning commission upon granting preliminary approval. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.12.140 - Supplementary information. 
    The subdivider shall supply to the city manager the following information with the final plat: 
A.  A preliminary or supplementary title report for the property being subdivided, including the exceptions, if any, that will be imposed when the final plat is recorded; 
B.  A copy of the restrictive covenants to be filed with the final plat; 
C.  Improvement plans for the facilities to be constructed by the subdivider, including plans for drainage, sewer, water, curbs and gutters, sidewalks and streets, and any other construction plan that may be required. All such plans shall meet or exceed the specifications for construction adopted by the city; 
D.  A deed or deeds, satisfactory to the commission, conveying all land to be dedicated for public use other than streets; 
E.  A statement to be fixed to the final plat which offers for public dedication all streets, pedestrian and bicycle ways, private easements of access, other rights-of-way, drainage channels, watercourses and any other property intended for public use; 
F.  A statement from the Lincoln County assessor concerning unpaid taxes on the property to be subdivided. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.12.150 - Agreement for improvements. 
    The subdivider shall improve or agree to improve lands dedicated for roads, alleys, pedestrian or bicycle ways, drainage channels, private easements of access and other rights-of-way as a condition preceding the acceptance and approval of the final plat. Prior to the commission's certifying approval on the final plat, the subdivider shall either install all required improvements and repair existing streets and other public facilities damaged in the development of the subdivision or shall execute and file with the commission an agreement between the subdivider and the city specifying the period within which all the required improvements and repairs shall be completed. The agreement shall provide that if all of the required work is not completed within the time specified, the city may complete the work and recover the full cost and expense from the subdivider. The subdivider shall also post a performance bond as required by this title. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.12.160 - Performance bond. 
A.  A performance bond, pursuant to this section, is required with the executed agreement to complete the improvements and repairs within the subdivision. The subdivider shall file with the agreement one of the following to assure full and faithful performance: 
1.  A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state of Oregon on a form approved by the city manager; 
2.  Cash or a certified check in an amount fixed by the city manager; or 
3.  Certification by a bank or other reputable lending institution that money is being held to cover the cost of the improvements and incidental expenses and that the money will only be released upon authorization of the city manager. 
B.  Such assurance of full and faithful performance shall be for a sum determined by the city manager as sufficient to cover the cost of the improvements and repairs that may be required prior to acceptance, including related engineering and inspection costs and may include an additional percentage as determined by the manager to cover any inflationary costs which may be incurred during the construction period. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.12.170 - Final plat approval and recording. 
A.  Upon receipt of the final plat and all supplementary information and documents, the planning commission shall determine whether the final plat conforms to the preliminary plat, the conditions of approval, and the ordinances of the city. If any changes are to be considered by the planning commission in the approved preliminary plat, the planning commission shall first hold a public hearing in accordance with this title. 
B.  If the planning commission finds that the final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat, the conditions of approval, and the requirements of all city ordinances, the final plat may be approved and submitted for the necessary signatures. Approval by the planning commission shall constitute acceptance by the public of the dedication of any street on the plat and agreement by the city to maintain that street as a city street. 
C.  The subdivider shall record the final plat with the clerk of Lincoln County within thirty (30) days of the date that the last required signature to the final plat has been obtained. If not, the subdivider shall resubmit the final plat to the planning commission which may require alterations in the final plat because of changes in the area of the subdivision. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
Chapter 16.16 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES 
Sections: 

16.16.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the planned development is to provide greater flexibility in the development of land than may otherwise be possible under strict application of this title and the zoning ordinance. Deviation from specific site development standards is allowable as long as the general purposes for the standards are achieved and the general provisions of the comprehensive land use plan and relevant ordinances are observed. It is intended to encourage variety and creativity in land development patterns throughout the city while giving special attention to potential natural hazards, scenic views, watercourses, trees and other features which help determine land use. The planned development should result in a development equal to or better than that resulting from strict application of city ordinance standards in which the design of the overall development permits increased freedom in the placement and uses of buildings, location and designation of open spaces, circulation of traffic and people and the inclusion of watercourses, wooded areas and other amenities in overall site planning. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.16.020 - Preapplication conference. 
    Any person proposing a planned development shall comply with the provisions of Section 16.12.030, dealing with preapplication conferences. In addition, the exact procedure to be followed for approval shall be agreed upon by all parties. Any required variance or conditional uses shall also be identified. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.16.030 - Preliminary plat and plan filing. 
    The applicant shall file with the city manager at least thirty (30) days prior to the scheduled planning commission meeting at which applicant is requesting review, an application form, preliminary plat, development plan (narrative of proposal), any supplemental information determined to be necessary during the preapplication conference, and the appropriate fee as set by the city council by resolution. The city manager shall conduct a review of the information submitted to determine compliance with city standards. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.16.040 - Zoning. 
    Toledo does not have a planned development zone. Instead, the planned development requires an application, a preapplication conference, a preliminary plat, a hearing, and a final plat, all regulated by this Title 16. Planned developments are used most often in conjunction with residential developments but planned developments work for commercial and industrial developments too. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.16.050 - Information in preliminary plat. 
    The applicant shall submit a preliminary plat containing the following information: 
A.  Information required to be filed under Chapter 16.12 of this title for the preliminary plat of a subdivision; 
B.  Any additional information outlined by the city manager in the preapplication conference. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.16.060 - Information in the development plan. 
    The applicant shall submit a development plan which shall be a narrative of the proposal containing at least the following information: 
A.  A description of the purpose and layout of the development emphasizing significant watercourses, geological and topographical features which serve to guide the development plans and building arrangement, open spaces, and proposed uses other than single-family residential; 
B.  An analysis of projected sewer and water needs of the proposed development and applicant's proposal for serving those needs; 
C.  Geologic or soils studies relevant to the proposal; 
D.  When applicable, information regarding intentions and plans to comply with city ordinances concerning flood control and prevention; 
E.  A statement that the proposal will not adversely affect a designated dredged material disposal site or mitigation site; 
F.  Any additional information deemed appropriate by the applicant or the city manager. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.16.070 - Public hearing. 
    When the city manager has determined that all required information has been submitted, the manager shall schedule a public hearing for the next regular planning commission meeting and shall give notice to the public as required by this title. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.16.080 - Allowable variations from title requirements. 
    The following variations to the requirements of the particular zone may be allowed in conjunction with a planned development: 
A.  Density (number of units) shall be determined by calculating the gross available acreage, exclusive of area needed for streets, utilities and sidewalks, and applying the lot size standard of the zone. Density may be increased up to ten (10) percent if the planning commission finds that such an increase will not adversely affect the development itself or the surrounding neighborhood, that adequate sewer and water is available, that open space for aesthetic appearance and light and air are not comprised, and that the purpose of the zone is carried out. 
B.  Building height may be increased up to ten (10) percent beyond the standard of the zone upon approval of the planning commission if open space within the development and building setbacks are increased to provide a pleasing aesthetic appearance and allow for circulation of light and air, fire lanes, water pumps, additional hydrants and other applicable conditions may be required by the planning commission to insure adequate fire protection. 
C.  Minimum lot size, street frontage, and setbacks required in the zone may not necessarily apply to a planned development although the planning commission may set conditions to carry out the purpose of such standards. 
D.  The lot coverage standard of the zone shall not apply to specific lots as designated by the planning commission, but shall apply to the development as a whole. 
E.  Roadway and right-of-way widths may be reduced if provisions are made for landscaping along the roadway and for routing bicycle and pedestrian traffic through and around the development. Any reduction in required roadway and right-of-way widths shall not hinder the safe and efficient circulation of traffic to and within the proposed development. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.16.090 - Criteria for preliminary evaluation of a planned development. 
A.  The granting of preliminary approval is a statement to the applicant to proceed with the development under the conditions set forth by the planning commission. Therefore, the planning commission shall apply the following criteria to a proposal for a planned development: 
1.  All required information has been submitted; 
2.  Every aspect of the planned development conforms to all applicable ordinance standards; 
3.  The proposal complies with the city comprehensive land use plan; 
4.  All streets, sidewalks and ways meet the standards and specifications pursuant to Chapter 16.06 of this code; 
5.  Each unit can be served by city sewer and water and the city has the capacity to provide those services; 
6.  Identified natural hazards have been addressed and provisions made for insuring that the development will proceed without aggravating those hazards; 
7.  Provisions of city ordinances concerning flood control and prevention have been and will be complied with; 
8.  Provisions have been made for safe and efficient access to the development and safe and efficient circulation of motor vehicles, bicycles and pedestrian traffic; 
9.  Adequate off-street parking has been provided. 
B.  In addition to the above criteria, the planning commission shall prefer planned developments which correspond to topographical features, preserve natural, scenic or historic features (for example, stands of trees, watercourses, view property), address and incorporate, when feasible, alternative energy sources and methods of generation, provide attractively landscaped and meandering pedestrian and bicycle ways separate from streets. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 6, 9-17-2014) 
16.16.100 - Planning commission action. 
    In response to an application, the planning commission may approve, deny, conditionally approve or table any proposal. For approval or denial, the commission shall make findings which set forth compliance or noncompliance with the above criteria. A planned development may be approved only upon a finding that all criteria have been met. Any request for a zone change, variance or conditional use may also be acted upon as part of the overall action on the planned development. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.16.110 - Approval of the final plat. 
    The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 16.12 of this title, dealing with final plats and supplementary information, appropriately altering language to reflect the fact that it is a planned development. In addition, the applicant shall provide all appropriate documentation showing ownership of any common open spaces or other common property within the planned development. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
Chapter 16.20 - EXPEDITED LAND DIVISIONS 
Sections: 

16.20.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide the city manager with the authority and guidelines to review all expedited land divisions in order to assure compliance with Oregon Revised Statutes 197.360 to 197.380. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.20.020 - Approval required. 
    No person shall divide land within the city by means of an expedited land division without first obtaining the approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.20.030 - Application process. 
    An application for an expedited land division shall describe the manner in which the proposed division complies with each of the provisions listed in this section. The application shall be submitted as per the application process requirements outlined in Section 16.08.030 for minor and major partitions. A filing fee as set forth by resolution of the city council shall be paid in full at the time of filing. 
A.  Includes land that is zoned for residential uses and is within an urban growth boundary; 
B.  Is solely for the purposes of residential use, including recreational or open space uses accessory to residential use; 
C.  Does not provide for dwellings or accessory buildings to be located on land that is specifically mapped and designated in the comprehensive plan and land use regulations for full or partial protection of natural features under the statewide planning goals that protect: 
1.  Open spaces, scenic and historic areas and natural resources, 
2.  Estuarine resources, 
3.  Coastal shorelands, and 
4.  Beaches and dunes. 
    Within Toledo these protected lands also include, but are not limited to, lands identified as wetlands, slide areas, or areas with slopes of twenty-five (25) percent or more; 
D.  Satisfies minimum street or other right-of-way standards established by acknowledged land use regulations (including but not limited to the Toledo zoning and land division ordinances, the Uniform Fire Code, the Uniform Building Code and the city of Toledo Public Improvements Requirements and Design Standards), if such standards are not contained in the applicable regulations, as required by statewide planning goals or rules. The property being divided and each parcel being created must have a minimum of frontage of fifteen (15) feet in an R-S zone and twenty (20) feet in an R-G zone and primary ingress and egress must be taken from a fully developed city street which meets all city of Toledo's standards; 
E.  If the land division will create four or more lots, it is a subdivision and it must create enough lots or parcels to allow building residential units at eighty (80) percent or more of the maximum net density permitted by the zoning designation of the site (based upon the minimum lot size for a single-family residence); 
F.  If the land division will create three or fewer parcels under ORS 92.010 it is a partition and must meet the standards in subsections (C)(1) through and including (C)(4) of this section. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.20.040 - Notice requirements and application procedures. 
    The city will follow the notice requirements and application procedures outlined in ORS 197.365 and ORS 197.370 to process expedited land division applications. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.20.050 - Appeals. 
    An appeal of an action by the city manager on an expedited land division shall be applied for and processed as outlined in ORS 197.375. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
Chapter 16.24 - REPLATTING WITHIN SUBDIVISIONS AND PARTITIONS 
Sections: 

16.24.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide the planning commission with the authority and guidelines to review all major and minor replats. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.24.020 - Approval required. 
    No person shall replat land within the city by means of a replat without first obtaining the approval of the planning commission. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.24.030 - Major and minor replat application fees. 
    An application fee as set forth by resolution of the city council shall be paid in full at the time of filing of a replat request. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.24.040 - Major replats. 
    For a major replat, the application shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with the procedures for a subdivision as set forth in the Toledo Municipal Code Title 16.12, subdivisions chapter. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.24.050 - Minor replat application process. 
A.  Replatting. Any plat or portion thereof and any group of adjacent parcels may be replatted upon receiving an application signed by all of the owners as appearing on the deed(s) and an application on forms provided by the city. 
B.  Plan. For a minor replat, the applicant shall submit a plan with the application that includes the following information: 
1.  Northpoint, scale and date of the completed plan, approximate acreage and boundary lines; 
2.  Location of propert(ies) by section, township, range, tax lot(s) sufficient to define the location and boundaries of the replat; 
3.  Contour lines or spot elevations at five foot intervals; 
4.  Location, square footage, and dimensions of all lots to be replatted; 
5.  Location, square footage, and dimensions of any sites allocated for a purpose other than residential; 
6.  Existing uses on the property including location of all existing structures; 
7.  Existing locations, widths and names of opened and unopened roads with or adjacent to the replatted areas, together with any easements or rights-of-way and other important features such as section lines, corners, city boundary lines, and monuments; 
8.  Any proposed changes to existing utility easements; 
9.  Notations indicating any limitations on rights-of-access to or from roads and lots or other parcels of land proposed by the applicant; 
10.  Locations of significant natural features such as rock outcroppings, marshes, waterways, and/or wetlands. 
    For a replat resulting in one lot, #3 and #5 may be omitted by the city manager. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.24.060 - Minor replat public hearing and notice. 
    The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing to review the application for a minor replat. Notice shall be given pursuant to the notification requirements of a subdivision request and shall include notice to any utility company and public agency affected by a proposed change in a utility easement. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.24.070 - Minor replat criteria for approval. 
    The following criteria must be met before the planning commission may approve the proposed minor replat: 
A.  The application has been deemed complete by the city manager; 
B.  The replat of land complies with applicable ordinances and public improvement design standards adopted by the city or the applicant has applied for and received an exception/variance from the applicable ordinance or standard; 
C.  The applicant has demonstrated or the public works director has verified that each lot can be served by city sewer and city water and the city has the capacity to provide those services; 
D.  The applicant has demonstrated that adequate precautions have been taken to prevent damage or injury resulting from natural hazards; 
E.  The replat of land will not affect a dredged material disposal site or a mitigation site as designated by the Toledo Comprehensive Land Use Plan; 
F.  The replat of land will not result in any newly created parcels or lots which are entirely zoned for natural resources or which become one hundred (100) percent undevelopable due to the splitting off the buildable land unless the property is owned by the city of Toledo or other government agency; 
G.  No public streets or roads are vacated by the replat; and 
H.  No existing utility easement is changed where an objection in writing is filed by a utility company that desires to maintain the easement as it exists. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.24.080 - Planning commission action on a minor replat. 
A.  The planning commission is authorized to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application and shall take action within forty-five (45) days of the last public hearing on the application. Approval of an application shall be valid for twelve (12) months after the effective date of the approval for the applicant to complete the requirements of the replat. 
B.  If the applicant requests an extension in writing before the expiration of the approval of the replat, the planning commission shall grant one extension of time for a period not to exceed one year to complete the requirements of the replat. 
C.  Any required improvements shall be subject to the "improvements" and "performance bond" sections of the subdivisions chapter of Title 16. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.24.090 - Recording approved minor replats. 
A.  The replat shall be prepared in accordance with ORS Chapters 92 (Comprehensive Land Use Planning Coordination) and 209 (County Surveyor) by an Oregon licensed surveyor and conform to the plat standards established by the county surveyor. 
B.  A copy of the recorded replat shall be provided to the city no later than sixty (60) days after recording. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
Chapter 16.28 - LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS 
Sections: 

16.28.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules, regulations, and standards governing the approval of lot line adjustments which involve modifications to lot lines or parcel boundaries which do not result in the creation of new lots and includes the consolidation of lots. This chapter is intended to encourage efficient use of land resources, full utilization of urban services, and transportation options. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.28.020 - Submission requirements. 
    All applications for lot line adjustment shall be made on forms provided by the city. The application shall include a preliminary lot line map identifying all existing and proposed lot lines and dimensions; footprints and dimensions of existing structures (including accessory structures); location and dimensions of driveways and public and private streets within or abutting the subject lots; location of significant vegetation, existing fences and walls; and any other information deemed necessary by the city manager for ensuring compliance with city codes. A filing fee as set forth by resolution of the city council shall be paid in full at the time of filing. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.28.030 - Approval process. 
A.  Decision-Making Process. Lot line adjustments shall be reviewed by means of a Type I procedure, as governed by Ordinance 1287 using approval criteria contained in Section 16.28.040. 
B.  Time Limit on Approval. The lot line adjustment shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of approval, during which time it must be recorded. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.28.040 - Approval criteria. 
    The city manager shall approve or deny a request for a lot line adjustment in writing based on findings that all of the following criteria are satisfied: 
A.  No additional parcel or lot is created by the lot line adjustment; however, the number of lots or parcels may be reduced. 
B.  Lot Standards. All lots and parcels comply with the applicable lot standards of the land use district including lot area and dimensions. 
C.  Access. All lots and parcels comply with the standards or requirements of access and circulation. 
D.  Setbacks. The resulting lots, parcels, tracts, and building locations comply with the standards of the land use district. 
E.  Exemptions from Dedications and Improvements. A lot line adjustment is not considered a development action for purposes of determining whether right-of-way dedication or improvement is required. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.28.050 - Minimum conditions. 
    Approvals shall be subject to the following minimum conditions: 
A.  Deeds, based on a metes and bounds legal description, for all adjusted lots resulting from the lot line adjustment shall be recorded with the Lincoln County clerk's office. 
B.  A certified boundary survey map that reflects the approved lot line adjustment shall be filed with Lincoln County. Prior to the filing of the survey map with Lincoln County, the map shall be reviewed by the city and signed by the city manager. 
C.  Copies of the recorded deeds and filed survey map shall be provided to the city following recordation. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.28.060 - Recording lot line adjustments. 
A.  Recording. Upon the city's approval of the proposed lot line adjustment, the applicant shall record the lot line adjustment with Lincoln County within one year of approval or the decision expires, and submit a copy of the recorded survey map to the city, to be filed with the approved application. 
B.  Time Limit. The applicant shall submit the copy of the recorded lot line adjustment survey map to the city within fifteen (15) days of recording and prior to the issuance of any building permits on the re-configured lots. 
C.  Lapsing of Approval. The lot line adjustment approval shall lapse if: 
1.  The lot line adjustment is not recorded within the time limit of one year; 
2.  The lot line adjustment has been improperly recorded with Lincoln County without the satisfactory completion of all conditions attached to the approval; or 
3.  The final recording is a departure from the approved plan. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.28.070 - Extension. 
    The city shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant an extension of the approval period not to exceed one year provided that: 
A.  No changes are made on the original plan as approved by the city; 
B.  The applicant can show intent of recording the approved lot line adjustment within the one year extension period; and 
C.  There have been no changes in the applicable code or plan revisions on which the approval was based. In the case where the lot line adjustment conflicts with a code change, the extension shall be denied. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
Chapter 16.30 - ADJUSTMENTS AND VARIANCES 

16.30.010 - Adjustment-Purpose. 
    The adjustment review process provides a mechanism by which the city manager may make limited modifications to the application of regulations in the development code. Adjustment reviews provide limited flexibility for unusual situations, while continuing to provide certainty and rapid processing for land use applications. Requests for changes from a numerical development standard of ten (10) percent or less of the standard are processed as "adjustments." Requests for changes to standards which are not numeric or which are for more than ten (10) percent of the standard are processed as "variances." 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 7, 9-17-2014) 
16.30.020 - Adjustment-Procedure. 
    Adjustment requests are processed through a Type II procedure using the review criteria listed in Section 16.30.030 in addition to the applicable requirements contained in Chapter 19.12. 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 7, 9-17-2014) 
16.30.030 - Adjustment-Review criteria. 
    All adjustment requests will be approved if the city manager finds that the applicant has shown that the following criteria have been met: 
1.  The requested adjustment is for ten (10) percent or less of the numerical development standard; 
2.  The need for the requested adjustment is created by the configuration of an existing or proposed structure on the site; 
3.  The need for the requested adjustment is created by the configuration of the existing lot boundaries or topography of the site; 
4.  The design and operating characteristics of the proposed development are reasonably compatible with the placement of surrounding development and land uses, and any negative impacts have been sufficiently minimized; or 
5.  If more than one adjustment is being requested, the cumulative effect of the adjustments will result in a project which is still consistent with the overall purpose of the applicable zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 7, 9-17-2014) 
16.30.040 - Variances-Purpose. 
    This section provides standards and procedures for variances, which are modifications to the development standards in Title 16 of this code that are not otherwise permitted elsewhere in this code as exceptions to code standards. This code cannot provide standards to fit every potential development situation. The city's varied geography and complexities of land development require flexibility. This chapter provides that flexibility, while maintaining the purposes and intent of the code. The variance procedure provides relief from specific code provisions in Title 16 when they have the unintended effect of preventing reasonable development that is in conformance with all other codes. The variance procedure is intended to provide flexibility while ensuring that the purpose of each development standard is met. Variances are necessary when the applicant requests a deviation from numerical standards of more than ten (10) percent or a variance from non-numerical development standards. 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 7, 9-17-2014) 
16.30.050 - Variance-Procedure. 
    A variance is processed as a Type III procedure using the review criteria listed in Section 16.30.070 in addition to the applicable procedures contained in Chapter 19.16. 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 7, 9-17-2014) 
16.30.060 - Regulations which may and may not be varied. 
A.  Unless listed in subsection B of this section, all regulations in this code may be modified using the variance process. 
B.  Variances are prohibited for the following items: 
1.  As an exception to any restrictions on uses or development which contain the word "prohibited." 
2.  As an exception to a threshold for a review, such as the characteristics that would distinguish a minor partition from a major partition or subdivision. 
3.  As an exception to a definition or classification. 
4.  As an exception to the procedural steps of a procedure or to change assigned procedures. 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 7, 9-17-2014) 
16.30.070 - Variance-Review criteria. 
    The planning commission may approve an application for a variance if the applicant has shown that all of the following criteria have been met: 
A.  The proposed variance will not be materially detrimental to the purposes of this code, to any other applicable policies and standards, and to other properties in the same zoning district or in the vicinity; 
B.  A hardship to development exists that is peculiar to the lot size or shape, topography, pre-existing structure(s), wetlands, floodplains, or other similar circumstances related to the property over which the applicant has no control, and that are not applicable to other properties in the vicinity; 
C.  The development proposed will be the same as permitted under this title and city standards will be maintained to the greatest extent that is reasonably possible while permitting reasonable economic use of the land; 
D.  Existing physical and natural systems, such as but not limited to traffic, drainage, natural resources, and parks will not be adversely affected any more than would occur if the development occurred as specified by the subject code standard; 
E.  The hardship is not self-imposed; and 
F.  The variance request is the minimum variance that would alleviate the hardship. 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 7, 9-17-2014) 
16.30.080 - Appeals of adjustment and variance decisions. 
    Appeals of adjustment and variance decisions shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 19, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 7, 9-17-2014) 
16.30.090 - Time limit on approval of a variance. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, authorization of a variance shall be void after one year if the installation of any required improvements have not been completed and the final plat has not been recorded. 
B.  The authorization may be extended by the planning commission for an additional period of one year if the request is made in writing prior to the expiration of the original authorization. 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 7, 9-17-2014) 
Chapter 16.32 - LEGAL FRAMEWORK 
Sections: 

16.32.010 - Enforcement. 
    The city manager shall have the power and duty to enforce the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.32.020 - Interpretation. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements fulfilling its objectives. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions, of this chapter or of any other ordinance, resolution, or regulation, the provisions which are more restrictive shall govern. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.32.030 - Severability. 
    The provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of the ordinance codified in this chapter is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
16.32.040 - Penalty. 
    A person violating a provision of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be punished upon conviction by a civil penalty as a Class A infraction. This remedy is not intended to be exclusive and the city of Toledo may pursue any other remedy available to it by law. 
(Ord. 1301B § 1 (part), 2004) 
Title 17 - ZONING 
Chapters: 
Chapter 17.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

17.04.010 - Title. 
    This title shall be known as the "Toledo Zoning Ordinance." 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.04.020 - Definitions. 
A.  As used in this title any gender reference refers to all genders and the singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
B.  The following words and phrases, unless the context otherwise requires, shall mean: 
    "Abut" means contiguous to or immediately joining. For example, two lots with a common property line are considered to be abutting. 
    "Access" means the way or means by which pedestrians and vehicles enter and leave property. 
    "Accessory dwelling unit" means a dwelling unit incidental and subordinate to the main dwelling unit. Examples include a studio apartment located over a garage or a one bedroom cottage located in the backyard. 
    "Accessory structure or use" means a structure or use incidental and subordinate to the main use of the property and which is located on the same lot with the main use, including a home occupation. Where an accessory building is attached to the main building in a substantial manner, as by a wall or roof, such accessory building shall be considered part of the main building. 
    "Alley" means a public way of not over twenty (20) feet wide providing a secondary means of access to private property. 
    "Alter" means any chance, addition, or modification in the construction of a building or structure. 
    "Apartment house." See Dwelling, multi-family. 
    "Assembly plants" refers to establishments, which produce finished or semi-finished products from manmade, secondary or partially completed materials. Products may be for wholesale trade, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms or consumers. Goods are generally not displayed or sold on-site, but if done, such uses may not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of the building or buildings in which the assembly plant operates. Assembly plants will be fully enclosed and may include office space as an accessory use. 
    "Auto body shop" means an establishment primarily engaged in the repair of automotive tops, bodies and interiors, or automotive painting and refinishing. 
    "Auto wrecking yard" means an area used for the dismantling and/or wrecking of used motor vehicles, machinery, or trailers, or the storage or sale of dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked motor vehicles, machinery, or trailers or their parts or the storage of motor vehicles unable to be moved under the power of the vehicle. 
    "Automobile service station" means a building or portion thereof and land used for dispensing automobile fuel, oil, accessories, and minor vehicle repairs. When the dispensing sale or offering for sale of motor fuels or oil is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be classified as a public garage. 
    "Babysitting" means the provision of child care to a child in the child's own home during the temporary absence of the child's parents. 
    "Bed and breakfast facility" means a single-family dwelling or part thereof occupied by the proprietor with no more than five guest rooms and where traveler's accommodation and meals are provided for a fee on a daily or weekly room rental basis, not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days. 
    "Beverage production" refers to manufacturing facilities including bottling plants, breweries, coffee roasting, soft drink production and wineries. This does not include milk processing or production. Accessory uses may include an eating or drinking establishment or retail sales of beverages produced on-site. 
    "Boarding, lodging, or rooming house" means a building where lodging with or without meals is provided for compensation for not less than five nor more than ten (10) guests. 
    "Building" means a structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. 
    "Cannabinoid concentrate" means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from marijuana by: 
1.  A mechanical extraction process; or 
2.  A chemical extraction process using a nonhydrocarbon-based or other solvent, such as water, vegetable glycerin, vegetable oils, animal fats, isopropyl alcohol or ethanol. 
    "Cannabinoid edible" means food or potable liquid into which a cannabinoid concentrate, cannabinoid extract or dried marijuana leaves or flowers have been incorporated. 
    "Cannabinoid extract" means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from marijuana by: 
1.  A chemical extraction process using a hydrocarbon-based solvent, such as butane, hexane or propane: 
2.  A chemical extraction process using the hydrocarbon-based solvent carbon dioxide if the process uses heat or pressure; or 
3.  Any other process identified by the state liquor control commission, in consultation with the authority by rule. 
    "Cannabinoid product" means a cannabinoid edible and any other product intended for human consumption or use, including a product intended to be applied to the skin or hair that contains cannabinoids or dried marijuana leaves or flowers. 
    "Child" means a human being under thirteen (13) years of age. 
    "Child day care center" means a facility which provides child care and/or educational services prior to the first grade level for thirteen (13) or more children, or for twelve (12) or fewer children in a facility other than the single-family residence of the provider and complies with the rules and regulations established by the State of Oregon Children and Families Services Division. 
    "Child day care home" means a facility which provides child care and/or educational services prior to the first grade level for twelve (12) or fewer children in the single-family residence of the provider. If the Child Day Care Home provides service in compliance with the Oregon Children and Families Services Division, child care ratios such that no employees are required, and the facility is located in a residential zone, the Child Day Care Home shall be regulated as a Home Occupation. Child Day Care Homes of all sizes shall comply with the rules and regulations established by the State of Oregon Children and Families Services Division. 
    "City" means the city of Toledo, Oregon. 
    "City manager" means the city manager of the city or designee(s). 
    "City street" means a public right-of-way which has been dedicated to the public and accepted by the city and created to provide ingress or egress to one or more lots, parcels, areas, or tracts of land, including the terms "street," "highway," "lane," "avenue," "road," or similar designations. For the purpose of Title 17, the term "city street" includes improved public roadways dedicated to the public and accepted by either Lincoln County or the Oregon Department of Transportation. They may or may not be maintained. 
    "Clear vision area" means a triangular area on a lot at the intersection of two streets or a street and a railroad, two sides of which are lot lines measured from the corner intersection of the lot lines to a distance specified in these regulations. The third side of the triangle is a line across the corner of the lot joining the ends of the other two sides. Where the lot lines at intersections have rounded corners, the lot lines will be extended in a straight line to a point of intersection. The vision clearance area contains no plantings, walls, structures, or temporary or permanent obstructions exceeding 2.5 feet in height measured from the top of the curb. 
    "Commission" means the city planning commission of the city of Toledo, Oregon. 
    "Comprehensive land use plan" means the plan adopted by the city to serve as a guide to the orderly growth, development, and improvement of the city, including any adopted written text with goals and policies, a diagrammatic map of desired land use allocations, and any amendments to such text and map. 
    "Conditional use" means a use that is generally in line with the purpose of the zone but which could, if not reviewed, have a significant adverse impact on other properties or uses within the zone beyond that of the uses permitted outright. 
    "Condominium" means a form of ownership where buildings are subdivided into individual units such that each owner owns only the individual unit and the air space occupied by it. The portion of land upon which the building is situated, the surrounding grounds, party, walls, corridors, and services other than those within independent units (such as electrical, water, gas, sewer, etc.) become joint responsibilities of all the owners as tenants in common. 
    "Cultivation" or "cultivate" means: 
1.  All phases of growth of marijuana from seed to harvest; or 
2.  Preparing, packaging, or repackaging, labeling, or relabeling of marijuana prior to consumption, or incorporation into a marijuana-infused product. 
    "Custom manufacturing" means manufacturing of individual, or in small lots, items made according to personal order. 
    "Development" means any human-induced change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to building or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, and drilling operations. Also includes any action or use on or applied to real property. 
    "Drive-in use" means an establishment that by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles. Restaurant, take-out, or drive-in is separately defined. 
    "Dwelling, multi-family" means a building containing two or more dwelling units excluding accessory dwelling units. 
    "Dwelling, single-family" means a detached building containing one dwelling unit. 
    "Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms designed for occupancy by one family only and not having more than one cooking facility, but not including recreational vehicles, hotels, motels, boarding houses, etc. 
     "Duplex" means a detached building containing two dwelling units. 
     "Triplex" means a detached building containing three dwelling units. 
     "Fourplex" means a detached building containing four dwelling units. 
     "Multi-plex" means a building containing more than four dwelling units. 
    "Easement" means the grant of a right-of-way use for a specific purpose, such as an easement for utility purposes across a parcel of land. 
    "Eating or drinking establishments" means retail establishments selling food and drink for consumption on the premise, including lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate on-site consumption. This term includes restaurants where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principal building. It also includes a retail food establishment which is any fixed facility in which food or drink is offered or prepared primarily for retail trade. 
    "Employees" means all persons, including proprietors, working on the premises. 
    "Family" means two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or legal guardianship living together in a dwelling unit. A family is also a group of not more than five persons who need not be related by blood, marriage, adoption, or legal guardianship, living in a dwelling unit. A single person living alone shall be recognized as a family. 
    "Floor area" means the area included in surrounding walls of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of vent shafts and courts. 
    "Food production" refers to manufacturing establishments producing or processing foods for human consumption, including: bakery products, candy and confectionary products, catering services separate from stores or restaurants, dairy products, fruit and vegetable canning, preserving and related processing, grain mill products and by-products, seafood processing and canning, and miscellaneous food item preparation from raw products. This does not include: meat packing plants other than seafood processing and canning, slaughterhouses or rendering plants. May include an eating or drinking establishment as an accessory use. 
    "Garage, parking" means a structure, or part of a structure, used to store cars primarily on a short term basis, with or without a fee. 
    "Garage, private" means an accessory building or portion of a main building, including a carport, which is used for the parking or storage of privately owned vehicles, boats, and trailers of the person resident upon the premises and in which no business, service, or industry related to motor vehicles is carried on. 
    "Garage, public" means a public or commercial garage is a building or part of a building or space used for business or commercial purposes used principally for the repair, equipping, and care of motor vehicles and where such vehicles may be parked or stored. 
    "Grade (ground level)" means the average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of the building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the aboveground level should be measured at the sidewalk. 
    "Height of building" means the vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the roof. 
    "Historical resources" means a district, site, structure, or artifact which has a significant relationship to events or conditions of the human past. 
    "Home occupation" means an occupation carried on within a dwelling by members of the family occupying the dwelling with no servant, employee, or other persons being engaged at the home occupation site, provided the residential character of the building is maintained and the occupation is conducted in such a manner as not to give an outward appearance or manifest any characteristic of a business in the ordinary meaning of the term unless specifically authorized by the zoning code or infringe upon the right of neighboring residents to enjoy the peaceful occupancy of their homes. A city of Toledo business license is required for all home occupations. 
    "Hospital" means an establishment which provides sleeping and eating facilities to persons receiving medical, obstetrical, or surgical care and nursing service on a continuous basis. 
    "Hostel" means a single building containing a single dwelling unit where four unrelated individuals but not more than twenty (20) unrelated individuals may live for not more than thirty (30) continuous days. A hostel may be occupied and managed by a family in addition to the four to twenty (20) persons renting facilities. 
    "Hotel/motel" means a building in which lodging is provided to the public for compensation, with or without common entrances, with or without cooking facilities, and where more than seventy-five (75) percent of the lodging rooms are for rent to transient guests for a continuous period of less than thirty (30) days. 
    "Impact" means the consequences of a course of action; the effect of a goal, guideline, plan, or decision. 
    "Kennel" means a lot or building used for a business or residence in which four or more dogs, cats, or other domestic animals at least four months of age are kept and where such animals are kept commercially for board, propagation, training, or sale. A kennel does not include an agricultural use such as cattle grazing on land in the natural resource zone. 
    "Landscaping" means any combination of living plants such as trees, shrubs, plants, vegetative ground cover or turf grasses, and may include structural features such as walkways, fences, benches, plazas, works of art, reflective pools, fountains, or the like. Landscaping also includes the preservation and protection of existing vegetation. Bark, wood chips, rock or other similar material surrounding plants can also be considered a part of the landscaping. 
    "Limited manufacturing" refers to processing and manufacturing operations which are fully enclosed and are primarily engaged in the on-site production of the following: 
1.  Hand-manufactured goods involving the use of hand tools or domestic mechanical equipment. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are made individually or in small lots. Typical products include: art, sculpture, pottery, jewelry, toys, candles, woodwork, custom textile products and similar artisan goods. Retail sale or display of goods produced on-site may be included as a subordinate accessory use. 
2.  Manufacturing or assembly of precision items or professional instruments. Typical products include: measuring, analyzing or controlling instruments, electronic components, medical and dental supplies, computers and musical instruments, commercial fishing gear manufacturing, including but not limited to; crab pot manufacturing, net and ground gear manufacturing/construction. Retail sale or display of goods produced on-site may be included as an accessory use. 
    "Loading space" means an off-street space within a building or on the same lot with a building for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle or truck while loading or unloading merchandise or material. 
    "Lot" means a unit of land that is created by a partition or a subdivision of land defined by the Toledo land division ordinance. 
    "Lot area" means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot. 
    "Lot, corner" means a lot abutting on two intersecting streets other than an alley, provided that the streets do not intersect at an angle greater than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
    "Lot, frontage" means the portion of the lot nearest the street and from which access is obtained. 
    "Lot, interior" means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    "Lot line" means the property line bounding a lot. 
    "Lot line, front" means in the case of an interior lot, the lot line separating the lot from the street other than an alley, and in the case of a corner lot, the owner shall choose the lot line, approved by staff, which is along a street other than an alley. 
    "Lot line, rear" means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular, triangular, or other shaped lot, a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. 
    "Lot line, side" means any lot line not a front or rear lot line. 
    "Low intensity recreation" means recreational facilities with limited infrastructure and predominant open space. Examples include: bike and pedestrian paths, viewpoints and fishing areas. Low intensity recreation does not include: campgrounds, playgrounds, sports fields, basketball courts or other high-use facilities. 
    "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance. 
    "Machine shops and fabrication" refers to establishments primarily engaged in the assembly of metal parts, including blacksmith and welding shops, sheet metal shops, machine shops and boiler shops. Products may include: metal duct work, tanks, towers, cabinets and enclosures, metal doors and gates and similar products. 
    "Manufactured dwelling" means a structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards and regulations in effect at the time of construction. For general classification purposes, manufactured dwellings also include: 
1.  Residential trailers constructed before January 1, 1962. 
2.  Mobile homes constructed between January 1, 1962, and June 15, 1976, which met Oregon construction standards then in effect; and 
3.  Manufactured homes constructed to federal standards. 
    "Manufactured home park" means any place where four or more manufactured dwellings are located within five hundred (500) feet of one another on a lot, tract, or parcel of land under the same ownership, the primary purpose of which is to rent or lease space for manufactured homes for a charge or fee paid or to be paid for the rental, lease or use of the facilities, or to offer free space in connection with securing the trade or patronage of such uses. 
    "Marijuana" means the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae, any part of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae, and the seeds of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae. "Marijuana" does not include industrial hemp, as defined in ORS 571.300. 
    "Marijuana items" means marijuana, cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates, and cannabinoid extracts. 
    "Marijuana laboratory" means a laboratory that performs testing, research or development of recreational marijuana or marijuana items for producer, processor, wholesaler, or retail licensees. 
    "Marijuana processor" means a recreational marijuana processor who holds a processor license issued by the state liquor control commission, to process, compound or convert marijuana into products, concentrates or extracts, but does not include packaging or labeling, for the premises at which marijuana items are processed. 
    "Marijuana producer" means a recreational marijuana producer who holds a production license issued by the state liquor control commission, to manufacture, plant, cultivate, grow or harvest of marijuana, for the premises at which the marijuana is produced. 
    "Marijuana retailer" means a recreational marijuana retailer who holds a retail license issued by the state liquor control commission, for retail sale of marijuana or marijuana items, for the premises at which marijuana items are sold. 
    "Marijuana wholesaler" means a recreational marijuana wholesaler who holds a wholesale license issued by the state liquor control commission, for purchase of marijuana items for resale to a person other than a consumer, for the premises at which marijuana items are received, kept, stored or delivered. 
    "Medical clinic" means a building or structure whose primary purpose is housing practitioners for the medical and dental treatment of persons. 
    "Medical marijuana dispensary facility" means a medical marijuana facility registered by the Oregon Health Authority under ORS 475.300 to ORS 475.346 and that sells, distributes, transmits, gives, dispenses or otherwise provides medical marijuana to a registry identification cardholder or the designated primary caregiver of a registry identification cardholder. 
    "Medical marijuana grow site" means a specific location registered by the Oregon Health Authority and used by a grower to produce marijuana for medical use by a specific patient. 
    "Mini-storage" means buildings or other structures with multiple, self-contained units which are intended to be rented or leased to individual parties for the purpose of small-scale storage or sheltering of personal goods, household items, vehicles, and similar items of personal property. 
    "Nonconforming structure or use" means a lawful structure or use at the time this code or any amendment to it becomes effective and which does not conform to the requirements of the zone in which it is located. A nonconforming structure and a nonconforming use may be present simultaneously on one piece of real property. 
    "Parcel" means a tax lot created by the division of land. 
    "Parking lot, public" means an open, off-street area used for the temporary parking of more than three automobiles and available for public use, with or without charge, or as accommodation for clients and customers. 
    "Persons" means every natural person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation. 
    "Planned development" means the development of an area of land as a single entity for a number of dwelling units or a number of uses, according to a plan which allows flexibility in lot size, bulk or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage, or required open space to the regulations otherwise required by the city of Toledo zoning ordinance. It is intended to encourage variety in the development pattern of the city and to encourage creative approaches to land development. It is further intended to provide for the general well-being of future inhabitants and the surrounding neighborhood by planning around geologic hazards, providing a safe and efficient transportation network, assuring privacy and open space, maintaining health and safety and enhancing the overall livability of the area. 
    "Porch/deck, unenclosed" means an unenclosed porch/deck that does not contain additional walls excluding the house wall and is characterized by open railing or enclosed railing not to exceed forty-five (45) inches in height. 
    "Processing and manufacturing operations" refers to operations primarily engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products. 
    "Public right-of-way" means an easement for access dedicated to the public, the city, or other governmental entity and accepted as such which may or may not be developed and maintained by the city of Toledo. 
    "Public safety services" means a safety service such as fire suppression, police protection, or emergency medical response, intended as a service to the public that may be operated by a governmental body/agency or a private corporation. 
    "Public use" means services, structures or facilities that enhance the livability and quality of life, including physical, social and economic welfare, for the general public, or the proposed use provides for the use, protection, preservation, conservation, or enhancement of parks, natural areas, and similar areas in a manner that meets community needs for a wide range of passive or active recreational uses. Examples of a "public use" includes parks, camp grounds, playgrounds, sports fields, basketball courts, open spaces, and other areas used for low intensity recreation, structures to provide public safety services, water storage tanks, water or wastewater treatment facilities, utility substations, communication services, schools, and public transportation facilities. 
    "Recreational marijuana" means any marijuana intended for recreational use which meets all requirements for recreational marijuana contained in this chapter, state law, and any other applicable law. 
    "Recreational marijuana facility" means any recreational marijuana related facility, including marijuana producer, marijuana processor, marijuana wholesaler, marijuana retailer, and marijuana laboratory. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicular-type living unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its own motor power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. Type of recreational vehicles include, but are not limited to, travel trailer, camping trailer, camper, camping van, and motor home. 
    "Recreational vehicle park" means a plot of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by recreational vehicles as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes (not more than thirty (30) days out of any sixty (60) day period). 
    "Religious use/institution" means a building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, that by design and construction are primarily intended for conducting organized religious services and associated accessory uses commonly associated with a religious use or use of a building such as concerts, holiday related sales, bake sales, rummage sales, meetings, religious instruction, community related events, and other such uses. 
    "Research and development (R&D)" refers to facilities exclusively used for research, development and/or testing of innovative information, concepts, methods, processes, materials, or products. This can include the design, development, and testing of biological, chemical, electrical, magnetic, mechanical, and/or optical components in advance of product manufacturing. The accessory development, fabrication, and light manufacturing of prototypes, or specialized machinery and devices integral to research or testing may be associated with these uses. Such uses may be located individually, in a business park, or in a flex-space. R&D uses will be fully enclosed, may include office space as an accessory use, and have minimal transportation system impacts. 
    "Residential care facility" means a facility licensed under the authority of the Department of Human Resources (DHR) under ORS 443.400 to 443.460 which provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training or a combination thereof for six to fifteen (15) individuals who need not be related. Staff required to meet DHR licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of facility residents, and need not be related to each other. 
    "Residential care home" means a residence, licensed under the authority of the Department of Human Resources (DHR) under ORS 443.400 to 443.825 which provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training or a combination thereof for six to fifteen (15) individuals who need not be related. Staff required to meet DHR licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of facility residents, and need not be related to each other or to any resident of the residential home. 
    "Residency hotel" means a building or group of buildings in which lodging, with or without cooking facilities, is available to owners or transient guests for rent, trade, exchange, or other compensation for a period of less than thirty (30) days. Tenancy will be less than from month-to-month. More than twenty-five (25) percent of the lodging rooms or units may be used or are available for residential use or rental for residential purposes on a month-to-month tenancy or a lease or rental agreement for periods of thirty (30) days or more. 
    "Restaurant, take-out or drive-in" means an establishment where food and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption which takes place or is designed to take place outside the confines of the restaurant building or site, and where ordering and pickup of food takes place from a vehicle. 
    "Right-of-way" means a strip of land within which there is located a passageway conveyed for a specific purpose. 
    "Salvage/junk yard" means any property used by a business that deals in buying and selling old motor vehicles, old motor vehicle parts, machinery or parts thereof, appliances, or parts thereof, scrap metal, or other discarded material. 
    "Scrap metal and transfer facility" means a place/structure where metal goods and materials which are used, worn out, cast out, or discarded are stored on a short-term basis for the purpose of reclamation and/or recycling of the metal before transfer to another facility. 
    "School" means any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed, or used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge. 
    "Security dwelling" means a single-family dwelling or a dwelling unit as part of a building which is an accessory use to the main use of the property and which is either located on the same lot with the main use or as part of the main building to provide housing for security personnel, caretakers, employees, and/or owners. 
    "Setback" means the minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given line of reference (usually a property line) to the nearest foundation line or vertical wall, whichever is closer, of a structure. An architectural feature of the structure shall not project more than two feet into the required setback. Where architectural features project more than two feet into the allowable setback area, the distance shall be measured from the reference line to the architectural feature. 
    "Sign" means a presentation or representation, other than a house number, by words, letters, figures, designs, pictures, or colors, publicly displayed so as to give notice relative to a person, a business, an article or merchandise, a service, an assemblage, a solicitation, or a request for aid or other type of advertising. This includes the board, metal, or surface upon which the sign is painted, included, or attached. 
    "Story" means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the top story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the top floor and the ceiling above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement, cellar, or garage is more than six feet above grade, such basement, cellar, or garage shall be considered a story. 
    "Street" means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way which provides for public use for the purpose of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the placement of utilities. Street shall include the terms "road," "highway," "lane," "place," "avenue," "court," "way," or other similar designations. 
    "Structure" means a building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some manner and which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on the ground. 
    "Structural alteration" means any change to the supporting members of a building including foundations, bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or roof. 
    "Tower" means a structure situated on a nonresidential site that is intended for transmitting or receiving television, radio, or telephone communications, excluding those used exclusively for dispatch communications. 
    "Trailer, house" means a building or single-wide vehicle originally designed or presently constructed to be used as a dwelling or lodging place for recreational uses and to be movable from place to place over streets. 
    "Trailer park" means a plot of ground upon which one or more house trailers occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located, regardless of whether a charge is made for such accommodations. 
    "Transportation facilities" means a physical facility used to move people and goods from one place to another (i.e., streets, sidewalks, pathways, bike lanes, transit stations, bus stops, etc.). 
    "Transportation improvements" means a transportation facility improvement to include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Normal operation, maintenance, repair, and preservation activities associated with existing transportation facilities. 
2.  Installation of culverts, pathways, medians, fencing, guardrails, lighting, and similar types of improvements within the existing right-of-way. 
3.  Projects specifically identified in the city's adopted Transportation System Plan. 
4.  Landscaping as part of a transportation facility. 
5.  Emergency measures necessary for the safety and protection of property or the public. 
6.  Construction of a street or road as part of an approved subdivision or partition consistent with the city's adopted Transportation System Plan. 
7.  Construction of a street or road as part of an approved subdivision or land partition approved in accordance with the applicable land division ordinance. 
    "Truck and car repair and service - minor" means the general repair and servicing of automobiles and passenger trucks (of eleven thousand (11,000) lbs. gvw or less) excluding industrial vehicles. 
    "Truck and car repair and service - major" means the general repair and servicing of automobiles and trucks including industrial vehicles. 
    "Use" means the purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. 
    "Visual screening" means a barrier, natural or man-made, that blocks the view into a property. 
    "Water-dependent development" means development activity that can only be carried out on, in, or adjacent to the water because the use requires access to the water body for transportation, recreation, energy production or source of water. 
    "Water-related development" means a use which derives a cost savings advantage, not associated with land costs or rent, from a location on or near the water or a use whose location on or near the water is essential to the functioning of adjacent water-dependent uses. 
    "Yard" means an open space on a lot which is unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this ordinance. FRONT: A yard between side lot lines and measured horizontally at right angles to the front lot line from the front lot line to the nearest point of the building. REAR: A yard extending between side lot lines and measured horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line from the rear lot line to the nearest point of the main building. SIDE: A yard between a building and the side lot lines measured horizontally at right angles to the side lot line from the side lot line to the nearest point of the building. 
(Ord. 1307 §§ 1-3, 2005; Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. No. 1345, § 1, 11-7-2012) 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 8, 9-17-2014; Ord. No. 1357, § 1, 11-19-2014; Ord. No. 1360, § 1, 2-3-2016; Ord. No. 1364, § 2, 11-2-2016) 
17.04.030 - Compliance with ordinance (Title) provisions and maintenance of minimum requirements. 
A.  No building, structure, or premise shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or altered contrary to the provisions of this ordinance. 
B.  Each use permitted either outright or conditionally in any of the zones in this ordinance includes the accessory uses which attach to that main use, and both the main use and all accessory uses shall be considered in any application or proceeding under this ordinance. 
C.  No lot area, yard, or other open space, or required off-street parking or loading area existing on or after the effective date of this ordinance shall be reduced in area, dimension, or size below the minimum required by this ordinance, or shall any lot area, yard, or other open space or off-street parking or loading area which is required by this ordinance for one use be used as the lot area, yard, or other open space or off-street parking or loading area requirement for any other use. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.04.040 - Classification of zones. 
    For the purposes of this ordinance the city is divided into zones designated as follows: 
Zone Abbreviated 
Designation Single-Family Residential R-S General Residential R-G Commercial C Light Industrial L-I Industrial I Natural Resource N-R Water-Dependent W-D Public Lands P-L  
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.04.050 - Zoning map, boundaries, designation after annexation and planned developments. 
A.  The location and boundaries of the zones designated in Section 17.04.040 are established as shown on the map entitled "Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Map of the City of Toledo" dated with the date of adoption and signed by the mayor and city recorder and hereafter referred to as the "zoning map." 
B.  The signed copy of the zoning map shall be maintained on file in the office of the city manager and is hereby made a part of this ordinance. 
C.  Unless otherwise specified, zone boundaries are lot lines or the center line of streets, alleys, railroad right-of-way, or such lines extended. Where a zone bounder divides a land parcel under a single ownership into two zones, then the entire parcel shall be zoned for the less restrictive use by the adjustment of the boundaries, provided the boundary adjustment is a distance of less than twenty (20) feet. If the adjustment involves a distance of more than twenty (20) feet, the procedure for a zone change shall be followed. 
D.  Territory annexed to the city shall be given a zone designation in compliance with the Comprehensive Land Use Plan designation of the property. Such change may be entirely or partially carried out as a part of the annexation proceedings. The zone designation under the zoning ordinance of Lincoln County shall apply until changed by the city. If the city council finds it is important to the protection or implementation of city, policies, with notice and opportunity to be heard, interim regulations may be applied in the annexed area until more permanent action can be taken. 
E.  Planned developments shall be allowed outright without requiring an overlay zone for all single-family residential and general residential zoned properties. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.04.060 - Land use application/permit procedures under the zoning ordinance. 
    The land use application/permit procedures referenced in this zoning ordinance (Title 17) are to be followed according to the criteria set forth by ordinance in Title 19 of the municipal code by the city council. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 17.08 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-S) 
Sections: 

17.08.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the R-S zone is to preserve areas within the city for single-family residences and the facilities and services which go along with those residences. The facilities and services and other conditional uses should be compatible with low- density residential living and should not result in heavy traffic, loud noise, or any other disturbing activity. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.08.020 - Uses permitted outright. 
    In the R-S zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright. Special standards for certain uses, marked with an asterisk (*), are found in Section 17.08.090. 
A.  Single-family dwellings * and their accessory uses. 
B.  Home occupations which comply with Chapter 17.46. 
C.  Manufactured dwellings.* 
D.  Accessory use structures.* 
E.  Accessory dwelling units.* 
F.  Transportation facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with the city Transportation System Plan). 
(Ord. 1307 § 4, 2005; Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 9, 9-17-2014) 
17.08.030 - Conditional uses permitted. 
A.  Religious use. 
B.  Governmental structure or land use including but not limited to a public park, playground, fire station, library, or museum. 
C.  Hospital, sanitarium, rest home, home for the aged, nursing home, convalescent home, group care center, residential care facility, residential care home, or medical clinic. 
D.  School: nursery, primary, elementary, junior high, or senior high. 
E.  Pumping station and utility substation. 
F.  Manufactured dwellings that do not meet the minimum standards set in Sections 17.08.090(A)-(B). 
G.  Boarding house, bed and breakfast facility, hostel, or residency hotel. 
H.  Multifamily dwelling units. 
I.  Commercial use in conjunction with a planned development under the Toledo Land Division Ordinance. 
J.  Child day care center.* 
(Ord. 1307 §§ 5, 6, 2005; Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.08.040 - Signs. 
    The following signs are permitted in the R-S zone: 
A.  One temporary sign, not illuminated and not to exceed nine square feet in area, advertising the sale, lease, or rental of the property. 
B.  Temporary political signs, not illuminated and not to exceed six square feet, to be removed within seven days after the pertinent election date. 
C.  One non-illuminated sign not to exceed six square feet in area in conjunction with a home occupation. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.08.050 - Lot size. 
    The minimum lot area shall be seven thousand (7,000) square feet for an interior lot and seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet for a corner lot. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.08.060 - Setback requirement. 
    In an R-S zone the yards shall be as follows: 
A.  The front yard shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
B.  The side yard shall be a minimum of six feet on one side and nine feet on the other side except that on corner lots the setback for all buildings shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet on the side abutting a street. 
C.  The rear yard shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
D.  The entrance to a garage or carport, whether or not attached to a dwelling, shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the access street. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.08.070 - Height of building. 
    In an R-S zone no principal building shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half stories, whichever is less, and no accessory building shall exceed a height of two stories or twenty-two (22) feet, whichever is less. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.08.080 - Lot coverage. 
    In an R-S zone buildings shall not occupy more than an accumulative fifty-five (55) percent of the lot area. No lot shall have more than one principal building constructed thereon. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.08.090 - Special standards for certain uses (marked with an asterisk (*) in Sections 17.08.020 and 17.08.030). 
A.  Design Features for Single-Family Dwellings in a Single-Family Residential Zone. 
1.  All single-family dwellings shall enclose an area of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
2.  All single-family dwellings located within a single-family residential zone, except for manufactured dwellings located within a mobile home or manufactured home park, shall utilize at least three of the following design features, or other design features as approved by the planning commission: 
a.  Dormers; 
b.  Recessed entries; 
c.  Cupolas; 
d.  Bay or bow windows; 
e.  Window shutters; 
f.  Off-set on building face or roof (minimum twelve (12) inches); 
g.  Gables; 
h.  Covered porch entry or enclosed deck; 
i.  Pillars or posts; 
j.  Tile, wood shake, three-tab composite material, or wood shingle roof; 
k.  Horizontal lap siding or shakes; 
l.  Perimeter foundation of surfaced concrete or masonry; 
m.  Window trim (minimum four inches wide); 
n.  Balconies/decks; 
o.  Decorative pattern on exterior finish (e.g., scales/shingles, wainscoting, ornamentation, and similar features); 
p.  An alternative feature providing visual relief similar to above options; 
q.  Six inch minimum eaves plus gutters and downspouts. 
3.  All single-family dwellings will meet the minimum requirements for energy efficiency, as set by the Uniform Building Codes as adopted by the city, excepting manufactured dwellings which shall be certified by the manufacturer to have an exterior thermal envelope meeting performance standards which reduce heat loss to levels equivalent to the performance standards previously stated. Evidence demonstrating that the manufacture dwelling meets "Super Good Cents" energy efficiency standards is deemed to satisfy the exterior thermal envelope certification requirement. Additional manufacturers certification shall not be required. 
4.  Single-family dwellings shall have an attached or detached garage or carport. The structure shall be sided and roofed to match the dwelling. All driveways shall have an all-weather surface as approved by the Public Works Department. 
5.  Erosion control plans must be submitted prior to issuance of a building permit. 
6.  Single-family dwellings and other improvements shall be developed in compliance with all other applicable provisions set forth in the city zoning ordinance and the Uniform Building Codes. 
B.  Manufactured Dwellings. In addition to compliance with the provisions set forth above in Section 17.08.090(A), a manufactured dwelling shall be permitted outright subject to the following standards: 
1.  The manufactured dwelling shall be multi-sectional, double-wide or larger. A manufactured dwelling shall not be considered multi-sectional by virtue of having a tip-out section. The manufactured dwelling must show compliance with Department of Housing and Urban Development standards. 
2.  The manufactured dwelling shall minimally be placed on an excavated and backfilled foundation, with continuous footing foundation that is six inches nominal thickness by eighteen (18) inches wide with two continuous #4 rebar lapped twelve (12) inches and centered in each footing. The perimeter shall be enclosed with skirting of concrete or concrete block such that no more than twelve (12) inches of the enclosing material is exposed above grade. Where the building site has a sloped grade, no more than twelve (12) inches of the enclosing material shall be exposed on the uphill side of the home. If the manufactured dwelling is placed on a basement or in a floodplain, the twelve (12) inch limitation shall not apply. 
3.  The manufactured dwelling shall have a pitched roof with a minimum nominal slope of three feet in height for each twelve (12) feet in width (3:12). 
C.  Accessory Use Structures. Structures that are incidental and subordinate to the main structure on the property which are located in conjunction with the main uses are allowed. 
1.  If the accessory structure is ten (10) feet or less high and less than or equal to one hundred twenty (120) square feet, it can be located in the rear setback area, but no closer than five feet from the property lines. 
2.  All of the side and front yard setback must be met. 
3.  Accessory structures may be of any size provided no other portion of the zoning code such as the sections on lot coverage standards or the building height standards are violated. 
D.  Accessory Dwelling Units. One accessory dwelling unit may be allowed in conjunction with a single-family dwelling by conversion of existing space, by means of an addition, or as an accessory structure on the same lot with an existing dwelling, provided the following conditions can be met: 
1.  The owner(s) of the primary dwelling shall occupy at least one of the units. 
2.  Any additions shall not increase the gross floor area of the original dwelling by more than thirty-five (35) percent. Gross floor area of the accessory unit shall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent of the primary dwelling's total floor area, or six hundred fifty (650) square feet, whichever is the lesser. 
3.  One additional off-street parking space shall be provided in addition to the required parking for the primary dwelling. 
4.  Accessory dwelling shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material, and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material of the primary dwelling. 
5.  Units shall comply with fire and life-safety codes. 
6.  Any accessory use and/or dwelling associated with a conditional use shall be allowed only after approval has been granted through the conditional use procedure. A conflict of interpretation concerning whether a use or structure is an accessory use or structure shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions for a code interpretation. 
E.  Child Day Care Centers shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  A fence installed at least four feet in height around any play yard areas which cannot be breached by children. 
2.  Vehicular traffic and pedestrian facilities located and designed to prevent cars from backing into the street or crossing the pedestrian paths of children entering or leaving the building(s) or play area(s). 
3.  Off-street parking provided at one and a quarter (1.25) spaces per staff person for the shift with the highest number of staff persons. Any fraction of a space requires an additional space (e.g., 1.25 to 1.75 spaces would require two full spaces). 
4.  Located in a manner and with sufficient barriers to minimize disturbance to the surrounding properties and to prevent or minimize environmental/safety hazards for the children in the center. 
5.  Must be registered or certified through the State Department of Children and Family Services. 
(Ord. 1307 §§ 7-15, 2005; Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 17.12 - GENERAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-G) 
Sections: 

17.12.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the R-G zone is to encourage economical, higher-density housing in these designated areas. Additional traffic pressure and resulting noise and activity should be confined to the areas zoned R-G. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.12.020 - Uses permitted outright. 
    In the R-G zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright. Special standards for certain uses, marked with an asterisk (*), are found in Section 17.12.040. 
A.  Single-family dwellings and their accessory uses. 
B.  Multi-family dwelling units. 
C.  Manufactured dwellings.* 
D.  Accessory dwelling units.* 
E.  Home occupations which comply with Chapter 17.46. 
F.  Accessory use structures. 
G.  Registered and licensed residential care facility and residential care homes. 
H.  Transportation facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with the city Transportation System Plan). 
(Ord. 1307 §§ 16, 17, 2005; Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 10, 9-17-2014) 
17.12.030 - Conditional uses permitted. 
A.  Religious use. 
B.  Governmental structure or land use, including but not limited to a public park, playground, fire station, library, or museum. 
C.  Hospital, sanitarium, rest home, home for the aged, nursing home, convalescent home, group care center, or medical clinic. 
D.  School: nursery, primary, elementary, junior high, or senior high. 
E.  Pumping station and utility substation. 
F.  Boarding house, bed and breakfast facility, hostel, or residency hotel. 
G.  Child day care center.* 
H.  Manufactured dwellings that do not meet the minimum standards in Section 17.12.040(B). 
I.  Professional office use, bakery/catering, art gallery/studio, eating establishment, or other similar type of commercial use in conjunction with the residential use of the property that exceeds the standards for a home occupation. 
(Ord. 1307 § 18, 2005: Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.12.040 - Special standards for certain uses (marked with an asterisk (*) in Sections 17.12.020 and 17.12.030). 
A.  Accessory Dwelling Units. One accessory dwelling unit may be allowed in conjunction with a single-family dwelling by conversion of existing space, by means of an addition, or as an accessory structure on the same lot with an existing dwelling, provided the following conditions can be met: 
1.  The owner(s) of the primary dwelling shall occupy at least one of the units. 
2.  Any additions shall not increase the gross floor area of the original dwelling by more than thirty-five (35) percent. Gross floor area of the accessory unit shall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent of the primary dwelling's total floor area, or six hundred fifty (650) square feet, whichever is the lesser. 
3.  One additional off-street parking space shall be provided in addition to the required parking for the primary dwelling. 
4.  Accessory dwellings shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material, and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material of the primary dwelling. 
5.  Units shall comply with fire and life-safety codes. 
6.  Any accessory use and/or dwelling associated with a conditional use shall be allowed only after approval has been granted through the conditional use procedure. A conflict of interpretation concerning whether a use or structure is an accessory use or structure shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions for code interpretation. 
B.  Manufactured dwellings shall: 
1.  Be double-wide or wider; 
2.  Have a minimum of eight hundred fifty (850) square feet; 
3.  Have skirting that matches the dwelling or perimeter foundation of surfaced concrete or masonry; 
4.  Have a pitched roof with a minimum nominal slope of two feet in height for each twelve (12) feet in width (2:12); and 
5.  Comply with Department of Housing and Urban Development Standards. 
C.  Child day care centers shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  A fence installed at least four feet in height around any play yard areas which cannot be breached by children. 
2.  Vehicular traffic and pedestrian facilities located and designed to prevent cars from backing into the street or crossing the pedestrian paths of children entering or leaving the building(s) or play area(s). 
3.  Off-street parking provided at one and a quarter spaces per staff person for the shift with the highest number of staff persons. Any fraction of a space requires an additional space (e.g., one and a quarter to one and three-fourths spaces would require two full spaces). 
4.  Located in a manner and with sufficient barriers to minimize disturbance to the surrounding properties and to prevent or minimize environmental/safety hazards for the children in the center. 
5.  Must be registered or certified through the State Department of Children and Family Services. 
(Ord. 1307 §§ 19-23, 2005; Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.12.050 - Signs. 
    The following signs are permitted in the R-G zone: 
A.  One temporary sign, not illuminated and not to exceed nine square feet in area, advertising the sale, lease, or rental of the property. 
B.  Temporary political signs, not illuminated and not to exceed six square feet, to be removed within seven days after the pertinent election date. 
C.  One nonilluminated sign not to exceed six square feet in area in conjunction with a home occupation. 
(Ord. 1307 § 24, 2005: Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.12.060 - Lot size. 
    The minimum lot area shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet for a single-family dwelling plus one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet for each additional dwelling unit. Density in the R-G zone shall not exceed twenty-one (21) units per acre. 
(Ord. 1307 § 25, 2005: Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.12.070 - Setback requirements. 
    In an R-G zone the yards shall be as follows: 
A.  The front yard shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
B.  The side yard shall be a minimum of five feet on both sides except that on corner lots the setback for all buildings shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet on the side abutting a street. 
C.  The rear yard shall be a minimum of five feet. 
D.  The entrance to a garage or carport, whether or not attached to a dwelling, shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the access street. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.12.080 - Height of buildings. 
    In an R-G zone no principal building shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half stories, whichever is less. No accessory building shall exceed a height of two stories or twenty-two (22) feet, whichever is less. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.12.090 - Lot coverage. 
    In an R-G zone buildings shall not occupy more than an accumulative sixty-six (66) percent of the lot area. No lot shall have more than one principal building constructed thereon. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 17.16 - COMMERCIAL ZONE (C) 
Sections: 

17.16.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the C zone is to provide for retail and service commercial uses. It is also intended that these uses will supply personal services or goods to the average person and that a majority of the floor space will be devoted to that purpose. Compatible uses including public, civic, and institutional uses are also allowed. Residential use above the commercial main floor or located as not to prevent the main commercial use are allowed and encouraged especially in the Main Street District area. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.16.020 - Uses permitted outright. 
    In the C zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright. Special standards for certain uses, marked with an asterisk (*), are found in Section 17.16.050. 
A.  Retail trade or commercial services, except drive-in uses. 
B.  Entertainment (e.g., theaters, clubs, amusement uses). 
C.  Hotel, motels, bed and breakfast facility, hostel, or residency hotels. 
D.  Personal and professional services (e.g., child care center, catering/food services, restaurants, taverns, laundromats and dry cleaners, barber shops and salons, banks and financial institutions, or similar uses). 
E.  Medical and dental offices, clinics or laboratories. 
F.  Office uses (i.e., those not otherwise listed). 
G.  Public and institutional uses such as religious uses, clubs, lodges, government offices and facilities, public safety services, libraries, museums, community centers, public parking lots, parks, schools, or other similar uses. 
H.  Custom manufacturing of goods for retail and/or wholesale sale on the premises such as small-scale crafts, electronic equipment, bakery, furniture, art, sculpture, pottery, or other similar types of goods. 
I.  Truck and car repair and service-minor.* 
J.  Automobile service stations. 
K.  One accessory dwelling unit in conjunction with a commercial use and that meets applicable code requirements. 
L.  Temporary street vendors/seasonal commercial uses not to exceed six months. 
M.  Transportation facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with the city Transportation System Plan). 
(Ord. 1311 § 1, 2006; Ord. 1307 §§ 26, 27, 2005; Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 11, 9-17-2014) 
17.16.030 - Conditional uses permitted. 
A.  Animal hospitals or kennels. 
B.  Drive-in use for uses which are permitted outright or as conditional uses in the C zone. 
C.  Restaurants (take-out or drive-in). 
D.  Machine shops. 
E.  Mini-storage. 
F.  Multi-family dwelling units. 
G.  Overnight trailer park or recreational vehicle parks. 
H.  Pumping station or utility substations. 
I.  Truck and car repair and service - major. 
J.  Food production and/or beverage production, where the majority of the floor space will be devoted to providing personal services or goods to the public. 
K.  Medical marijuana dispensary facility. 
L.  Marijuana retailer. 
M.  Uses which are similar to those permitted outright or conditionally in the C zone and which conform to the purpose of the zone. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1354, § 1, 4-2-2014; Ord. No. 1357, §§ 2-5, 11-19-2014; Ord. No. 1360, §§ 2, 3, 2-3-2016) 
17.16.040 - Setback requirements. 
    Except for allowed uses within the Main Street District area as defined in Section 17.40.010, the front yard in a C zone shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.16.050 - Special standards for certain uses (marked with an asterisk (*) in Section 17.16.020). 
A.  Truck and Car Repair and Service - Minor: 
1.  All repair shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building. 
2.  Non-operating vehicles shall be stored overnight only within the building and outdoors in designated storage spaces. The maximum number of non-operating vehicle, outdoor, storage spaces shall be limited to one space for the first four repair bays with .25 storage spaces per each additional repair bay. Required customer/employee parking spaces shall not be used for overnight storage of non-operating vehicles. 
3.  Operating vehicles shall be parked overnight only in designated parking areas or within the building. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 17.20 - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE (L-I) 
Sections: 

17.20.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the light industrial zone is to implement the Toledo Comprehensive Land Use Plan by providing areas to serve a variety of manufacturing and other industrial activities with limited external impacts and to serve as a transition area between commercial, public and residential uses and heavier industrial uses. 
    Uses permitted in the L-I zone are often involved in the secondary processing of materials into components, the assembly of components into finished products, transportation, communication and utilities, wholesaling and warehousing. The external impact from these uses is generally less than uses permitted in the industrial zone, and transportation needs are often met by truck. Activities are generally located indoors, although there may be some outdoor storage, delivery, and loading. Offices and commercial uses are permitted on a limited basis, and only in conjunction with a permitted L-I use. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. No. 1345, § 2, 11-7-2012) 
17.20.020 - Uses permitted outright. 
    In the L-I zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted, subject to applicable standards, provided that the uses occur in a building or buildings that together do not exceed forty thousand (40,000) square feet of floor area. Special standards for certain uses (marked with an asterisk (*) are found in Section 17.20.040. 
A.  Assembly plants. 
B.  Limited manufacturing. 
C.  Contractor's warehouse and shop. 
D.  Crane business and related operations. 
E.  Storage in conjunction with a permitted use. 
F.  Machine shop and fabrication. 
G.  Mini-storage. 
H.  Parking in conjunction with uses permitted in the L-I zone. 
I.  Governmental and utility uses such as a pumping station, utility service yard, utility substation, public works shop, public safety services, or similar facilities. 
J.  Separate office building and/or retail sales in conjunction with a permitted use.* 
K.  Wholesale trade. 
L.  Auto body shop.* 
M.  Truck and car repair and service-minor.* 
N.  Boat building and/or boat repair and related launch facility. 
O.  Automobile service stations. 
P.  One security dwelling as a separate structure or one security dwelling as part of a building for light industrial use that complies with applicable codes for mixed use occupation. A security dwelling may only be allowed as an accessory use in conjunction with uses permitted in the L-I zone.* 
Q.  Temporary street vendors/seasonal commercial uses not to exceed six months. 
R.  Uses permitted outright in the commercial zone, but only on parcels with frontage on Business Highway 20. 
S.  Warehousing. 
T.  Railroad line and associated uses. 
U.  Commercial fishing gear maintenance, repair and storage. 
V.  Food production and/or beverage production. 
W.  Research and development. 
X.  Low intensity recreation. 
Y.  Timber-based operations, excluding milling and/or processing of wood and paper products. 
Z.  Commercial marina or moorage, and or charter boat operation. 
AA.  Transportation facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with the city Transportation System Plan). 
(Ord. 1311 § 2, 2006; Ord. 1307 §§ 28, 29, 2005; Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1345, § 3, 11-7-2012; Ord. No. 1355, § 12, 9-17-2014) 
17.20.030 - Conditional uses permitted. 
A.  A use permitted outright in the L-I zone, in which the building or buildings provided for the use exceed forty thousand (40,000) square feet of floor area. 
B.  Bulk storage of flammable liquids and gases. 
C.  Eating or drinking establishments, including take-out or drive-in services. 
D.  Industrial museum. 
E.  Processing and manufacturing operations, excluding the following: 
1.  Asphalt mixing and batching. 
2.  Explosives manufacturing. 
3.  Petroleum or petroleum products refining. 
4.  Fertilizer manufacture. 
5.  Gas manufacture. 
6.  Slaughterhouse or rendering facility. 
F.  Shipping facilities. 
G.  Shoreline stabilization as defined in the Lincoln County Estuary Management Plan. 
H.  Truck and car repair and service-major. 
I.  Waste transfer, recycling facility, or scrap metal facility. 
J.  Drive-in use for uses which are permitted outright or as conditional uses in the L-I zone. 
K.  Concrete mixing and batching, but excluding asphalt mixing and batching. 
L.  Uses which are similar in character, scale and performance to those permitted outright or conditionally in the L-I zone and which conform with the purpose of the zone. 
M.  Marijuana producer, marijuana processor, marijuana wholesaler, and marijuana laboratory. Marijuana retailer may be approved when medical marijuana dispensary facility is an approved use at the same site. 
N.  Uses which are similar in character, scale and performance to those permitted outright or conditionally in the L-I zone and which conform with the purpose of the zone. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1345, § 4, 11-7-2012; Ord. No. 1360, §§ 4, 5, 2-3-2016) 
17.20.040 - Special standards for certain uses (marked with an asterisk (*) in Section 17.20.020). 
A.  Auto Body Shop. The use must comply with the following standards: 
1.  Non-operating vehicles shall be stored overnight only within the building and outdoors in designated storage spaces. The maximum number of non-operating vehicle, outdoor, storage spaces shall be limited to two spaces per paint booth. Required customer/employee parking spaces shall not be used for overnight storage of non-operating vehicles. 
2.  Operating vehicles shall be parked overnight only in designated parking areas or within the building. 
B.  Truck and Car Repair and Service-Minor. The use must comply with the following standards: 
1.  Non-operating vehicles shall be stored overnight only within the building and outdoors in designated storage spaces. The maximum number of non-operating vehicle, outdoor, storage spaces shall be limited to one space for the first two repair bays and .50 storage spaces per each additional repair bay. Required customer/employee parking spaces shall not be used for overnight storage of non-operating vehicles. 
2.  Operating vehicles can be parked overnight only in designated parking areas or within the building. 
C.  A Security Dwelling as a Separate Structure. The dwelling must comply with the following standards: 
1.  It must be a site-built single-family structure which meets the Uniform Building Code or a manufactured home that meets the following criteria: 
a.  Be a single wide or wider. 
b.  Must comply with the current edition of the Oregon Manufactured Dwelling Specialty Code. 
c.  Have skirting that matches the dwelling or perimeter foundation of surfaced concrete or masonry. 
d.  The manufactured dwelling shall have a pitched roof with a minimum nominal slope of two feet in height for each twelve (12) feet in width (2:12), and shall be of three-tab or shake style roofing material. 
2.  The structure is limited to a size between two hundred forty (240) to eight hundred fifty (850) square feet and is limited in size to a one-bedroom unit. 
3.  Parking must be provided for the structure at the ratio of one space per unit and it must be adjacent to the dwelling. 
4.  The dwelling may be located within the industrial building or if it is in a separate structure: 
a.  A fenced, landscaped yard will be provided with setbacks as are required in the R-S zone from any of the industrial uses on the site and from the adjacent properties and roadways. 
b.  There shall not be any outdoor storage in the front yard or in any of the setback areas of the dwelling. 
5.  Security dwellings are to be located so as to minimize the number of dwellings in an industrial area/park, i.e., near the entry to the complex. 
D.  Separate office building and/or retail sales associated with a permitted use in the L-I zone. The dwelling must comply with the following standards: 
1.  Separate office buildings or retail sales associated with a permitted L-I use must not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total floor area of the building or buildings devoted to the use. 
(Ord. 1307 § 30, 2005; Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1345, § 5, 11-7-2012) 
Chapter 17.24 - INDUSTRIAL ZONE (I) 
Sections: 

17.24.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the I zone is to implement the Toledo Comprehensive Land Use Plan by providing sufficient, desirable land in the city for the expansion of existing industrial sites and for the construction and development of new industry. The I zone is intended to serve a range of manufacturing uses which may have significant external impacts. Uses permitted in the I zone often have transportation needs that include both rail and truck. Less intensive industrial uses that are permitted in the L-I [zone] are also permitted. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1345, § 6, 11-7-2012) 
17.24.020 - Uses permitted outright. 
    In the I zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright. Special standards for certain uses (marked with an asterisk (*) are found in Section 17.24.040. 
A.  Assembly plants. 
B.  Limited manufacturing. 
C.  Processing and manufacturing operations, except as noted in subsection FF. 
D.  Contractor's warehouse and shop. 
E.  Crane business and related operations. 
F.  Storage in conjunction with a permitted use. 
G.  Machine shop and fabrication. 
H.  Mini-storage. 
I.  Parking in conjunction with uses permitted in the I zone. 
J.  Governmental and utility uses such as a pumping station, utility service yard, utility substation, public works shop, public safety services, or similar facilities. 
K.  Separate office building and/or retail sales in conjunction with a permitted use.* 
L.  Wholesale trade. 
M.  Auto body shop.* 
N.  Truck and car repair and service-minor.* 
O.  Truck and car repair service-major. 
P.  Automobile service stations. 
Q.  One security dwelling as a separate structure or one security dwelling as part of a building for industrial use that complies with applicable codes for mixed use occupation. A security dwelling may only be allowed as an accessory use in conjunction with uses permitted in the I zone.* 
R.  Temporary street vendors/seasonal commercial uses not to exceed six months. 
S.  Warehousing. 
T.  Railroad line and associated uses. 
U.  Commercial fishing gear maintenance, repair and storage. 
V.  Food production and/or beverage production. 
W.  Research and development. 
X.  Low intensity recreation. 
Y.  Timber-based operations. 
Z.  Shipping facilities. 
AA.  Waste transfer, recycling facility, or scrap metal facility. 
BB.  Bulk storage of flammable liquids and gases. 
CC.  Boat building and/or boat repair and related launch facility. 
DD.  Commercial marina or moorage, and or charter boat operation. 
EE.  Transportation facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with the city Transportation System Plan). 
FF.  The following processing and manufacturing operations are not permitted: 
1.  Asphalt mixing and batching. 
2.  Explosives manufacturing. 
3.  Petroleum or petroleum products refining. 
4.  Fertilizer manufacture. 
5.  Gas manufacture. 
6.  Slaughterhouse or rendering facility. 
(Ord. 1311 § 3, 2006; Ord. 1307 § 31, 2005; Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1345, § 7, 11-7-2012; Ord. No. 1355, § 13, 9-17-2014) 
17.24.030 - Conditional uses permitted. 
A.  Mineral resource mining, recovery, stockpiling and processing. 
B.  Concrete mixing and batching, but excluding asphalt mixing and batching. 
C.  Shoreline stabilization as defined in the Lincoln County Estuary Management Plan. 
D.  Eating or drinking establishments, including take-out or drive-in services. 
E.  Industrial museum. 
F.  Drive-in use for uses which are permitted outright or as conditional uses in the I zone. 
G.  Marijuana producer, marijuana processor, marijuana wholesaler, and marijuana laboratory. 
H.  Uses which are similar in character, scale and performance to those permitted outright or conditionally in the I zone and which conform with the purpose of the zone. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1345, § 8, 11-7-2012; Ord. No. 1360, §§ 6, 7, 2-3-2016) 
17.24.040 - Special standards for certain uses (marked with an asterisk (*) in Section 17.24.020). 
A.  Auto Body Shop. The use must comply with the following standards: 
1.  Non-operating vehicles shall be stored overnight only within the building and outdoors in designated storage spaces. The maximum number of non-operating vehicle, outdoor, storage spaces shall be limited to two spaces per paint booth. Required customer/employee parking spaces shall not be used for overnight storage of non-operating vehicles. 
2.  Operating vehicles shall be parked overnight only in designated parking areas or within the building. 
B.  Truck and Car Repair and Service-Minor. The use must comply with the following standards: 
1.  Non-operating vehicles shall be stored overnight only within the building and outdoors in designated storage spaces. The maximum number of non-operating vehicle, outdoor, storage spaces shall be limited to one space for the first two repair bays and .50 storage spaces per each additional repair bay. Required customer/employee parking spaces shall not be used for overnight storage of non-operating vehicles. 
2.  Operating vehicles can be parked overnight only in designated parking areas or within the building. 
C.  A Security Dwelling as a Separate Structure. The dwelling must comply with the following standards: 
1.  It must be a site-built single-family structure which meets the Uniform Building Code or a manufactured home that meets the following criteria: 
a.  Be a single wide or wider. 
b.  Must comply with the current edition of the Oregon Manufactured Dwelling Specialty Code. 
c.  Have skirting that matches the dwelling or perimeter foundation of surfaced concrete or masonry. 
d.  The manufactured dwelling shall have a pitched roof with a minimum nominal slope of two feet in height for each twelve (12) feet in width (2:12), and shall be of three-tab or shake style roofing material. 
2.  The structure is limited to a size between two hundred forty (240) to eight hundred fifty (850) square feet and is limited in size to a one-bedroom unit. 
3.  Parking must be provided for the structure at the ratio of one space per unit and it must be adjacent to the dwelling. 
4.  The dwelling may be located within the industrial building or if it is in a separate structure: 
a.  A fenced, landscaped yard will be provided with setbacks as are required in the R-S zone from any of the industrial uses on the site and from the adjacent properties and roadways. 
b.  There shall not be any outdoor storage in the front yard or in any of the setback areas of the dwelling. 
5.  Security dwellings are to be located so as to minimize the number of dwellings in an industrial area/park, i.e., near the entry to the complex. 
D.  Separate office building and/or retail sales associated with a permitted use in the I zone. The dwelling must comply with the following standards: 
1.  Separate office buildings or retail sales associated with a permitted industrial use must not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total floor area of the building or buildings devoted to the use. 
(Ord. 1307 §§ 32, 33, 2005; Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. No. 1345, § 9, 11-7-2012) 
Chapter 17.28 - NATURAL RESOURCE ZONE (N-R) 
Sections: 

17.28.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the N-R zone is to protect land and water important as habitat for plant, animal, or marine life for future generations, to ensure open spaces, to promote a healthy and visually attractive environment, and to provide for human development and enrichment by providing recreational areas, facilities, and opportunities. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.28.020 - Uses permitted outright. 
    In an N-R zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright: 
A.  Planting, cultivation and harvesting of timber or agricultural crops. 
B  Pasture. 
C.  One residence per tax lot existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, provided the residence is occupied in conjunction with an agricultural use. 
D.  Accessory out-buildings. 
E.  Yaquina Estuary Management Unit #33 shall be governed by the permitted uses established through the Yaquina Bay Task Force. 
F.  Public park facilities. 
G.  Transportation facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with the city Transportation System Plan). 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 14, 9-17-2014) 
17.28.030 - Conditional uses permitted. 
A.  Pumping station and utility substation. 
B.  Structural shoreline stabilization. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 17.32 - WATER-DEPENDENT ZONE (W-D) 
Sections: 

17.32.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the W-D zone is to provide for water-dependent uses which need contact with or use of the water for water-borne transportation, recreation, energy production, or water supply. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.32.020 - Uses permitted outright. 
    In a W-D zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright: 
A.  Marine terminal or transfer facility for fish, timber, or other water-borne commerce. 
B.  Industrial processing plant which requires access to water body during processing operation. 
C.  Log storage that requires access to water. 
D.  Boat building or boat repair and launch facility. 
E.  Seafood processing. 
F.  Marine fuel sales. 
G.  Charter boat operation. 
H.  Marine ways and boat ramp. 
I.  Commercial marina or moorage. 
J.  One security dwelling as part of a building for water-dependent use that complies with applicable codes for mixed use occupation. 
K.  Any shoreland use or activity necessary in relation to a use allowed under Section 17.32.020. 
L.  Any other use that conforms with the definition of water-dependent development in Section 17.04.020. 
M.  Low intensity recreation providing waterfront access. 
N.  Transportation facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with the city Transportation System Plan). 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1345, § 10, 11-7-2012; Ord. No. 1355, § 15, 9-17-2014) 
17.32.030 - Conditional uses permitted. 
A.  Boat sales. 
B.  Bait and tackle shop. 
C.  Warehouse and storage area for marine equipment. 
D.  Seafood processing plant, smoking or canning establishment or retail outlet that does not require access to water. 
E.  Restaurant in conjunction with and incidental to a water-dependent use which provides a waterfront viewing experience and which either provides public waterfront access with a waterfront walkway or pavilion, or is located on a floor above a water-dependent use. 
F.  Public accommodation in conjunction with a water-dependent use that provides marina facility or public waterfront walkway or pavilion. 
G.  Parking lot associated with a permitted or conditional use in the W-D zone. 
H.  Marine equipment or supply sales. 
I.  Other water-related development in conjunction with a water-dependent use. 
J.  A non-water-dependent or non-water-related use, provided no structures or alterations are involved which would prevent future use of the site for water-dependent use. 
K.  Structural shoreline stabilization as defined in the Lincoln County Estuary Management Plan as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1345, §§ 11-13, 11-7-2012) 
17.32.040 - Other uses permitted. 
    A permitted or conditional use as specified within Management Unit Numbers 12, 25, 30, 31, 32, and 33 as contained within the Lincoln County Estuary Management Plan, which is hereby incorporated into this section by reference. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1345, § 14, 11-7-2012) 
Chapter 17.36 - PUBLIC LANDS ZONE (P-L) 
Sections: 

17.36.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the P-L zone is to implement the Toledo Comprehensive Land Use Plan by indicating lands currently providing areas to benefit the public, regardless of ownership of the lot or parcel, and used for a public use such as schools and parks acknowledging that such lands may be put to a variety of uses. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1364, § 3, 11-2-2016) 
17.36.020 - Uses permitted outright. 
    In a P-L zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright: 
A.  Uses existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and the expansion of those uses are permitted outright. 
B.  Transportation facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with the city Transportation System Plan). 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 16, 9-17-2014) 
17.36.030 - Conditional uses permitted. 
A.  Any other use necessary to benefit the public. 
B.  A residential and/or commercial mixed use may be conditionally allowed as an accessory structure or use, in addition to a public use, if incidental and subordinate to the public use. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1364, § 4, 5, 11-2-2016) 
17.36.040 - Special standards. 
    A residential and/or commercial accessory use may be allowed in the same structure or on the same lot or parcel as the public use, provided all applicable development standards and building code requirements for the nearest residential and/or commercial zone are met. 
(Ord. No. 1364, § 6, 11-2-2016) 
17.36.050 - Abandoned use. 
    After a public use is abandoned for more than six months, the properties are no longer eligible for the P-L zone designation and must be rezoned through a comprehensive land use plan map amendment. 
(Ord. No. 1364, § 7, 11-2-2016) 
Chapter 17.40 - MAIN STREET DISTRICT OVERLAY 
Sections: 

17.40.010 - Purpose and definition. 
    The purpose of the Main Street District Overlay is to recognize the unique attributes and development pattern of the Toledo Main Street area. For the purpose of this ordinance the Main Street District is defined as the commercially zoned real property fronting the following streets: 
A.  Main Street from Highway 20 south to Butler Bridge Road; 
B.  Main Street from Highway 20 north to NE 4th Street; 
C.  2nd Street North from the Southern Pacific Railroad tracks east to Highway 20; 
D.  1st Street North from the Southern Pacific Railroad tracks east to Highway 20; 
E.  Graham Street from the Southern Pacific Railroad tracks east to Alder Street; 
F.  Alder Street from Business Highway 20 south to Graham Street; and 
G.  The south side of Highway 20 from Main Street southeast to Alder Street. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.40.020 - Requirements from which Main Street District uses are exempt. 
    The Main Street District is exempt from the following sections of the code to the extent that the requirements are not included as a condition of approval of a land use permit. 
A.  Setback requirements of the Commercial Zone of Section 17.16.040. 
B.  Parking requirements of Section 17.44.030. 
C.  Landscaping requirements of Section 17.52.020. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 17.44 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 
Sections: 

17.44.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide basic and flexible standards for development of vehicle parking. The design of parking areas is critically important to the viability of some commercial areas, pedestrian and driver safety, the efficient and safe operation of adjoining streets, and community image and livability. Historically, some communities have required more parking than is necessary for some land uses resulting in the paving of extensive areas of land that could be put to better use. This chapter recognizes that each development has unique parking needs by providing a flexible approach for determining parking space requirements. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.44.020 - Applicability. 
    All developments subject to development review (Chapter 17.60), including development of parking facilities, shall comply with the provisions of this section. At the time of erection of a new building or at the time of enlargement or change in use of an existing building within any zone in the city except the Main Street District area as defined by Section 17.40.010, off-street parking spaces shall be provided for the increased parking requirements as indicated in this section unless greater requirements are otherwise established. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.44.030 - Vehicle parking standards. 
    The minimum number of required off-street vehicle parking spaces shall be determined in accordance with the following standards. Off-street parking spaces may include spaces in garages, carports, parking lots, and/or driveways if vehicles are not parked in a vehicle travel lane (including emergency or fire access lanes), public right-of-way, pathway or landscape area. Credit shall be allowed for "on-street parking", as provided in Section 17.44.040. 
A.  Residential Uses: 
1.  Single-family detached housing. Two parking spaces shall be provided for each detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home on an individual lot. 
2.  Two- and three-family housing. 1.5 parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
3.  Multi-family and single-family attached housing. 
a.  Studio units or one-bedroom units less than five hundred (500) sq. ft. - one space/unit. 
b.  One-bedroom units five hundred (500) sq. ft. or larger - 1.50 spaces/unit. 
c.  Two-bedroom units - 1.75 spaces/unit. 
d.  Three-bedroom units - 2.00 spaces/unit. 
e.  Retirement complexes for seniors fifty five (55) years or greater - one space/unit. 
4.  Rooming and boarding houses, dormitories. Two spaces for each three guest rooms, or one space per three beds, whichever is more. 
5.  Senior housing. Same as for retirement complexes. 
6.  Manufactured home parks. Same as for single-family detached housing. 
7.  Accessory dwelling. One parking space required. 
B.  Commercial Uses: 
1.  Auto, boat or trailer sales, retail nurseries and similar bulk retail uses. One space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of the first ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross land area; plus one space per five thousand (5,000) square feet for the excess over ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross land area; and one space per two employees. 
2.  Business, general retail, personal services. 
a.  General - one space per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Furniture and appliances - one space per seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of gross floor area. 
3.  Chapels and mortuaries. One space per four fixed seats in the main chapel. 
4.  Hotels and motels. One space for each guest room, plus one space for the manager. 
5.  Offices. 
a.  Medical and Dental Offices - one space per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  General Offices - one space per four hundred fifty (450) square feet of gross floor area. 
6.  Restaurants, bars, ice cream parlors and similar uses. One space per four seats or one space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross leasable floor area, whichever is less. 
7.  Theaters, auditoriums, stadiums, gymnasiums, similar uses. One space per four seats. 
C.  Industrial Uses: 
1.  Industrial uses, except warehousing. One space per two employees on the largest shift or for each seven hundred (700) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is less, plus one space per company vehicle. 
2.  Warehousing. One space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area or for each two employees, whichever is greater, plus one space per company vehicle. 
3.  Public utilities (gas, water, telephone, etc.), not including business offices. One space per two employees on the largest shift, plus one space per company vehicle; a minimum of two spaces is required. 
D.  Public and Institutional Uses: 
1.  Child care centers having thirteen (13) or more children. One space per two employees; a minimum of two spaces is required except as otherwise defined in an individual zone. 
2.  Religious uses and places of worship. One space per four seats. 
3.  Golf courses, except miniature. Four spaces per hole, plus additional spaces for auxiliary uses set forth in this section. Miniature golf courses - one space per hole. 
4.  Hospitals. Two spaces per patient bed. 
5.  Nursing and convalescent homes. One space per three patient beds. 
6.  Rest homes, homes for the aged, or assisted living. One space per two patient beds or one space per apartment unit. 
7.  Schools, elementary and middle school. One and one-half spaces per classroom, or the requirements for public assembly areas as set forth herein, whichever is greater. 
8.  High schools. One and one-half spaces per classroom, plus one space per ten (10) students the school is designed to accommodate, or one space per four public assembly seats as set forth herein, whichever is greater. 
9.  Colleges, universities and trade schools. One and one half spaces per classroom, plus one space per five students the school is designed to accommodate, plus requirements for on campus housing. 
E.  Unspecified Uses: 
    Where a use is not specifically listed in this table, parking requirements shall be determined by finding that a use is similar to those listed in terms of parking needs. 
(Ord. 1307 § 34, 2005; Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.44.040 - On-street parking credit. 
    The amount of off-street parking required shall be reduced by one off-street parking space for every on-street parking space adjacent to the development. On-street parking shall follow the established configuration of existing on-street parking, except that angled parking may be allowed for some streets, where permitted by city of Toledo, ODOT and/or Lincoln County standards. The following constitutes an on-street parking space: 
A.  Parallel parking, each twenty-four (24) feet of uninterrupted curb; 
B.  Diagonal parking per standard, each with eighteen (18) (thirty (30) degree) to ten (10) feet of curb (sixty (60) degree): 
C.  Perpendicular (ninety (90) degree) parking, each with nine feet of curb; 
D.  Curb space must be connected to the lot which contains the use; 
E.  Parking spaces that would not obstruct a required clear vision area, nor any other parking that violates any law or street standard; and 
F.  On-street parking spaces credited for a specific use may not be used exclusively by that use, but shall be available for general public use at all times. No signs or actions limiting general public use of on-street spaces is permitted by the property owner. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.44.050 - Parking location and shared parking. 
A.  Location. Vehicle parking for new uses is allowed only on approved parking shoulders (streets), within garages, carports and other structures, or on driveways or parking lots that have been developed in conformance with this code. 
B.  Off-site Parking. Except for single-family dwellings, the vehicle parking spaces required by this chapter may be located on another parcel of land, provided the parcel is within a reasonable walking distance or five hundred (500) feet of the use it serves. The distance from the parking area to the use shall be measured from the nearest parking space to a building entrance, following a sidewalk or other pedestrian route. The right to use the off-site parking must be evidenced by a recorded deed, lease, easement, or similar written instrument. 
C.  Mixed Uses. If more than one type of land use occupies a single structure or parcel of land, the total requirements for off-street automobile parking shall be the sum of the requirements for all uses, unless it can be shown that the peak parking demands are actually less (i.e., the uses operate on different days or at different times of the day). In that case, the total requirements shall be reduced accordingly. 
D.  Shared Parking. Required parking facilities for two or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking facilities used jointly, to the extent that the owners or operators show that the need for parking facilities does not materially overlap (e.g., uses primarily of a daytime versus nighttime nature), and provided that the right of joint use is evidenced by a recorded deed, lease, contract, or similar written instrument establishing the joint use. 
E.  Availability of Facilities. Owners of off-street parking facilities may post a sign indicating that all parking on the site is available only for residents, customer and/or employees, as applicable. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.44.060 - Delivery and loading facilities. 
    Within the industrial and light industrial zones, delivery and loading facilities are not permitted in required setback areas. On lots abutting parcels zoned general residential or single-family residential, delivery and loading facilities shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from abutting property lines. 
(Ord. No. 1345, § 15, 11-7-2012) 
17.44.070 - Bicycle parking requirements. 
A.  Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Spaces. Uses shall provide bicycle parking spaces, as designated in the table below. 
Table 17.44.070 
Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Spaces 
Use Categories Required Spaces General Residential Uses Apartment dwellings, condominium or time share project (multifamily-more than 2-family dwellings only) 1 per 6 units Rooming or boarding house or fraternity 2, or 1 per 20 bedrooms Commercial Uses Church 2, or 1 per 4,000 sq. ft. of net building area Public or equivalent private or parochial schools 1 per every 4 classrooms, or per conditional use permit review All other uses 2, or 1 per 12,000 sq. ft. of floor area, or per conditional use permit review Natural Resource Uses Public parks (active recreation areas only) 2 Industrial or Light Industrial Uses All uses 2, or 1 per 40,000 sq. ft. of floor area Other uses Determined through land use review, site design review, or conditional use permit review, as applicable  
B.  Exemptions. This section does not apply to single-family and two-family housing (attached, detached, or manufactured housing), home occupations, agriculture, and livestock uses. 
C.  Location and Design. Bicycle parking should be no farther from the main building entrance than the distance to the closest vehicle parking space. When allowed within a public right-of-way, bicycle parking shall be coordinated with the design of street furniture, as applicable. 
D.  Lighting. For security, bicycle parking shall be lit at least as well as vehicle parking. 
E.  Hazards. Bicycle parking shall not impede or create a hazard to pedestrians. Parking areas shall be located so as to not conflict with vision clearance standards. 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 17, 9-17-2014) 
17.44.080 - Bicycle parking credit. 
A.  Bicycle Parking Credit. Up to twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of required vehicle parking may be reduced by one vehicle parking space for each two off-street bicycle parking spaces provided. 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 18, 9-17-2014) 
Chapter 17.46 - HOME OCCUPATION PERMITS 
Sections: 

17.46.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to encourage those who are engaged in small commercial ventures which could not necessarily be sustained if it were necessary to lease commercial quarters or which, by the nature of the venture, are appropriate in scale and impact to be operated within a residence. Home occupations are encouraged for their contribution in reducing the number of vehicle trips often generated by conventional businesses. They are permitted in all residential units (dwellings), subject to the following standards. 
(Ord. 1307 § 35 (part), 2005) 
17.46.020 - Appearance of residence. 
A.  The home occupation shall be restricted to lawfully-built enclosed structures and be conducted in such a manner as not to give an outward appearance of a business. 
B.  The home occupation shall not result in any structural alterations or additions to a structure that will change its primary use or building code occupancy classification. 
C.  The home occupation shall not violate any conditions of development approval. 
D.  No products and/or equipment produced or used by the home occupation may be displayed to be visible from outside any structure. 
(Ord. 1307 § 35 (part), 2005) 
17.46.030 - Storage. 
A.  Outside storage, visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent properties is prohibited. 
B.  On-site storage of hazardous materials (including toxic, explosive, noxious, combustible or flammable) beyond those normally incidental to residential use is prohibited. 
C.  Storage of inventory or products and all other equipment, fixtures, and activities associated with the home occupation shall be allowed in any structure. 
(Ord. 1307 § 35 (part), 2005) 
17.46.040 - Employees. 
A.  Other than family members residing within the dwelling located on the home occupation site, there shall be no employees at the home occupation site at any given time. 
B.  Additional individuals may be employed by or associated with the home occupation, so long as they do not report to work or pick-up/deliver at the home. 
C.  The home occupation site shall not be routinely used as a headquarters for the assembly of employees for instruction or other purposes, including dispatch to other locations. 
D.  Authorization for up to one full-time equivalent (forty (40) hours per week) may be granted but requires one additional off-street parking space. The requirement will be evaluated as a Class A variance in Section 17.68.030(C). Full-time equivalent employee does not include contract service workers that are not specifically required for the home occupation, such as, but not limited to, contractors, house cleaning, handyman, and landscapers. 
(Ord. 1307 § 35 (part), 2005) 
17.46.050 - Advertising and signs. 
    In no case shall a sign exceed six square feet. 
(Ord. 1307 § 35 (part), 2005) 
17.46.060 - Vehicles, parking, and traffic. 
A.  One commercially-licensed vehicle associated with the home occupation is allowed at the home occupation site. It shall be of a size that would not overhang into the public right-of-way when parked in the driveway or other location on the home occupation site. 
B.  There shall be no more than three commercial vehicle deliveries to or from the home occupation site daily. 
C.  There shall be no more than one client's or customer's vehicle at any one time and no more than eight per day at the home occupation site. 
(Ord. 1307 § 35 (part), 2005) 
17.46.070 - Business hours. 
    There shall be no restriction on business hours, except that clients or customers are permitted at the home occupation from eight a.m. to eight p.m. only. 
(Ord. 1307 § 35 (part), 2005) 
17.46.080 - Prohibited home occupation uses. 
A.  Any activity that produces radio or TV interference, noise, glare, vibration, smoke, or odor beyond allowable levels as determined by local, state, or federal standards, or that can be detected beyond the property line is prohibited. 
B.  Any activity involving on-site retail sales is prohibited, except that the sale of items that are incidental to a permitted home occupation is allowable. For example, the sale of lesson books or sheet music from music teachers, art or craft supplies from arts or craft instructors, computer software from computer consultants, and similar incidental items for sale by home businesses are allowed. 
C.  Any uses described in this section or uses with similar objectionable impacts because of motor vehicle traffic, noise, glare, odor, dust, smoke, or vibration, such as, but not limited to: 
1.  Ambulance service; 
2.  Animal hospital, on-site veterinary services, kennels, or animal boarding; 
3.  Auto or other vehicle repair, including auto painting; 
4.  Repair, reconditioning or storage of motorized vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles, airplanes, or large equipment on-site. 
D.  Medical marijuana dispensary facilities, whether operating illegally without a business license or registered pursuant to ORS 475.314. 
E.  Marijuana producer, marijuana processor, marijuana retailer, marijuana wholesaler, and marijuana laboratory. 
(Ord. 1307 § 35 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 1357, § 6, 11-19-2014; Ord. No. 1360, § 8, 2-3-2016) 
17.46.090 - Exceptions. 
    The following exceptions to the home occupation chapter shall apply for certain home occupations as listed: 
A.  Day Care Home. 
1.  Vehicle round trips may be increased to sixteen (16). 
2.  Hours of operation may be expanded to six a.m. to eight p.m. 
(Ord. 1307 § 35 (part), 2005) 
17.46.100 - Enforcement. 
    The community development director may visit and inspect the site of home occupations in accordance with this chapter periodically to insure compliance with all applicable regulations, during normal business hours, and with reasonable notice. A city of Toledo business license is required for all home occupations. 
(Ord. 1307 § 35 (part), 2005) 
Chapter 17.48 - ACCESS AND CLEAR VISION REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 

17.48.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that developments provide safe and efficient access and circulation while recognizing the role that topography plays in development in Toledo. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.48.020 - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply to all public streets within the city and to all properties that abut these streets. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.48.030 - Access permit required. 
    Access to a public street requires an access permit (a Type I permit) in accordance with the following procedures: 
A.  Permits for access to city streets shall be subject to review and approval by the city manager based on the standards contained in this chapter, the city Public Improvements Requirements and Design Standards, the city Transportation System Plan, and/or the Uniform Fire Code as applicable. An access permit may be in the form of a letter to the applicant, attached to a land use decision notice, or included as part of the development review/building permit approval. 
B.  Permits for access to state highways shall be subject to review and approval by the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT), except when ODOT has delegated this responsibility to the city or Lincoln County. In that case, the city or county shall determine whether access is granted based on its adopted standards. 
C.  Permits for access to county roads/highways shall be subject to review and approval by Lincoln County, except where the county has delegated this responsibility to the city, in which case the city shall determine whether access is granted based on adopted city standards. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1355, § 19, 9-17-2014) 
17.48.040 - Conditions of approval. 
    The city or other agency with access permit jurisdiction may require the closing or consolidation of existing curb cuts or other vehicle access points, recording reciprocal access easements (i.e., for shared driveways), installation of traffic control devices or traffic safety devices, and/or other mitigation as a condition of granting an access permit, to ensure the safe and efficient operation of the street and highway system. The city is authorized to require greater requirements for access in accordance with the adopted city standards for permits issued by any jurisdiction within the city limits. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.48.050 - Access options. 
    When vehicle access is required for development (i.e., for off-street parking, delivery, service, drive-through facilities, etc.), access shall be provided by one of the following methods. These methods are "options" to the developer unless one method has been specifically required in conjunction with a land use application. 
A.  Option 1. Access is from an existing or proposed alley or mid-block lane. If a property has access to an alley or lane, direct access to a public street is not required. 
B.  Option 2. Access is from a private street or driveway connected to an adjoining property that has direct access to a public street (i.e., "shared driveway"). A public access easement covering the driveway shall be recorded to assure access to the closest public street for all users of the private street/drive. 
C.  Option 3. Access is from a public street adjacent to the development parcel. If practicable, the owner/developer may be required to close or consolidate an existing access point as a condition of approving a new access. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.48.055 - Driveway spacing standards. 
Private Access Driveway Spacing Standards 
Functional Classification Driveway Spacing 
(measured between curb cuts) Arterial 40 feet Collector 20 feet Local Street (includes Main Street and streets designated as commercial streets) 10 feet  
(Ord. No. 1355, § 20, 9-17-2014) 
_____
17.48.060 - Clear-vision areas. 
    A clear-vision area shall be maintained on the corners of all property at the intersection of two streets, a street and alley/mid-block lane, or a street and a railroad. 
A.  A clear-vision area shall consist of a triangular area, two sides of which are lot lines measured from the corner intersection of the street lot lines for a distance specified below in this section or, where the lot lines have rounded corners, the lot lines extended in a straight line to a point of intersection and so measured and the third side of which is a line across the corner of the lot joining the non-intersecting ends of the other two sides. 
B.  A clear-vision area shall contain no planting, fence, wall, structure, or temporary or permanent obstruction exceeding two and a half feet in height, measured from the top of the curb or, where no curb exists, from the established street center line grade, except that trees exceeding this height may be located in this area, provided all branches and foliage are removed to a height eight feet above grade. 
C.  The following measurements shall establish clear-vision areas: 
1.  In residential zones the minimum distance shall be thirty (30) feet, or, at intersections with an alley/mid-block lane, ten (10) feet. 
2.  In all other zones, the minimum distance shall be fifteen (15) feet, or at intersections with an alley, ten (10) feet, except that when the angle of intersection between streets, other than an alley, is less than thirty (30) degrees, the distance shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 17.52 - LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE COMMERCIAL, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND WATER-DEPENDENT ZONES 
Sections: 

17.52.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote community health, safety, and welfare by setting development standards for landscaping, street trees, fences and walls. Together, these elements of the natural and built environment contribute to the visual quality, environmental health and character of the community. Trees provide climate control through shading during summer months and wind screening during winter. Walls, fences, trees and other landscape materials also provide vital screening and buffering between land uses. Landscaped areas help to control surface water drainage and can improve water quality, as compared to paved or built surfaces. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.52.020 - Requirement to landscape. 
    Any new commercial, light industrial, industrial or water-dependent use on an existing vacant lot as of the date of passage of this ordinance or on a lot that subsequently becomes vacant for a period of more than one year are required to provide landscaping as part of the development/building permit process. 
A.  The following standards are intended to serve as minimum landscaping and screening standards: 
1.  A minimum of five percent of the parcel or lot shall be landscaped. If two or more lots are utilized for the use, the five percent requirement shall apply for each lot though the landscaping may be placed or retained on one lot or on each of the lots. 
2.  A suitable tree (minimum six feet in height at time of planting) shall be planted for every twenty (20) feet (or portion of twenty (20) feet) of lot line fronting any developed street or road. For each tree retained on the proposed development site, the tree planting requirement shall be reduced by one. 
3.  In selecting trees, the following requirements shall apply: 
a.  If planted near or under power lines, trees must be selected that will grow no higher than twenty-five (25) feet at maturity such as Amur Maple, Vine Maple, Flowering Cherries, and Flowering Plum. 
b.  If planted near sewer or water lines, no cedars, poplars, willows or alders shall be planted because of the potential for line damage from roots. 
c.  If not planted near or under power lines, or near sewer or water lines, then any tree species is acceptable. 
4.  Trees identified for meeting the landscaping requirement shall be subject to the city of Toledo tree permit or removal requirements. 
B.  On commercial, industrial, light industrial, and water-dependent property abutting a residentially zoned property, an evergreen hedge, evergreen trees or sight-obscuring fence must be placed to screen the view of storage areas and operations not enclosed in a building. Fences shall not be less than six feet nor more than eight feet in height. Evergreen hedges or trees shall not be less than six feet in height. 
C.  A landscape plan shall be submitted as part of the building permit site plan or as a separate plan in conjunction with a building permit. The landscape plan shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. 
D.  An alternative landscape plan may be submitted to the planning commission for consideration as a substitute for the above standards. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 17.56 - NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES 
Sections: 

17.56.010 - Purpose. 
    This chapter acknowledges and deals with nonconforming structures and uses. The purpose of this section is to preserve those structures and uses as they exist at the time that this ordinance or its amendments become effective, to allow a minimum of further expansion or upgrading and to assure that improvement and change to such structures and uses will, as much as possible, be in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.56.020 - Continuation of nonconforming structure and use. 
    Subject to the provisions of this ordinance, a nonconforming structure and a nonconforming use may be continued. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.56.030 - Change of a nonconforming use. 
    If a nonconforming use is changed, it shall be changed to a use conforming to the zoning regulations and, after change, shall not be changed back to the original nonconforming use. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.56.040 - Discontinuance of a nonconforming use. 
    If a nonconforming use is discontinued from active use for a period of one year, further use of the property shall be for a use conforming with this ordinance. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.56.050 - Change of a nonconforming structure. 
    A nonconforming structure may be altered or expanded, providing the use of the structure is not changed and the resulting structure conforms with the ordinance requirements for the zone in which the use of the structure would be allowed. If more than one set of requirements is appropriate, the most restrictive set shall apply. 
(Ord. 1307 § 36, 2005: Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.56.060 - Destruction of a nonconforming structure. 
    If a nonconforming structure or use is destroyed by any cause, the structure may not be rebuilt. A Class B variance is necessary to repair or rebuild a significantly damaged nonconforming use or structure. 
(Ord. 1307 § 37, 2005: Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.56.070 - Completion of building. 
    Nothing contained in this ordinance shall require any change in the plans, construction, alteration, or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been issued and construction work has commenced prior to the adoption of this ordinance, except that if the designated use will be nonconforming it shall, for the purpose of Chapter 17.56, be a discontinued use if not in operation within one year of the date of issuance of the building permit. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 17.60 - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PERMITS 
Sections: 

17.60.010 - Purpose. 
    Development review is required for all types of development requiring a building permit to ensure that the development conforms to the applicable municipal code criteria and/or conditions of approval for an approved land use permit. Development review is a nondiscretionary or "ministerial" review conducted by the city manager without a public hearing. The development review permit is intended to distinguish between the review of an application by the city of Toledo for conformance with the applicable municipal code, fire codes, and other state and federal requirements and the review of the proposed structure under the Uniform Building Code and related codes. The development review permit is a Type I permit. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.60.020 - Approval criteria. 
A.  The proposed land use is permitted by the underlying zone. 
B.  The land use, building/yard setback, lot area, lot dimension, lot coverage, building height, access requirements, drainage requirements, wetland requirements and other applicable standards have been met. 
C.  All applicable fire code standards are met. 
D.  The necessary building permit information required by Lincoln County or the city of Toledo has been submitted. 
E.  Any necessary variances or other land use permits have been obtained and the application meets any required conditions of approval for those permits. 
F.  The approval shall lapse, and a new application shall be required, if a building permit has not been issued within twelve (12) months of development review approval, or if development of the site is in violation of the approved plan or other applicable codes. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 17.64 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 
Sections: 

17.64.010 - Purpose. 
    A use is designated as a conditional use within a given zone when it is judged to be generally in line with the purpose of the zone but which could, if not reviewed, have a negative impact on other properties or uses within the zone. The purpose of such a review is to assure adequate site design and compatibility with surrounding uses and property. A review of a conditional use is a Type III review. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.64.020 - Authorization to grant or deny conditional use permits. 
    Uses designated in this ordinance as permitted conditional uses may be permitted by the planning commission in accordance with the standards and procedures specified in this ordinance. Future significant enlargements or major alterations of a conditional use shall also be reviewed by the commission and new conditions may be imposed. Change in use, expansion or contraction of site area, or alteration of structures or uses which are classified as conditional but which existed prior to the effective date of this ordinance, shall conform to all regulations pertaining to conditional uses. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.64.030 - Application submission requirements for conditional use permits. 
    A property owner or the owner's authorized agent may initiate a request for a conditional use by filing a completed application with the city manager along with the appropriate fee as set by city council resolution. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions and arrangement of the proposed use. The planning commission or city manager may require other drawings or material necessary to an understanding of the proposed use and its relationship to surrounding properties as part of a complete application. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.64.040 - Conditions for development. 
    The planning commission shall review and make a decision to approve or deny a conditional use request in accordance with the standards and procedures for a Type III review as set forth in Toledo Municipal Code Chapter 19.16. 
    In approving a conditional use request, the planning commission may impose any conditions determined by the commission to be necessary and appropriate to ensure that the use will comply with all applicable provisions of this section. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: 
A.  Limit the manner in which the use is conducted, including restricting the time an activity may take place and restraints to minimize such environmental effects as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare and odor. 
B.  Establish a special yard or other open space or lot area or dimension. 
C.  Limit the height, size or location of a building or other structure. 
D.  Designate the size, number, location or nature of vehicle access points. 
E.  Increase the amount of street dedication, roadway width, or improvements within the street right-of-way. 
F.  Designate the size, location, screening, drainage, surfacing or other improvement of a parking or truck loading area. 
G.  Limit or otherwise designate the number, size, location, height or lighting of signs. 
H.  Limit the location and intensity of outdoor lighting or require its shielding. 
I.  Require diking, screening, landscaping or another facility to protect adjacent or nearby property and designate standards for installation or maintenance of the facility. 
J.  Designate the size, height, location or materials for a fence. 
K.  Protect existing trees, vegetation, water resources, wildlife habitat or other significant natural resources. 
L.  Specify other conditions to permit development in conformity with the intent and purpose of the conditional classification of development. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1345, § 16, 11-7-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1345, § 16, adopted Nov. 7, 2012, changed the title of § 17.64.040 from "Action on a conditional use request" to "Conditions for development." 
17.64.050 - Standards governing conditional uses. 
    In addition to the standards of the zone in which the conditional use is located and the other standards of this chapter, conditional uses shall meet the following standards: 
A.  In addition to other applicable standards of this section, all conditional uses shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  The site under consideration is suitable for the proposed use considering: 
a.  The size, design and operating characteristics of the use. 
b.  The adequacy of transportation access to the site. 
c.  The natural and physical features of the site such as general topography, natural hazards, natural resource values, and other features. 
2.  The proposed use is compatible with existing and projected uses on surrounding lands, considering the factors in paragraph (1) of this subsection. 
B.  In addition to other standards of the zone in which the conditional use is located, certain uses shall comply with the following additional standards: 
1.  Utility Substation or Pumping Station. The minimum lot size in the applicable zone may be waived only on finding that the waiver will not result in noise or other detrimental effect on adjacent property. No equipment storage shall be permitted on the site. Such development shall be fenced and landscaped as required by the planning commission. 
2.  Processing and manufacturing operations. 
a.  The facility shall not abut a property zoned general residential or single-family residential. 
b.  The processor shall operate in a wholly enclosed building, except for incidental storage. 
c.  A processing facility shall be no larger than forty thousand (40,000) square feet. 
d.  The processing facility may not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers. 
3.  Waste transfer, recycling facility, or scrap metal facility. 
a.  Facilities must be fenced and shall be secured from unauthorized entry and the removal of materials when attendants are not present. 
b.  Facilities and storage shall be located no closer than thirty (30) feet from any property line. 
c.  Hours of operation shall be established, and the facility shall be clearly marked with the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation. 
d.  The site shall be maintained free of litter, odors, pests, and any other undesirable material, and shall be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis. 
e.  Space shall be provided on the site for the anticipated peak load of customers to circulate, park, and deposit recyclable materials. 
f.  Containers provided for after-hours donations of recyclable materials shall be at least fifty (50) feet from any property zoned general residential or single-family residential, shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction, shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate the materials collected, and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or the removal of materials. 
g.  Donation areas shall be kept free of litter, odors, pests, and any other undesirable material. The containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material, which may be deposited. The facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers. 
4.  Marijuana producer, marijuana processor, marijuana retailer, marijuana wholesaler, and marijuana laboratory. 
a.  The use shall not abut a property in the general residential (R-G) or single-family residential (R-G) zones or Lincoln County residential land use zones. 
b.  The use may be co-located with a medical marijuana grow site or medical marijuana dispensary facility, if allowed by state law and regulation, provided such use is properly licensed. 
c.  The use shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a private or parochial elementary or secondary school, teaching children as defined in ORS 339.030(1)(a). 
d.  The use shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a public elementary or secondary school whose attendance is compulsory under ORS 339.020. 
e.  The facility where the use takes place shall be no larger than forty thousand (40,000) square feet. 
f.  The use shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another medical or recreational marijuana facility, including a marijuana producer, marijuana processor, marijuana retailer, marijuana wholesaler, marijuana laboratory, medical marijuana dispensary facility, or medical marijuana grow site. This one thousand (1,000) feet requirement from property line to property line in a straight line measurement is not meant to prohibit more than one of the uses described in this subsection 4.f. from being co-located. More than one of the uses in this subsection 4.f. may be co-located, but only for the period of time, and as allowed, by state law and regulation. 
g.  Drive-through recreational marijuana facilities in any zone are prohibited. 
h.  The proposed use must be located inside a permanent building. Outdoor storage of any merchandise or plants is not allowed. 
i.  The proposed use requires continued compliance with all state, city, and federal law, excluding marijuana's classification as a controlled substance under the federal Controlled Substances Act. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1345, § 17, 11-7-2012; Ord. No. 1360, § 9, 2-3-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1345, § 17, adopted Nov. 7, 2012, changed the title of § 17.64.050 from "Conditions for development" to "Standards governing conditional uses." 
17.64.060 - Time limit on approval of a conditional use. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, authorization of a conditional use shall be void after one year if a building permit has not been issued or development has not begun. 
B.  The authorization may be extended by the planning commission for an additional period of one year if the request is made in writing prior to the expiration of the original authorization. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1345, § 18, 11-7-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1345, §§ 18, 19, adopted Nov. 7, 2012, deleted material from the Code pertaining to standards governing conditional uses (former § 17.64.060) and, in effect, renumbering § 17.64.070 as § 17.64.060. Former § 17.64.060 derived from Ord. 1286, § 1(part), adopted 2001. 
Chapter 17.68 - VARIANCES 
Sections: 

17.68.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide flexibility to development standards in recognition of the complexity and wide variation of site development opportunities and constraints in Toledo. The variance procedures are intended to provide flexibility while ensuring that the purpose of each development standard is met. Because some variances are granted using "clear and objective standards," and the impact, if any, on adjacent property owners is negligible, they can be granted by means of a Type I procedure. Other variances, as identified below, require a Type II or Type III procedure because they involve discretionary decision-making or the potential for more substantial changes that may have some impact on the adjacent property owners. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.68.020 - Classes of variances. 
    Three types of variances shall be allowed under the zoning regulation: 
A.  A "Class A" variance is a variance requiring staff level approval only and is intended to apply to situations where the exercise of discretion by staff is minimal because the factual situation is relatively straightforward. A Class A variance is reviewed through a Type I procedure and a decision on the Class A variance is the final decision of the city. 
B.  A "Class B" variance is a variance requiring staff level approval and is intended to apply to situations which require a greater exercise of discretion and in which the factual situation is complex. A Class B variance is reviewed as a Type Il procedure and a decision on the Class B variance may be appealed to the planning commission. 
C.  A "Class C" variance is a variance requiring planning commission approval and is intended to apply to situations in which the exercise of discretion is greater and the factual situation may be complex. A Class C variance is reviewed as a Type III procedure and a decision on the Class C variance may be appealed to the city council. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.68.030 - Class A-Variances. 
    After determining that the applicable conditions exist, the city manager shall grant a request for a variance to the following ordinance requirements. 
A.  Class A-Variance to Front Yard setback Requirements. In the case of residential dwellings, the following variance to the front yard setback requirement is authorized for a lot in any zone: If there are dwellings on both abutting lots with front yards of less than the required depth for the zone, the front yard for the lot need not exceed the average front yard of the abutting dwellings. If there is a dwelling on one abutting lot with a front yard of less than the required depth for the zone, the depth of the front yard for the lot need not exceed a depth one-half way between the depth of the abutting lot and the required front yard depth. 
B.  Class A-Variance to Building Height Limitations. A variance for the following types of structures or structural parts from the building height requirements of this ordinance are allowed as long as they do not exceed fifty (50) feet from grade: chimneys, cupolas, tanks, church spires, belfries, domes, derricks, monuments, fire and hose towers, observation towers, transmission towers, smokestacks, flagpoles, radio and television towers, masts, aerials, cooling towers, water towers, elevator shafts, windmills, conveyors, and other similar projections. 
C.  Class A-Variance for Home Occupation Employees. Home occupations do not allow for on-site employees. A variance from this provision would allow up to one full-time equivalent employee (forty (40) hours per week). An off-street parking space must be available to the employee. There can only be one employee on-site at a time. A site plan and employee schedule must be part of the application. Full-time equivalent employee does not include contract service workers that are not specifically required for the home occupation, such as, but not limited to, contractors, house cleaning, handyman, and landscapers. 
D.  Class A-Variance to Front Yard Setback for Unenclosed Porches/Decks. A variance for unenclosed porches/decks is allowed for intrusion into an established front yard setback of up to seven feet as long as there is no encroachment into a public utility easement. 
(Ord. 1307 § 38, 2005; Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.68.040 - Class B-Variances. 
A.  Class B-Variance to Setbacks. A variance to the front yard setback requirement of up to five feet and for any other setback up to fifty (50) percent is authorized as follows: 
1.  For residential zones, a majority of houses on an existing block have front yard setbacks of less than the required depth and the number of vacant lots does not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total lots on the block, or 
2.  The topography of the lot, such as steep slopes or the location of a natural drainage source such as an intermittent stream, makes it difficult to build to the yard setback requirement, or 
3.  The variance would allow the preservation of an existing tree(s) or other natural resource, and 
4.  The variance would not create any public safety issues such as a clear-vision problem. 
B.  Class B-Variance to Vehicular Access and Circulation Standards. Where vehicular access and circulation cannot be reasonably designed to conform to code standards within a particular parcel, shared access with an adjoining property shall be considered. If shared access in conjunction with another parcel is not feasible, the city may grant a variance to the access requirements after finding the following: 
1.  There is not adequate physical space for shared access, or the owners of abutting properties do not agree to execute a joint access easement, 
2.  There are no alternative access points on the street in question or from another street, 
3.  The request is the minimum adjustment required to provide adequate access, 
4.  The approved access or access approved with conditions will result in a safe access, and 
5.  The clear-vision requirements will be met. 
C.  Class B-Variance to Parking Requirements. Variances to the municipal parking requirements are authorized in the commercial, light industrial, and industrial zones of up to twenty (20) percent of the required off-street parking if: 
1.  Topographical conditions exist on the lot such as steep slopes, location of natural drainage course, or high groundwater table, or 
2.  The variance would allow the preservation of trees or other natural resource, and 
3.  Adequate setbacks, clear vision, access, and compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act requirements are assured, and 
4.  The proposal comes as close to meeting ordinance requirements as conditions allow. 
D.  Class B-Variance to Rebuild a Destroyed Nonconforming Structure. Section 17.56.060 allows rebuilding a partially damaged nonconforming structure as long as it is not made to be more nonconforming. It also precludes the rebuilding of a totally destroyed nonconforming structure. A variance to this section can be applied for and will be evaluated against the following criteria: 
1.  Public response; 
2.  Livability and effects on adjacent and surrounding properties; 
3.  Circumstances pertinent to the property in question that are beyond the control of the applicant; 
4.  No other provisions of the municipal codes are violated; 
5.  Effected natural resources; 
6.  No public safety issues are created; 
7.  The requested variance is the minimum necessary. 
(Ord. 1307 § 39, 2005; Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.68.050 - Class C-Variances. 
A.  Class C-Variance to Lot Size. The planning commission may grant a variance to the minimum lot size requirements in the single-family residential and the general residential zones if: 
1.  There is a peculiarity in lot configuration for lots of record existing prior to 1982, or 
2.  The variance would alleviate an existing nonconforming use or structure, and 
3.  Setbacks, clear vision, access and off-street parking requirements are met, and 
4.  The variance would not unduly burden city services such as streets, parks, water and sewer, and 
5.  The new lot or lots are no less than eighty-three (83) percent of the size required by the ordinance. 
B.  Class C-Variance to Building Height. The planning commission may grant a variance to the building height limitation in residential zones if: 
1.  The lot size is increased by twenty (20) square feet over the minimum lot size requirement for every five feet or fraction thereof of additional height, 
2.  The Toledo Fire Chief is satisfied that the proposed structure can be adequately protected in case of fire, considering, at least, fire flow, proximity to fire hydrants, access, and limitations of fire fighting equipment, and 
3.  The additional building height does not significantly increase shade to neighboring property and does not infringe upon neighborhood privacy. 
C.  Class C-Variance to Toledo Public Improvement Requirements and Design Standards. The planning commission may grant a variance to the street standard requirements of the Toledo Public Improvement Requirements and Design Standards if: 
1.  The request is in conjunction with a development other than a subdivision or planned development, and 
2.  The topography of the subject property or the access way to the property makes the development of the access way to the full standards impracticable because full access way development would require such things as substantial cuts in slope or the filling of a wetland area, and 
3.  The property is sufficient size and adequate topography to accommodate the proposed development, and 
4.  The width of the access way is sufficient to meet the traffic demands of the development, and 
5.  The improved surface is sufficient considering the traffic, necessary drainage, geological and topographical factors affecting construction, long-term maintenance and durability of the surface, and the needs of emergency and utility vehicles, and 
6.  The improvements required of the development are roughly proportional to the impact created by the development, and 
7.  The Uniform Fire Code standards and all other ordinance requirements are met, unless specifically excepted, including but not limited to parking and clear vision requirements. 
D.  Class C-Variance Request to Other Standards or for Variances Greater than those Authorized Under Class A and Class B Variances. The planning commission, before approving an application for a variance to a zoning code requirement not specified above, shall consider the location, size, design and operation characteristics of the proposed development requiring the variance and shall determine whether it complies with one of the following criteria. If the development does not so comply, the commission shall deny the application. 
1.  The variance will cause no significant adverse impact of the livability, value, or appropriate development of abutting property or the surrounding area when compared to the impact of permitted development that does not require a variance. 
2.  A hardship to development exists which is peculiar to the lot size or shape, topography, sensitive lands, or other similar circumstances related to the property over which the applicant has no control. 
3.  The use proposed will be the same as permitted under the code and the requirements of the code will be maintained to the greatest extent that is reasonably possible while permitting reasonable economic use of the land. 
E.  In addition to compliance with the criteria as determined by the planning commission identified in subsections (A)-(D) above, the applicant must accept those conditions listed below that the commission finds are appropriate to obtain compliance with the criteria. 
1.  Limit the manner in which the use is conducted, including restricting the time an activity may take place and restraints to minimize such environmental effects as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare and odor. 
2.  Establish a special yard or other open space or lot area or dimension. 
3.  Limit the height, size or location of a building or other structure. 
4.  Designate the size, number, location or nature of vehicle access points. 
5.  Increase the amount of street dedication, roadway width, or improvements within the street right-of-way. 
6.  Designate the size, location, screening, drainage, surfacing or other improvement of a parking or truck loading area. 
7.  Limit or otherwise designate the number, size, location, height or lighting of signs. 
8.  Limit the location and intensity of outdoor lighting or require its shielding. 
9.  Require diking, screening, landscaping or another facility to protect adjacent or nearby property and designate standards for installation or maintenance of the facility. 
10.  Designate the size, height, location or materials for a fence. 
11.  Protect existing trees, vegetation, water resources, wildlife habitat or other significant natural resources. 
12.  Specify other conditions to permit development in conformity with the intent and purpose of the ordinance standards. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.68.060 - Time limit on approval of a variance. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, authorization of a variance shall be void after one year if a building permit has not been issued or development has not begun. 
B.  The authorization may be extended by the planning commission for an additional period of one year if the request is made in writing prior to the expiration of the original authorization. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 17.72 - RESTRICTIVE LOT LINE COVENANTS 
Sections: 

17.72.010 - Purpose. 
    To recognize that historical subdivisions of land in Toledo have not been platted in relationship to the topography of the property, that some lots have been historically treated as one piece of property, and that topographical or other constraints may severely limit the use of one lot such that the use of abutting lots is a reasonable alternative. The restrictive lot line covenant is an agreement between the city and the owner of multiple lots to treat the multiple lots as one lot for the purposes of the municipal code to allow the property owner to treat the multiple lots as one lot for the placement of a home, for the placement of an accessory building, or other purposes common to residential ownership of land and the property owner agrees to convey the lots as a single ownership. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.72.020 - Approval process. 
A.  Application. An application for a restrictive lot line covenant shall be processed as a Type III procedure. The application shall meet the requirements for submitting the application as established by the city manager. The applicant shall bear the cost of recording with Lincoln County associated with the restrictive lot line covenant. 
B.  Criteria, Standards, and Conditions of Approval. The city shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a restrictive lot line covenant based on findings of fact for the following standards and criteria: 
1.  The applicant has multiple legal lots that are under a common ownership and are abutting; and 
2.  The applicant desires to retain the lots as separate legal lots or a process for combining the lots into one lot is not available; and 
3.  Treating the multiple lots as one lot for municipal code purposes would not result in the violation of other sections of the municipal code or other applicable codes; and 
4.  The topography of the legal lots is such that except for the topography of the property, the proposed permitted use outright necessitating the request for a restrictive lot line covenant could be accommodated on one lot; or 
5.  Significant alterations of steep slopes, wetlands, natural drainage patterns, or other natural resources can be minimized by treating the abutting legal lots as one lot; or 
6.  The size of the legal lots is such that one or more of the lots are substandard but together the lots meet the size requirements for the applicable zone; or 
7.  The use proposed is an approved conditional use and the nature of the use is such that if the conditional use was located in a zone where the use was permitted outright, the interior lot lines between the abutting properties would not require setbacks; or 
8.  Open space, forested area, scenic views, or other similar amenity contributing to the enjoyment of the owner's use of property and/or to the livability of the community as a whole can be preserved. 
(Ord. 1307 § 40, 2005; Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.72.030 - Removal of restrictive lot line covenant. 
    A property owner may request that the Restrictive Lot Line Covenant be removed and the city shall grant such request provided that: 
A.  The lots subject to the agreement do not result in any nonconforming uses, nonconforming lots, or nonconforming structures that did not exist prior to the date of execution of the covenant; and 
B.  All other municipal code and state requirements then current will be met by the lots subject to the covenant. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 17.80 - AMENDMENTS 
Sections: 

17.80.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and procedures for legislative and quasi-judicial amendments to this code and the comprehensive land use map or zoning map. These will be referred to as "map and text amendments." Amendments may be necessary from time to time to reflect changing community conditions, needs and desires, to correct mistakes, or to address changes in the law. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.80.020 - Authorization to initiate amendments. 
    An amendment to the text or the maps of this title may be initiated by the city council, by the planning commission, or by application of a property owner. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.80.030 - Legislative amendments. 
    Legislative amendments are policy decisions such as the amendment to a comprehensive land use map or the municipal code made by the city council. They are reviewed using the Type IV land use procedure as set forth by ordinance. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.80.040 - Quasi-judicial amendments to maps. 
    Quasi-judicial map amendments are those map amendments which require discretion in applying existing standards or criteria to a request. The approval authority for quasi-judicial amendments shall follow the Type III land use procedure as set forth by ordinance and the approval authority shall be as follows: 
A.  The planning commission shall decide zoning map changes which do not involve comprehensive plan map amendments; 
B.  The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council on an application for a comprehensive plan map amendment. The city council shall decide such applications; and 
C.  The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council on a zoning map application which also involves a comprehensive plan map amendment application. The city council shall decide both applications. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.80.050 - Criteria for quasi-judicial map amendments. 
    A recommendation or a decision to approve, approve with conditions or to deny an application for a quasi-judicial amendment shall be based on all of the following criteria: 
A.  Demonstration of compliance with all applicable comprehensive plan policies and map designations. Where this criterion cannot be met, a comprehensive plan amendment shall be a prerequisite for approval; 
B.  Demonstration of compliance with all applicable standards and criteria of this code and other applicable implementing ordinances; 
C.  Evidence of a change in the neighborhood or community or a mistake or inconsistency in the comprehensive plan or land use maps regarding the property which is the subject of the application. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.80.060 - Conditions of approval. 
    A quasi-judicial decision may be for denial, approval, or approval with conditions necessary to bring an amendment into compliance with an applicable criteria. A legislative decision maybe approved or denied. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.80.070 - Record of amendments. 
    The city manager shall maintain a record of amendments to the text of this code and the land use maps in a format convenient for public use including the update of the official version of the maps on Geographic Information Systems as applicable. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 17.84 - CODE INTERPRETATIONS 
Sections: 

17.84.010 - Purpose. 
    Some terms or phrases within the municipal code may have two or more reasonable meanings. This section provides a process for resolving differences in the interpretation of the code text. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.84.020 - Code interpretation procedure. 
A.  Requests. A request for a code interpretation ("interpretation") shall be made in writing to the city manager with or without a pending application. The city manager may develop written guidelines for the application process and the city council may require an application fee. 
B.  Decision to Issue Interpretation. The city manager shall have the authority to review a request for an interpretation. The city manager shall advise the requester in writing within fourteen (14) days after the request is made, on whether or not the city will issue the requested interpretation. 
C.  Declining Requests for Interpretation. The city manager is authorized to issue or decline to issue a requested interpretation. Basis for declining may include, but is not limited to, a finding that the subject municipal code section affords only one reasonable interpretation and the interpretation does not support the request. The city manager decision to issue or decline to issue an interpretation is final when the decision is mailed to the party requesting the interpretation. 
D.  Written Interpretation. If the city manager decides to issue an interpretation, it shall be issued in writing and shall be mailed or delivered to the person requesting the Interpretation and any other person who specifically requested a copy of the interpretation. The written interpretation shall be issued within fourteen (14) days after the city advises the requester that an interpretation shall be issued. The decision shall become effective fourteen (14) days later, unless an appeal is filed in accordance with Section 17.84.030. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.84.030 - Appeals. 
    The applicant and any party who received such notice or who participated in the proceedings through the submission of written or verbal evidence of an interpretation may appeal the interpretation to the city council within fourteen (14) days after the interpretation was mailed or delivered to the applicant. The appeal may be initiated by fling a notice of appeal with the city manager pursuant to the requirements set forth by ordinance. 
A.  Appeal Procedure. The city council shall hear all appeals of a city manager interpretation as a Type III action, except that written notice of the hearing shall be provided to the applicant, any other party who has filed a notice of appeal, and any other person who requested notice. 
B.  Final Decision/Effective Date. The decision of the city council on an appeal of an interpretation shall be final and effective when it is mailed to the applicant. If an appeal of the city council's decision is filed, the decision remains effective unless or until it is modified by the land use board of appeals or a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.84.040 - Interpretations on file. 
    The city manager shall keep on file a record of all code interpretations. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 17.88 - LEGAL FRAMEWORK 
Sections: 

17.88.010 - Enforcement. 
    The city manager shall have the power and duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.88.020 - Interpretation. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be with the minimum requirements fulfilling its objectives. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions, of this chapter or of any other ordinance, resolution or regulations, the provisions which are more restrictive shall govern. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.88.030 - Fees. 
    All fees required by this chapter shall be in the amount set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.88.040 - Severability. 
    The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
17.88.050 - Penalty. 
    A person violating a provision of this chapter shall be punished upon conviction by a civil penalty as a Class B infraction ( a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during which the violation continues. This remedy is not intended to be exclusive and the city of Toledo may pursue any other remedy available to it by law. 
(Ord. 1286 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Title 18 - MISCELLANEOUS LAND USE REGULATION 
Chapters: 
Chapter 18.04 - RIPARIAN PROTECTION 
Sections: 

18.04.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this ordinance is to protect significant riparian areas and significant wetlands, thereby protecting and restoring the hydrologic, ecologic and land conservation functions these areas provide. Specifically, this ordinance is intended to protect habitat for fish and other aquatic life, protect habitat for wildlife, protect water quality for human uses and for aquatic life, control erosion and limit sedimentation, and reduce the effects of flooding. The ordinance attempts to meet these goals by excluding new structures and uses from buffer areas around fish-bearing lakes, streams and associated wetlands, and by prohibiting vegetation removal or other alteration in those buffers for uses not permitted in the riparian corridor except under certain circumstances. Existing structures and uses at the time of passage of this ordinance that do not meet the riparian setback standards are considered to be non-conforming structures and uses. 
(Ord. 1290 § 1 (part), 2001) 
18.04.020 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions are provided for use within this chapter. Definitions of general applicability for use are found within Title 17 of the Toledo Municipal Code. 
    "Conflicting use" means a land use or other activity reasonably and customarily subject to land use regulations, that could adversely affect a significant riparian resource. Agricultural practices in a Natural Resource Zone designation are not considered conflicting uses. 
    "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to constructing, erecting, and/or placing buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, and drilling operations. Development also includes any action or use on or applied to real property. 
    "Fish Use" means inhabited at any time of the year by anadromous or game fish species or fish that are listed as threatened or endangered species under the federal or state endangered species acts. Fish use is determined from the Oregon Department of Forestry Stream Classification maps or by maps issued by the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. 
    "Lawn" is grass or similar materials maintained as a ground cover of less than six inches in height. For purposes of this ordinance, lawn is not considered native vegetation regardless of the species used. 
    "Mitigation" means taking one or more of the following actions listed in order of priority: 
1.  Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain development action or parts of that action; 
2.  Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the development action and its implementation; 
3.  Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment; 
4.  Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the development action by monitoring and taking appropriate corrective measures; 
5.  Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing comparable substitute resources or environments. 
    "Non-conforming" means a structure or use that does not conform to the standards of this ordinance but has been in continuous existence from prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance up to the present. Non-conforming uses are not considered violations and are generally allowed to continue, though expansion, reconstruction, or substantial improvement may be regulated. 
    "Protect" when applied to an individual resource site, means to limit or prohibit uses that conflict with a significant resource site. 
    "Riparian area" means the area adjacent to a river, lake, or stream, consisting of the area of transition from an aquatic ecosystem to a terrestrial ecosystem. 
    "Stream" means a channel such as a river or creek that carries flowing surface water, including perennial streams and intermittent streams with defined channels, and excluding man-made irrigation and drainage channels. 
    "Structure" means a building or other major improvement that is built, constructed or installed, not including minor improvements, such as utility poles or irrigation system components, that are not customarily regulated through zoning ordinances. 
    "Top of Bank" means the state or elevation at which water overflows the natural banks of streams or other waters of the state and begins to inundate upland areas. In the absence of physical evidence, the two-year recurrence interval flood elevation may be used to approximate the bankfull stage or delineate the top of bank. 
(Ord. 1290 § 1 (part), 2001) 
18.04.030 - Protection of significant marsh/riparian habitat. 
A.  The following areas are designated as significant marsh/riparian habitat: 
1.  Lincoln County Estuary Management Unit # 33 (Natural Classification) as identified in the 1982 Lincoln County Estuary Management Plan and denoted as "a tidal marsh and wildlife habitat of major significance"; 
2.  The salt marsh and associated riparian area of Glen Lyons Park between Sturdevant Road, River Road, and Olalla Slough which is zoned as Natural Resource. 
B.  Alteration of habitat in significant marsh/riparian habitat precluded except for: 
1.  Improvements to Glen Lyons Park to improve the hydrological connection with Olalla Slough; 
2.  Breaching of dikes to allow an improved hydrological connection with an adjacent river area; 
3.  Enhancement of riparian vegetation by the removal of invasive, non-native species and the replacement with native vegetation; 
4.  Uses permitted in Management Unit # 33 as established by the 1982 Lincoln County Estuary Management Plan. 
(Ord. 1290 § 1 (part), 2001) 
18.04.040 - Protection of wetlands. 
A.  All applications to the city of Toledo for permits that may impact Oregon Division of State Lands or U.S. Army Corps of Engineers jurisdictional wetlands shall require notification by the city manager to the Oregon Division of State Lands and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers of the proposed permit application prior to approval of the permit. A copy of the notification shall also be given to the applicant and to the property owner if different than the applicant. 
B.  Permits that may impact jurisdictional wetlands shall be approved on the condition that appropriate state and/or federal permits be obtained and copies of permits be submitted to the city manager. 
(Ord. 1290 § 1 (part), 2001) 
18.04.050 - Establishment of riparian corridors. 
    The inventory of fish-bearing waterways within the Urban Growth Boundary of Toledo includes the Yaquina River, Depot Slough, Depot Creek, Olalla Slough, West and East Fork Olalla Slough/Creek, and Little Beaver Creek. In addition to those wetlands identified within the approved Toledo Wetland Conservation Plan Inventory, there may be wetlands which meet the criteria of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/or the Oregon Division of State Lands criteria for jurisdictional wetlands which have not been mapped. However, if a property owner desires, to have a separate wetlands survey approved by the Oregon Division of State Lands and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers as a verified wetland boundary, then the setback shall be measured from the most restrictive of the Oregon Division of State Lands and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers defined wetlands outer boundaries. Based on the classification contained in these inventories and those determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and Oregon Division of State Lands, the following riparian corridors shall be established: 
A.  Along all streams with average annual stream flow greater than one thousand (1,000) cubic feet per second (cfs), the riparian corridor boundary shall be seventy-five (75) feet upland from the top of each bank. This includes the Yaquina River. 
B.  Along all fish-bearing lakes and fish-bearing streams with average annual stream flow less than one thousand (1,000) cfs, the riparian corridor boundary shall be fifty (50) feet from the top of bank. This includes Depot Slough, Depot Creek, Olalla Slough, West and East Fork Olalla Slough/Creek, and Little Beaver Creek. 
C.  Where the riparian corridor includes all or portions of a wetland identified in the Toledo Wetland Conservation Plan Inventory, the standard distance to the riparian corridor boundary shall be measured from, and include, the upland edge of the wetland. 
(Ord. 1290 § 1 (part), 2001) 
18.04.060 - Management of riparian corridors. 
A.  Existing uses and structures at the date of passage of this ordinance are allowed to continue within riparian corridors to the extent allowed by the Comprehensive Plan map zone classification or as non-conforming structures or uses including: 
1.  Streets, roads, and paths; 
2.  Drainage facilities, utilities, and irrigation pumps; 
3.  Development within lands zoned for water-dependent uses; 
4.  Development within lands zoned for Industrial and Light-Industrial uses wherein past development patterns at the date of passage of this ordinance have resulted in a minimal amount of riparian vegetation and existing dense development in the general vicinity has significantly degraded riparian habitat values; 
5.  Existing lawn within the riparian area may be maintained but not expanded within the riparian area; 
6.  Existing agricultural uses at the date of passage of this ordinance; 
7.  Park facilities that are used to allow public access to and along the waterway; 
8.  Development conducted pursuant to an approved U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, Oregon Division of State Lands permit or an approved National Marine Fisheries Service Habitat Conservation Plan issued prior to the date of passage of this ordinance. 
B.  Alteration of existing structures or uses are allowed provided that: 
1.  Replacement of existing structures is with structures in the same location that do not disturb additional riparian surface area or such disturbance is mitigated; 
2.  Structures or other nonconforming alterations existing fully or partially within the riparian area may be expanded provided the expansion does not occur within the riparian area or the expansion is conducted pursuant to an approved Oregon Division of State Lands permit, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers permit, National Marine Fisheries Service Habitat Conservation Plan or Take Permit, or an approved Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife Habitat Mitigation Plan; 
3.  Existing shoreline stabilization and flood control structures may be maintained. Any expansion of existing structures or development of new structures shall be evaluated by the Oregon Division of State Lands and/or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers as provided by state and/or federal law. 
(Ord. 1290 § 1 (part), 2001) 
18.04.070 - Modification of riparian vegetation. 
A.  Riparian vegetation modification in riparian corridors is prohibited if the modification of riparian vegetation either individually or cumulatively would result in a significant degradation of the riparian corridor. Modification of riparian vegetation is allowed in conjunction with a permit submitted on appropriate forms to the city of Toledo if the: 
1.  Modification is conducted pursuant to an approved U.S. Army Corps of Engineers permit and/or an Oregon Division of State Lands permit which shall be considered sufficient evidence that the modification of riparian vegetation in the riparian corridor will not result in significant degradation of the riparian corridor; or 
2.  Modification is conducted pursuant to an approved National Marine Fisheries Service Habitat Conservation Plan or other permit which shall be sufficient evidence that the modification of riparian vegetation in the riparian corridor will not result in significant degradation of the riparian corridor; or 
3.  Modification is conducted pursuant to an approved National Marine Fisheries Service limit or other permit which shall be sufficient evidence that the modification of riparian vegetation in the riparian corridor will not result in significant degradation of the riparian corridor; or 
4.  Modification is conducted for either the removal of non-native vegetation and replacement with native plant species or the improvement of the existing riparian area by the planting of suitable riparian plant species. The replacement vegetation shall cover, at a minimum, the area from which vegetation was removed, and shall maintain or exceed the density of the removed vegetation; or 
5.  Modification is conducted for the removal of trees in danger of falling and posing a hazard to life or property, following consultation and approval from the Oregon Division of State Lands. If no hazard will be created, the Oregon Division of State Lands may require these trees, once felled, to be left in place in the riparian area; or 
6.  Modification is conducted for restoration or mitigation authorized pursuant to an approved U. S. Army Corps of Engineers or Oregon Division of State Lands permit; or 
7.  Modification is conducted pursuant to an approved Oregon Department of Fish & Wildlife Habitat Mitigation Plan under Oregon Administrative Rules 635-415-0000 through 635-415-0025 and shall be sufficient evidence that the modification of riparian vegetation in the riparian corridor will not result in significant degradation of the riparian corridor. 
B.  Exceptions: The following activities or areas are not required to meet the standards of this section: 
1.  Commercial forest practices regulated by the Oregon Forest Practices Act; 
2.  Normal and accepted farming practices other than new buildings or structures, occurring on land zoned for agricultural or natural resource purposes and existing in the riparian area since prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance; and 
3.  Development along the industrialized waterfront of Depot Slough from the confluence with the Yaquina River to the Georgia Pacific bridge at the end of NW 1st Street. 
(Ord. 1290 § 1, 2001) 
18.04.080 - Violation. 
    Violation of this ordinance shall be a Class A infraction. 
(Ord. 1290 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 18.08 - BALLOT MEASURE 37 
Sections: 

18.08.010 - Purpose. 
    This real property compensation ordinance is intended to implement the provisions added to Chapter 197 of Oregon Revised Statutes by Ballot Measure 37 (November 2, 2004). These provisions establish a prompt, open, thorough and consistent process that enables property owners an adequate and fair opportunity to present their claims to the city; preserves and protects limited public funds; and establishes a record of the city's decision capable of circuit court review. 
(Ord. 1305 § 1, 2004) 
18.08.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases mean: 
    "City manager" means the city manager of the city of Toledo, or his or her designee. 
    "Claim" means a claim filed under Ballot Measure 37. 
    "Exempt land use regulation" means a land use regulation that: 
1.  Restricts or prohibits activities commonly and historically recognized as public nuisances under common law; 
2.  Restricts or prohibits activities for the protection of public health and safety, such as fire and building codes, health and sanitation regulations, solid or hazardous waste regulations, and pollution control regulations; 
3.  Is required in order to comply with federal law; 
4.  Restricts or prohibits the use of property for the purpose of selling pornography or performing nude dancing; or 
5.  Was enacted prior to the date of acquisition of the property by the owner or a family member of the owner who owned the subject property prior to acquisition or inheritance by the owner, whichever occurred first. 
    "Family member" means and includes the wife, husband, son, daughter, mother, father, brother, brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, stepparent, stepchild, grandparent, or grandchild of the owner of the property, an estate of any of the foregoing family members, or a legal entity owned by any one or combination of these family members or the owner of the property. 
    "Land use regulation" means and includes: 
1.  Any statute regulating the use of land or any interest therein; 
2.  Administrative rules and goals of the land conservation and development commission; 
3.  Local government comprehensive plans, zoning ordinances, land division ordinances, and transportation ordinances; 
4.  Metropolitan service district regional framework plans, functional plans, planning goals and objectives; and 
5.  Statutes and administrative rules regulating farming and forest practices. 
    "Owner" means the present owner of the property, or any interest therein. 
    "Valid claim" means a claim submitted by the owner of real property that is subject to a land use regulation adopted or enforced by the city that restricts the use of the private real property in a manner that reduces the fair market value of the real property. 
(Ord. 1305 § 2, 2004) 
18.08.030 - Claim filing procedures. 
A.  A person seeking to file a claim under this chapter must be the present owner of the property that is the subject of the claim at the time the claim is submitted. The claim shall be filed with the city manager's office, or another city office if so designated by the city manager. 
B.  A claim shall include: 
1.  The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of all owners, and anyone with any interest in the property, including lien holders, trustees, renters, lessees, and a description of the ownership interest of each; 
2.  The address, tax lot, and legal description of the real property that is the subject of the claim, together with a title report issued no more than thirty (30) days prior to the submission of the claim that reflects the ownership interest in the property, or other documentation reflecting sole ownership of the property by the claimant, and the date the property was acquired; 
3.  The current land use regulation(s) that allegedly restricts the use of the real property and allegedly causes a reduction in the fair market value of the subject property; 
4.  The amount of the claim, based on the alleged reduction in value of the real property supported by an appraisal by an appraiser licensed by the appraiser certification and licensure board of the state of Oregon; and 
5.  Copies of any leases or covenants, conditions and restrictions (CCR's) applicable to the real property, if any, that impose restrictions on the use of the property. 
C.  Notwithstanding a claimant's failure to provide all of the information required by subsection B of this section, the city may review and act on a claim. 
(Ord. 1305 § 3, 2004) 
18.08.040 - City manager investigation and recommendation. 
A.  Following an investigation of a claim, the city manager shall forward a recommendation to the city council that the claim be: 
1.  Denied; 
2.  Investigated further; 
3.  Declared valid, and waive or modify the land use regulation, or compensate the claimant upon completion of an appraisal; or 
4.  Evaluated with the expectation of the city acquiring the property by condemnation. 
(Ord. 1305 § 4, 2004) 
18.08.050 - City council public hearing. 
    The city council shall conduct a public hearing before taking final action on a recommendation from the city manager. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided to the claimant, to owners and occupants of property within three hundred (300) feet of the perimeter of the subject property. 
(Ord. 1305 § 5, 2004) 
18.08.060 - City council action on claim. 
A.  Upon conclusion of the public hearing, and prior to the expiration of one hundred eighty (180) days from the date the claim was filed, the city council shall: 
1.  Determine that the claim does not meet the requirements of Measure 37 and this chapter, and deny the claim; or 
2.  Adopt a resolution with findings therein that supports a determination that the claim is valid and either direct that the claimant be compensated in an amount set forth in the resolution for the reduction in value of the property, or remove, modify or direct that the challenged land use regulation not be applied to the property. 
B.  The city council's decision to waive or modify a land use regulation or to compensate the owner shall be based on whether the public interest would be better served by compensating the owner or by removing or modifying the challenged land use regulation with respect to the subject property. 
(Ord. 1305 § 6, 2004) 
18.08.070 - Processing fee. 
    The city manager shall maintain a record of the city's costs in processing a claim, including the costs of obtaining information required by Section 18.08.030 which a property owner does not provide to the city. Following final action by the city on the claim at the local level, the city manager shall send to the property owner a bill for the actual costs, including staff and legal costs, that the city incurred in reviewing and acting on the claim. 
(Ord. 1305 § 7, 2004) 
Title 19 - LAND USE PROCEDURES 
Chapters: 
Chapter 19.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

19.04.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this title (Land Use Procedures) is to establish standard decision-making procedures that will enable the city, the applicant, and the public to review applications and participate in the local decision-making process in a timely and effective way. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.04.020 - Definitions. 
    "City Manager" shall mean the city manager or the manager's designee. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.04.030 - Description of permit/decision-making procedures. 
    All land use and development permit applications, except building permits, shall be decided by using the procedures contained in this title unless specified to the contrary. General procedures for all permits are contained in Chapter 19.24. Specific procedures for certain types of permits are contained in Chapters 19.08-19.20. The procedure "type" assigned to each permit governs the decision-making process for that permit. There are four types of permit/decision-making procedures: Type I, II, III, and IV. These procedures are described in Sections 19.04.030(A)-(D) below. In addition, the table in Section 19.04.040 lists all of the city's land use and development applications and their required permit procedure(s). 
A.  Type I Procedure (Ministerial). Type I decisions are made by the city manager without public notice and without a public hearing. The Type I procedure is used when there are clear and objective approval criteria, and applying city standards and criteria requires no use of discretion. 
B.  Type II Procedure (Administrative). Type II decisions are made by the city manager with public notice and an opportunity for a public hearing. The appeal of a Type II decision is heard by the planning commission. 
C.  Type III Procedure (Quasi-Judicial). Type III decisions are made by the planning commission after a public hearing, with appeals reviewed by the city council. Type III decisions generally use discretionary approval criteria. 
D.  Type IV Procedure (Legislative). Type IV procedures apply to legislative matters. Legislative matters involve the creation, revision, or large-scale implementation of public policy (e.g., adoption of land use regulations, zone changes, and comprehensive plan amendments which apply to entire districts). Type IV matters are considered initially by the planning commission with final decisions made by the city council. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.04.040 - Summary of development decisions/permits by type of decision-making procedure. 
Access Permit (public street) Type I Chapter 17.48 Annexation Type III/IV Comprehensive Plan, Oregon Revised Statutes or city/county intergovernmental agreement(s), as applicable. Building Permit N/A Building Code Code Interpretation Type II Chapter 17.84 Code Amendment Type IV Chapter 17.80 Comprehensive Plan Amendment Type IV Comprehensive Plan Conditional Use Permit Type III Chapter 17.64 Development Review Type I Chapter 17.60 Drainage Permit Type I Chapter 15.20 Excavation/Fill Permit Type I Chapter 15.20 Flood Plain Development Permit Type I Chapter15.16 (may require Riparian Modification permit first) Home Occupation Permit Type I Chapter 17.08  (Business License Required) Planned Development Type III Chapter 16.16 Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Map Type III/IV Chapter 17.80  Change Lot Line Adjustment Type I Oregon Revised 
Statutes Chapter 92 Lot Line Covenant, Restrictive Type II Chapter 17.72 Non-Conforming Use or Development 
Confirmation Type I Chapter 17.56 Partition Type III Chapter 16.08 Replat, Minor Type II Chapter 16.24 Riparian Modification Permit Type I Chapter 18.04 Subdivision Type III Chapter 16.12 Temporary Use Permit Type II Chapter 17.76 Tree Removal/Placement 
(In public right-of-way) Specified by 
Municipal Code Chapter 2.16 Variance  Class A Type I Section 17.68.030  Class B Type II Section 17.68.040  Class C Type III Section 17.68.050  
* ;hg;Note: The chapters referenced above in the right-hand column describe the types of land uses and development activity that require permits under each type of decision-making procedure. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 19.08 - TYPE I PROCEDURE (MINISTERIAL) 
Sections: 

19.08.010 - Application requirements. 
A.  Application Forms. Type I applications shall be made on forms provided by the city manager. 
B.  Application Requirements. Type I applications shall: 
1.  Include the information requested on the application form; 
2.  Address the criteria in sufficient detail for review and action; and 
3.  Be filed with the required fee. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.08.020 - Administrative decision requirements. 
    The city manager's decision shall address all of the approval criteria. Based on the criteria and the facts contained within the record, the city manager shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the requested permit or action. A written record of the decision shall be provided to the applicant and kept on file at city hall. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.08.030 - Final decision. 
    The decision shall be final on the date it is mailed or otherwise provided to the applicant, whichever occurs first. The decision is the final decision of the city. It cannot be appealed to city officials. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.08.040 - Effective date. 
    The decision is effective the day after it is final. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 19.12 - TYPE II PROCEDURE (ADMINISTRATIVE) 
Sections: 

19.12.010 - Preapplication conference. 
    A preapplication conference is required for Type II applications. Preapplication conference requirements and procedures are in Section 19.24.030. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.12.020 - Application requirements. 
A.  Application forms. Type II applications shall be made on forms provided by the city manager; 
B.  Submittal information. The application shall: 
1.  Include the information requested on the application form; 
2.  Be filed with a narrative statement that explains how the application satisfies each and all of the relevant criteria and standards in sufficient detail for review and decision-making; 
3.  Be accompanied by the required fee; 
4.  Include additional information as required by the relevant municipal code section(s) applicable to the application. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.12.030 - Notice of application for Type II administrative decision. 
A.  Before making a Type II administrative decision, the city manager shall mail notice to: 
1.  All owners of record of real property within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the subject site; 
2.  All city-recognized neighborhood groups or associations whose boundaries include the site; 
3.  Any person who submits a written request to receive a notice; and 
4.  Any governmental agency which is entitled to notice under an intergovernmental agreement entered into with the city. The city may notify other affected agencies, as appropriate, for review of the application. 
B.  The purpose of the notice is to give nearby property owners and other interested people the opportunity to submit written comments about the application, before the Type II decision is made. The goal of this notice is to invite people to participate early in the decision-making process; 
C.  Notice of a pending Type II administrative decision shall: 
1.  Provide a fourteen (14) day period for submitting written comments before a decision is made on the permit. 
2.  List the relevant approval criteria by name and number of code sections; 
3.  State the place, date and time the comments are due, and the person to whom the comments should be addressed; 
4.  Include the name and telephone number of a contact person regarding the administrative decision; 
5.  Identify the specific permits or approvals requested; 
6.  Describe the street address or other easily understandable reference to the location of the site; 
7.  State that if any person fails to address the relevant approval criteria with enough detail, they may not be able to appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals or Circuit Court on that issue. Only comments on the relevant approval criteria are considered relevant evidence; 
8.  State that all evidence relied upon by the city manager to make this decision is in the public record, available for public review, and that copies of this evidence can be obtained at a reasonable cost from the city; 
9.  State that after the comment period closes, the city manager shall issue a Type II administrative decision. The decision shall be mailed to the applicant and to anyone else who submitted written comments or who is otherwise legally entitled to notice; 
10.  Contain the following notice: "Notice to mortgagee, lienholder, vendor, or seller: The Toledo Municipal Code requires that if you receive this notice it shall be promptly forwarded to the purchaser." 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.12.040 - Administrative decision requirements. 
    The city manager shall make Type II written decisions addressing all of the relevant approval criteria and standards. Based upon the criteria and standards, and the facts contained within the record, the city manager shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny, the requested permit or action. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.12.050 - Notice of decision. 
A.  Within five days after the city manager signs the decision, a notice of decision shall be sent by mail to: 
1.  Any person who submits a written request to receive notice, or provides comments during the application review period; 
2.  The applicant and all owners or contract purchasers of record of the site which is the subject of the application; 
3.  Any person who submits a written request to receive notice, or provides comments during the application review period; 
4.  Any city-recognized neighborhood group or association whose boundaries include the site; 
5.  Any governmental agency which is entitled to notice under an intergovernmental agreement entered into with the city, and other agencies which were notified or provided comments during the application review period. 
B.  The city manager shall cause an affidavit of mailing the notice to be prepared and made a part of the file. The affidavit shall show the date the notice was mailed and shall demonstrate that the notice was mailed to the applicable people in Section 19.12.050(A) within the time required by law. 
C.  The Type II notice of decision shall contain: 
1.  A description of the applicant's proposal and the city's decision on the proposal (i.e., may be a summary); 
2.  The address or other geographic description of the property proposed for development, including a map of the property in relation to the surrounding area, where applicable; 
3.  A statement of where the city's decision can be obtained; 
4.  The date the decision shall become final, unless appealed; 
5.  A statement that all persons entitled to notice or who are otherwise adversely affected or aggrieved by the decision may appeal the decision; 
6.  A statement briefly explaining how an appeal can be filed, the deadline for filing an appeal, and where further information can be obtained concerning the appeal process; and 
7.  A statement that unless appellant (the person who files the appeal) is the applicant, the hearing on the appeal shall be limited to the specific issues identified in the written comments submitted during the comment period. Additional evidence related to the notice of appeal (see Section 19.12.060(B)(2)) may be submitted by any person during the appeal hearing, subject to any rules of procedure adopted by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.12.060 - Final decision and effective date. 
    A Type II administrative decision is final for purposes of appeal, when it is mailed by the city. A Type II administrative decision is effective on the day after the appeal period expires. If an appeal is filed, the decision is effective when the appeal is decided. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.12.070 - Appeal. 
    A Type II administrative decision may be appealed to the planning commission as follows: 
A.  Who May Appeal. The following people have legal standing to appeal a Type II administrative decision: 
1.  The applicant; 
2.  Any person who was mailed written notice of the Type II administrative decision; 
3.  Any other person who participated in the proceeding by submitting written comments. 
B.  Appeal Procedure. 
1.  Notice of Appeal. Any person with standing to appeal, as provided in Section 19.12.070(A), may appeal a Type II administrative decision by filing a notice of appeal according to the following procedures; 
a.  Time for filing. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the city manager within fourteen (14) days of the date the notice of decision was mailed; 
b.  Content of notice of appeal. The notice of appeal shall contain: 
1.  An identification of the decision being appealed, including the date of the decision; 
2.  A statement demonstrating the person filing the notice of appeal has standing to appeal; 
3.  A statement explaining the specific issues raised on appeal; 
4.  If the appellant is not the applicant, a statement demonstrating that the appeal issues were raised during the comment period; 
5.  Filing fee. 
c.  The amount of the filing fee shall be established by the city. The maximum fee for an initial hearing shall be the city's cost for preparing and for conducting the hearing, or the statutory maximum, whichever is less. 
2.  Scope of Appeal. The appeal of a Type II administrative decision by a person with standing shall be limited to the specific issues raised during the written comment period, as provided under Section 19.12.030(C), unless the hearings body allows additional evidence or testimony concerning any other relevant issue. The hearings body may allow such additional evidence if it determines that such evidence is necessary to resolve the case. The purpose of this requirement is to limit the scope of Type II administrative appeals by encouraging persons with standing to submit their specific concerns in writing during the comment period. The written comments received during the comment period will usually limit the scope of issues on appeal. Only in extraordinary circumstances should new issues be considered by the hearings body on appeal of a Type II administrative decision; 
3.  Appeal Procedures. Type III notice and hearing procedures shall be used for all Type II administrative appeals, as provided in Sections 19.16.030-19.16.070. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.12.090 - Appeal to city council. 
    The decision of the planning commission regarding an appeal of a Type II administrative decision is the final decision of the city unless appealed to city council within fourteen (14) days of the final decision. An appeal to city council shall follow the same appeal procedures as for the planning commission. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 19.16 - TYPE III PROCEDURE (QUASI-JUDICIAL) 
Sections: 

19.16.010 - Preapplication conference. 
    A preapplication conference is required for all Type III applications. The requirements and procedures for a preapplication conference are described in Section 19.24.030. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.16.020 - Application requirements. 
A.  Application forms. Type III applications shall be made on forms provided by the city manager. 
B.  Content. Type III applications shall: 
1.  Include the information requested on the application form; 
2.  Be filed with a narrative statement that explains how the application satisfies each and all of the relevant criteria in sufficient detail for review and action; 
3.  Be accompanied by the required fee; 
4.  Include additional information as required by the relevant municipal code section(s) applicable to the application. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.16.030 - Notice of hearing. 
A.  Mailed notice. Notice of a Type III application hearing or Type II appeal hearing shall be given by the city manager in the following manner: 
1.  At least twenty (20) days before the hearing date, notice shall be mailed to: 
a.  The applicant and all owners or contract purchasers of record of the property which is the subject of the application; 
b.  All property owners of record within three hundred (300) feet of the site; 
c.  Any governmental agency which has entered into an intergovernmental agreement with the city which includes provision for such notice, or who is otherwise entitled to such notice. Owners of airports shall be notified of a proposed zone change in accordance with ORS 227.175; 
d.  Any neighborhood or community organization recognized by the city council and whose boundaries include the property proposed for development; 
e.  Any person who submits a written request to receive notice; 
f.  For appeals, the appellant and all persons who provided testimony; and 
g.  For a land use district change affecting a manufactured home or mobile home park, all mailing addresses within the park, in accordance with ORS 227.175. 
2.  The city manager shall have an affidavit of notice be prepared and made a part of the file. The affidavit shall state the date that the notice was mailed to the persons who must receive notice; 
3.  At least six days before the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be printed in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The newspaper's affidavit of publication of the notice shall be made part of the administrative record. 
B.  Content of Notice. Notice of an appeal of a Type II administrative decision or a Type III hearing to be mailed and published per Section 19.16.030 above shall contain the following information: 
1.  The nature of the application and the proposed land use or uses which could be authorized for the property; 
2.  The applicable criteria and standards from the development code(s) that apply to the application; 
3.  The street address or other easily understood geographical reference to the subject property; 
4.  The date, time, and location of the public hearing; 
5.  A statement that the failure to raise an issue in person, or by letter at the hearing, or failure to provide statements or evidence sufficient to afford the decision-maker an opportunity to respond to the issue, means that an appeal based on that issue cannot be filed with the State Land Lose Board of Appeals; 
6.  The name of a city representative to contact and the telephone number where additional information on the application may be obtained; 
7.  A statement that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence submitted by or for the applicant, and the applicable criteria and standards can be reviewed at City Hall at no cost and that copies shall be provided at a reasonable cost; 
8.  A statement that a copy of the city's staff report and recommendation to the hearings body shall be available for review at no cost at least seven days before the hearing, and that a copy shall be provided on request at a reasonable cost; 
9.  A general explanation of the requirements to submit testimony, and the procedure for conducting public hearings; 
10.  The following notice: "Notice to mortgagee, lienholder, vendor, or seller: The Toledo Municipal Code requires that if you receive this notice it shall be promptly forwarded to the purchaser." 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.16.040 - Conduct of the public hearing. 
A.  At the commencement of the hearing, the hearings body shall state to those in attendance that: 
1.  The applicable approval criteria and standards that apply to the application or appeal; 
2.  A statement that testimony and evidence shall concern the approval criteria described in the staff report, or other criteria in the comprehensive plan or land use regulations which the person testifying believes to apply to the decision; 
3.  A statement that failure to raise an issue with sufficient detail to give the hearings body and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue, means that no appeal may be made to the State Land Use Board of Appeals on that issue; 
4.  Before the conclusion of the initial evidentiary hearing, any participant may ask the hearings body for an opportunity to present additional relevant evidence or testimony that is within the scope of the hearing. The hearings body shall grant the request by scheduling a date to finish the hearing (a "continuance") per Section 19.16.040(B), or by leaving the record open for additional written evidence or testimony per Section 19.16.040(C). 
B.  If the hearings body grants a continuance, the completion of the hearing shall be continued to a date, time, and place at least seven days after the date of the first evidentiary hearing. An opportunity shall be provided at the second hearing for persons to present and respond to new written evidence and oral testimony. If new written evidence is submitted at the second hearing, any person may request, before the conclusion of the second hearing, that the record be left open for at least seven days, so that they can submit additional written evidence or testimony in response to the new written evidence; 
C.  If the hearings body leaves the record open for additional written evidence or testimony, the record shall be left open for at least seven days after the hearing. Any participant may ask the city in writing for an opportunity to respond to new evidence submitted during the period the record was left open. If such a request is filed, the hearings body shall reopen the record: 
1.  When the hearings body reopens the record to admit new evidence or testimony, any person may raise new issues which relate to that new evidence or testimony; 
2.  An extension of the hearing or record granted pursuant to Sections 19.16.040(B) or (C) is subject to the limitations of ORS 227.178 ("120-day rule"), unless the continuance or extension is requested or agreed to by the applicant; 
3.  The city shall allow the applicant at least seven days after the record is closed to all other persons to submit final written arguments in support of the application, unless the applicant expressly waives this right. Unless a time period of greater than seven days is requested by the applicant and approved by the hearing body prior to the close of the evidentiary hearing, seven days shall be the time limit for submittal of the applicant's final written argument. The applicant's final submittal shall be part of the record but shall not include any new evidence. 
D.  The record. 
1.  The record shall contain all testimony and evidence that is submitted to the city and the hearings body and not rejected; 
2.  The hearings body may take official notice of judicially cognizable facts under the applicable law. If the hearings body takes official notice, it must announce its intention and allow persons participating in the hearing to present evidence concerning the noticed facts; 
3.  The hearings body shall retain custody of the record until the city issues a final decision. 
E.  Participants in the appeal of a Type II administrative decision or a Type III hearing are entitled to an impartial review authority as free from potential conflicts of interest and pre-hearing ex parte contacts Section 19.16.040(F) as reasonably possible. However, the public has a countervailing right of free access to public officials. Therefore: 
1.  At the beginning of the public hearing, hearings body members shall disclose the substance of any pre-hearing ex parte contacts concerning the application or appeal. He or she shall state whether the contact has impaired their impartiality or their ability to vote on the matter and shall participate or abstain accordingly; 
2.  A member of the hearings body shall not participate in any proceeding in which they, or any of the following, has a direct or substantial financial interest: Their spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, partner, any business in which they are then serving or have served within the previous two years, or any business with which they are negotiating for or have an arrangement or understanding concerning prospective partnership or employment. Any actual or potential interest shall be disclosed at the hearing where the action is being taken; 
3.  Disqualification of a member of the hearings body due to contacts or conflict may be ordered by a majority of the members present and voting. The person who is the subject of the motion may not vote on the motion to disqualify; 
4.  If all members abstain or are disqualified, those members present who declare their reasons for abstention or disqualification shall be re-qualified to make a decision; 
5.  Any member of the public may raise conflict of interest issues prior to or during the hearing, to which the member of the hearings body shall reply in accordance with this section. 
F.  Ex parte communications. 
1.  Members of the hearings body shall not: 
a.  Communicate, directly or indirectly, with any applicant, appellant, other party to the proceedings, or representative of a party about any issue involved in a hearing, except upon giving notice, per Section 19.16.040(E); 
b.  Take official notice of any communication, report, or other materials outside the record prepared by the proponents or opponents in connection with the particular case, unless all participants are given the opportunity to respond to the noticed materials. 
2.  No decision or action of the hearings body shall be invalid due to ex parte contacts or bias resulting from ex parte contacts, if the person receiving contact: 
a.  Places in the record the substance of any written or oral ex parte communications concerning the decision or action; and 
b.  Makes a public announcement of the content of the communication and of all participants' right to dispute the substance of the communication made. This announcement shall be made at the first hearing following the communication during which action shall be considered or taken on the subject of the communication. 
3.  A communication between city staff and the hearings body is not considered an ex parte contact. 
G.  Presenting and receiving evidence. 
1.  The hearings body may set reasonable time limits for oral presentations and may limit or exclude cumulative, repetitious, irrelevant or personally derogatory testimony or evidence; 
2.  No oral testimony shall be accepted after the close of the public hearing. Written testimony may be received after the close of the public hearing, only as provided in Section 19.16.040(C); 
3.  Members of the hearings body may visit the property and the surrounding area, and may use information obtained during the site visit to support their decision, if the information relied upon is disclosed at the hearing and an opportunity is provided to dispute the evidence. In the alternative, a member of the hearings body may visit the property to familiarize him or herself with the site and surrounding area, but not to independently gather evidence. In the second situation, at the beginning of the hearing, he or she shall disclose the circumstances of the site visit and shall allow all participants to ask about the site visit. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.16.050 - The decision process. 
A.  Basis for decision. Approval or denial of an appeal of a Type II Administrative decision or a Type III application shall be based on standards and criteria in the municipal code. The standards and criteria shall relate approval or denial of a discretionary development permit application to the development regulations and, when appropriate, to the comprehensive plan for the area in which the development would occur and to the development regulations and comprehensive plan for the city as a whole; 
B.  Findings and conclusions. Approval or denial shall be based upon the criteria and standards considered relevant to the decision. The written decision shall explain the relevant criteria and standards, state the facts relied upon in rendering the decision, and justify the decision according to the criteria, standards, and facts; 
C.  Form of decision. The hearings body shall issue a final written order containing the findings and conclusions stated in subsection B, which either approves, denies, or approves with specific conditions. The hearings body may also issue appropriate intermediate rulings when more than one permit or decision is required; 
D.  Decision-making time limits. A final order for any Type II Administrative Appeal or Type III action shall be filed with the city manager within ten (10) business days after the close of the deliberation. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.16.060 - Notice of decision. 
    Written notice of a Type II Administrative Appeal decision or a Type III decision shall be mailed to the applicant and to all participants of record within five business days after the hearings body decision. Failure of any person to receive mailed notice shall not invalidate the decision, provided that a good faith attempt was made to mail the notice. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.16.070 - Final decision and effective date. 
    The decision of the hearings body on any Type II appeal or any Type III application is final for purposes of appeal on the date it is mailed by the city. The decision is effective on the day after the appeal period expires. Unless specified elsewhere in the municipal code, the appeal period is fourteen (14) days. If an appeal is filed, the decision becomes effective on the day after the appeal is decided by the city council. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.16.080 - Appeals. 
    A Type III decision may be appealed to the city council (or as specified by ordinance for the particular land use application) as follows: 
A.  Who may appeal. The following people have legal standing to appeal a Type III decision: 
1.  The applicant; 
2.  Any person who has been substantially affected by the decision; 
3.  Any person who participated in writing or in person at the commission hearing. 
B.  Appeal procedure. 
1.  Notice of Appeal. Any person with standing to appeal, as provided in Section 19.16.080(A), may appeal a Type III decision by filing a Notice of Appeal according to the following procedures: 
a.  Time for filing. A Notice of Appeal shall be filed with the city manager within fourteen (14) days of the date the decision became effective; 
b.  Content of Notice of Appeal. The Notice of Appeal shall contain: 
1.  An identification of the decision being appealed, including the date of the decision; 
2.  A statement demonstrating the person filing the Notice of Appeal has standing to appeal; 
3.  A statement explaining the specific issues raised on appeal; 
4.  If the appellant is not the applicant, a statement demonstrating that the appeal issues were raised during the commission hearing; 
5.  Filing fee. 
c.  The amount of the filing fee shall be established by the city council. 
2.  Scope of appeal. The appeal of a Type III decision by a person with standing shall be limited to the specific issues raised during the planning commission hearing, unless the hearings body allows additional evidence or testimony concerning any other relevant issue. The hearings body may allow such additional evidence if it determines that such evidence is necessary to resolve the case. The purpose of this requirement is to limit the scope of Type III appeals by encouraging persons with standing to submit their specific concerns in writing or in person during the commission hearing. The comments received during the commission hearing will usually limit the scope of issues on appeal. Only in extraordinary circumstances should new issues be considered by the city council on appeal of a Type III decision; 
3.  Appeal procedures. The notification and hearings procedures for Type III applications on appeal to the city council shall be the same as for the initial hearing. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 19.20 - TYPE IV PROCEDURE (LEGISLATIVE) 
Sections: 

19.20.010 - Preapplication conference. 
    A preapplication conference is required for all Type IV applications. The requirements and procedures for a preapplication conference are described in Section 19.24.030. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.20.020 - Timing of requests. 
    The city manager shall review proposed Type IV actions based on the city's approved schedule for such actions. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.20.030 - Application requirements. 
A.  Application forms. Type IV applications shall be made on forms provided by the city manager. 
B.  Submittal information. The application shall contain: 
1.  The information requested on the application form; 
2.  A map and/or plan addressing the appropriate criteria and standards in sufficient detail for review and decision (as applicable); 
3.  The required fee; and 
4.  A letter or narrative statement that explains how the application satisfies each and all of the relevant approval criteria and standards. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.20.040 - Notice of hearing. 
A.  Required hearings. A minimum of two hearings, one before the planning commission and one before the city council, are required for all Type IV applications, except annexations where only a hearing by the city council is required. 
B.  Notification requirements. Notice of public hearings for the request shall be given by the city manager in the following manner: 
1.  At least twenty (20) days, but not more than forty (40) days, before the date of the first hearing on an ordinance that proposes to amend the comprehensive plan or any element thereof, or to adopt an ordinance that proposes to rezone property, a notice shall be prepared in conformance with ORS 227.186 and mailed to: 
a.  Each owner whose property would be rezoned in order to implement the ordinance (i.e., owners of property subject to a comprehensive plan amendment shall be notified if a zone change would be required to implement the proposed comprehensive plan amendment); 
b.  Any affected governmental agency; 
c.  Recognized neighborhood groups or associations affected by the ordinance; 
d.  Any person who requests notice in writing; 
e.  For a zone change affecting a manufactured home or mobile home park, all mailing addresses within the park, in accordance with ORS 227.175; and 
f.  Owners of airports shall be notified of a proposed zone change in accordance with ORS 227.175. 
2.  At least ten (10) days before the scheduled planning commission public hearing date, and seven days before the city council hearing date, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
3.  The city manager shall: 
a.  For each mailing of notice, file an affidavit of mailing in the record; and 
b.  For each published notice, file the affidavit of publication in a newspaper in the record. 
4.  The Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD) shall be notified in writing of proposed comprehensive plan and land use municipal code amendments at least forty-five (45) days before the first public hearing at which public testimony or new evidence will be received. 
5.  Notifications for annexation shall follow the provisions of this chapter, except as required for local government boundary commissions (ORS 199). 
C.  Content of notices. The mailed and published notices shall include the following information: 
1.  The number and title of the file containing the application, and the address and telephone number of the city office where additional information about the application can be obtained; 
2.  A description of the location of the proposal reasonably calculated to give notice of the location of the geographic area; 
3.  A description of the proposal in enough detail for people to determine that a change is proposed, and the place where all relevant materials and information may be obtained or reviewed; 
4.  The time(s), place(s), and date(s) of the public hearing(s); a statement that public oral or written testimony is invited; and a statement that the hearing will be held under this title and rules of procedure adopted by the council and available at City Hall; and 
5.  Each mailed notice required by Section 19.20.040(B)(1) shall contain the following statement: "Notice to mortgagee, lienholder, vendor, or seller: The Toledo Municipal Code requires that if you receive this notice it shall be promptly forwarded to the purchaser." 
D.  Failure to receive notice. The failure of any person to receive notice shall not invalidate the action, providing: 
1.  Personal notice is deemed given where the notice is deposited with the United States Postal Service. 
2.  Published notice is deemed given on the date it is published. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.20.050 - Hearing process and procedure. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided in the rules of procedure adopted by the city council: 
l.  The presiding officer of the planning commission and of the city council shall have the authority to: 
a.  Regulate the course, sequence, and decorum of the hearing; 
b.  Direct procedural requirements or similar matters; and 
c.  Impose reasonable time limits for oral presentations. 
2.  No person shall address the commission or the council without: 
a.  Receiving recognition from the presiding officer; and 
b.  Stating their full name and residence address. 
3.  Disruptive conduct such as applause, cheering, or display of signs shall be cause for expulsion of a person or persons from the hearing, termination or continuation of the hearing, or other appropriate action determined by the presiding officer. 
B.  Unless otherwise provided in the rules of procedure adopted by the council, the presiding officer of the commission and of the council, shall conduct the hearing as follows: 
1.  The presiding officer shall begin the hearing with a statement of the nature of the matter before the body, a general summary of the procedures, a summary of the standards for decision-making, and whether the decision which will be made is a recommendation to the city council or the final decision of the council; 
2.  The city manager's (staff) report and other applicable staff reports shall be presented; 
3.  The public shall be invited to testify; 
4.  The public hearing may be continued to allow additional testimony or it may be closed; and 
5.  The body's deliberation may include questions to the staff, comments from the staff, and inquiries directed to any person present. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.20.060 - Continuation of the public hearing. 
    The planning commission or the city council may continue any hearing, and no additional notice of hearing shall be required if the matter is continued to a specified place, date, and time. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.20.070 - Decision-making considerations. 
    The recommendation by the planning commission and the decision by the city council shall be based on consideration of the following factors: 
A.  The Statewide Planning Goals and Guidelines adopted under Oregon Revised Statutes Chapter 197 (for comprehensive plan amendments only); 
B.  Comments from any applicable federal or state agencies regarding applicable statutes or regulations; 
C.  Any applicable intergovernmental agreements; and 
D.  Any applicable comprehensive plan policies and provisions of the municipal code that implement the comprehensive plan. Compliance with Toledo Municipal Code 17.80 shall be required for legislative amendments such as Comprehensive Plan Amendments and for quasi-judicial amendments. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.20.080 - Approval process and authority. 
A.  The planning commission shall: 
1.  After notice and a public hearing, vote on and prepare a recommendation to the city council to approve, approve with modifications, approve with conditions, deny the proposed change, or adopt an alternative; and 
2.  Within ten (10) business days of determining a recommendation, the presiding officer shall sign the written recommendation, and it shall be filed with the city manager. 
B.  Any member of the planning commission who votes in opposition to the planning commission's majority recommendation may file a written statement of opposition with the city manager before the council public hearing on the proposal. The city manager shall send a copy to each council member and place a copy in the record; 
C.  If the planning commission fails to adopt a recommendation to approve, approve with modifications, approve with conditions, deny the proposed change, or adopt an alternative proposal, within ten (10) days of its first public hearing on the proposed change, the city manager shall: 
1.  Report the failure together with the proposed change to the city council; and 
2.  Provide notice and put the matter on the city council's agenda, a public hearing to be held, and a decision to be made by the council. No further action shall be taken by the commission. 
D.  The city council shall: 
1.  Approve, approve with modifications, approve with conditions, deny, or adopt an alternative to an application for legislative change, or remand the application to the planning commission for rehearing and reconsideration on all or part of the application; 
2.  Consider the recommendation of the planning commission; however, it is not bound by the commission's recommendation; and 
3.  Act by ordinance, which shall be signed by the mayor after the council's adoption of the ordinance. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.20.090 - Vote required for a legislative change. 
A.  A vote by a majority of the qualified voting members of the planning commission present is required for a recommendation for approval, approval with modifications, approval with conditions, denial or adoption of an alternative. 
B.  A vote by a majority of the qualified members of the city council present is required to decide any motion made on the proposal. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.20.100 - Notice of decision. 
    Notice of a Type IV decision shall be mailed to the applicant, any participants of record, and the Department of Land Conservation and Development, within five business days after the city council decision is filed with the city manager. The city shall also provide notice to all persons as required by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.20.110 - Final decision and effective date. 
    A Type IV decision, if approved, shall take effect and shall become final as specified in the enacting ordinance or as specified in the city charter, or if not approved, upon mailing of the notice of decision to the applicant. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.20.120 - Record of the public hearing. 
A.  A verbatim record of the proceeding shall be made by stenographic, mechanical, or electronic means. It is not necessary to transcribe an electronic record. The minutes and other evidence presented as a part of the hearing shall be part of the record; 
B.  All exhibits received and displayed shall be marked to provide identification and shall be part of the record; 
C.  The official record shall include: 
1.  All materials considered by the hearings body; 
2.  All materials submitted by the city manager to the hearings body regarding the application; 
3.  The verbatim record made by the stenographic, mechanical, or electronic means; the minutes of the hearing; and other documents considered; 
4.  The final ordinance; 
5.  All correspondence; and 
6.  A copy of the notices which were given as required by this title. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 19.24 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

19.24.010 - 120-day rule. 
    The city shall take final action on permit applications which are subject to this title, including resolution of all appeals, within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date the application is deemed as complete. Any exceptions to this rule shall conform to the provisions of ORS 227.178. (The one hundred twenty (120) day rule does not apply to Type IV legislative decisions-plan and code amendments under ORS 227.178.) 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.24.020 - Time computation. 
    In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this chapter, the day of the act or event from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday or legal holiday, including Sunday, in which event, the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday or legal holiday. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.24.030 - Preapplication conferences. 
A.  Participants. When a preapplication conference is required, the applicant shall meet with the city manager. 
B.  Information provided. At such conference, the city manager shall: 
1.  Cite the comprehensive plan policies and map designations applicable to the proposal; 
2.  Cite the ordinance provisions, including substantive and procedural requirements, applicable to the proposal; 
3.  Provide available technical data and assistance which will aid the applicant; 
4.  Identify other governmental policies and regulations that relate to the application; and 
5.  Reasonably identify other opportunities or constraints concerning the application. 
C.  Disclaimer. Failure of the city manager to provide any of the information required by this section shall not constitute a waiver of any of the standards, criteria or requirements for the application. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.24.040 - Changes in the law. 
    Due to possible changes in federal, state, regional, and local law, the applicant is responsible for ensuring that the application complies with all applicable laws on the day the application is deemed complete. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.24.050 - Applications. 
A.  Initiation of applications: 
1.  Applications for approval under this title may be initiated by: 
a.  Resolution of city council; 
b.  Resolution of the planning commission; 
c.  The city manager; or 
d.  A record owner of property (person(s) whose name is on the most recently recorded deed), or contract purchaser with written permission from the record owner. 
2.  Any person authorized to submit an application for approval may be represented by an agent authorized in writing to make the application on their behalf. 
B.  Consolidation of proceedings. When an applicant applies for more than one type of land use or development permit (e.g., Type II and III) for the same one or more parcels of land, the proceedings may be consolidated for review and decision by choice of the applicant. 
1.  If more than one approval authority would be required to decide on the applications if submitted separately, then the decision shall be made by the approval authority having original jurisdiction over one of the applications in the following order of preference: the council, the commission, or the city manager. 
2.  When proceedings are consolidated: 
a.  The notice shall identify each application to be decided; 
b.  The decision on a comprehensive plan map amendment shall precede the decision on a proposed land use district change and other decisions on a proposed development. Similarly, the decision on a zone map amendment shall precede the decision on a proposed development and other actions; and 
c.  Separate findings and decisions shall be made on each application. 
C.  Check for acceptance and completeness. In reviewing an application for completeness, the following procedure shall be used: 
1.  Acceptance. When an application is received by the city, the city manager shall immediately determine whether the following essential items are present. If the following items are not present, the application shall not be accepted and shall be immediately returned to the applicant: 
a.  The required form; 
b.  The required fee; 
c.  The signature of the applicant on the required form, and signed written authorization of the property owner of record if the applicant is not the owner. 
2.  Completeness. 
a.  Review and notification. After the application is accepted, the city manager shall review the application for completeness. If the application is incomplete, the city manager shall notify the applicant in writing of exactly what information is missing within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application and allow the applicant one hundred eighty (180) days to submit the missing information; 
b.  When application deemed complete for review. In accordance with the application submittal requirements in this title, the application shall be deemed complete upon the receipt by the city manager of all required information. The applicant shall have the option of withdrawing the application, or refusing to submit information requested by the city manager in (a), above. For the refusal to be valid, the refusal shall be made in writing and received by the city manager no later than fourteen (14) days after the date on the city manager's letter of incompleteness. If the applicant refuses in writing to submit the missing information, the application shall be deemed complete on the 31st day after the city manager first accepted the application. 
D.  Standards and criteria that apply to the application. Approval or denial of the application shall be based upon the standards and criteria that were applicable at the time the application was first accepted. 
E.  Changes or additions to the application during the review period. Once an application is deemed complete: 
1.  All documents and other evidence relied upon by the applicant shall be submitted to the city manager at least seven days before the notice of action or hearing is mailed, if possible. Documents or other evidence submitted after that date shall be received by city manager, and transmitted to the hearings body, but may be too late to include with the staff report and evaluation; 
2.  When documents or other evidence are submitted by the applicant during the review period, but after the application is deemed complete, the assigned review person or body shall determine whether or not the new documents or other evidence submitted by the applicant significantly change the application; 
3.  If the assigned reviewer determines that the new documents or other evidence significantly changes the application, the reviewer shall include a written determination that a significant change in the application has occurred as part of the decision. In the alternate, the reviewer may inform the applicant either in writing, or orally at a public hearing, that such changes may constitute a significant change, and allow the applicant to withdraw the new materials submitted, in order to avoid a determination of significant change; 
4.  If the applicant's new materials are determined to constitute a significant change in an application that was previously deemed complete, the city shall take one of the following actions, at the choice of the applicant: 
a.  Continue to process the existing application and allow the applicant to submit a new second application with the proposed significant changes. Both the old and the new applications will proceed, but each will be deemed complete on different dates and may therefore be subject to different criteria and standards and different decision dates; 
b.  Suspend the existing application and allow the applicant to submit a new application with the proposed significant changes. Before the existing application can be suspended, the applicant must consent in writing to waive the one hundred twenty (120) day rule (Section 19.24.010) on the existing application. If the applicant does not consent, the city shall not select this option; 
c.  Reject the new documents or other evidence that has been determined to constitute a significant change, and continue to process the existing application without considering the materials that would constitute a significant change. The city will complete its decision-making process without considering the new evidence. 
5.  If a new application is submitted by the applicant, that application shall be subject to a separate check for acceptance and completeness and will be subject to the standards and criteria in effect at the time the new application is accepted. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.24.060 - City manager duties. 
    The city manager shall: 
A.  Prepare application forms based on the criteria and standards in applicable state law, the city's comprehensive plan, and implementing municipal code provisions; 
B.  Accept all development applications which comply with the applicable application requirements; 
C.  Prepare a staff report that summarizes the application(s) and applicable decision criteria, and provides findings of conformance and/or non-conformance with the criteria. The staff report should also provide a recommended decision of: approval, denial or approval with specific conditions that ensure conformance with the approval criteria; 
D.  Prepare a notice of the proposal decision; 
l.  In the case of an application subject to a Type I or II review process, the city manager shall make the staff report and all case-file materials available at the time that the notice of the decision is issued; 
2.  In the case of an application subject to a hearing (Type III or IV process), the city manager shall make the staff report available to the public at least seven days prior to the scheduled hearing date, and make the case-file materials available when notice of the hearing is mailed. 
E.  Administer the hearings process; 
F.  File notice of the final decision in the city's records and mail a copy of the notice of the final decision to the applicant, all persons who provided comments or testimony, persons who requested copies of the notice, and any other persons entitled to notice by law; 
G.  Maintain and preserve the file for each application for the time period required by law. The file shall include, as applicable, a list of persons required to be given notice and a copy of the notice given, the affidavits of notice, the application and any supporting information, the staff report the final decision including the findings, conclusions and conditions (if any), all correspondence, minutes of any meeting at which the application was considered, and any other exhibit, information or documentation which was considered by the decision-maker(s) on the application; and 
H.  Administer the appeals and review process. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.24.070 - Amended decision process. 
A.  The purpose of an amended decision process is to allow the city manager to correct typographical errors, rectify inadvertent omissions and/or make other minor changes which do not materially alter the decision. 
B.  The city manager may issue an amended decision after the notice of final decision has been issued but before the appeal period has expired. If such a decision is amended, the decision shall be issued within ten (10) business days after the original decision would have become final, but in no event beyond the one hundred twenty (120) day period required by state law. A new ten (10) day appeal period shall begin on the day the amended decision is issued. 
C.  Notice of an amended decision shall be given using the same mailing and distribution list as for the original decision notice. 
D.  Modifications to approved plans or conditions of approval requested by the applicant shall follow the procedures and criteria as established for the original application. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
19.24.080 - Resubmittal of application following denial. 
    An application which has been denied, or an application which was denied and which on appeal or review has not been reversed by a higher authority, including the Land Use Board of Appeals, the Land Conservation and Development Commission or the courts, may not be resubmitted as the same or a substantially similar proposal for the same land for a period of at least twelve (12) months from the date the final city action is made denying the application, unless there is substantial change in the facts or a change in city policy which would change the outcome, as determined by the city manager. 
(Ord. 1287 § 1 (part), 2001) 
STATUTORY REFERENCES 
FOR 
OREGON CITIES 
    The statutory references listed below refer the code user to state statutes applicable to Oregon cities. They are current with the 2015 Regular Session of the State legislature. 
General Provisions 
Incorporation of cities 
ORS § 221.005 et seq. 
City charters 
Oregon Const. Art. XI, § 2 
Charter amendments 
ORS § 221.210 
Boundary changes 
ORS ch. 222 
Ordinances 
ORS § 221.275 et seq. 
Enforcement of ordinances 
ORS §§ 30.315 and 221.315 
Procedures for infractions, violations and traffic offenses 
ORS ch. 153 
Elections 
ORS §§ 221.180, 221.200, 221.230 
Initiative and referendum 
ORS §§ 221.210 and 250.255 et seq. 
Administration and Personnel 
City officers 
ORS § 221.110 et seq. 
Municipal courts 
ORS §§ 221.140, 221.336 et seq. 
Public meetings 
ORS § 192.610 et seq. 
Emergency management and services 
ORS ch. 401 
Planning commissions 
ORS § 227.010 et seq. 
Revenue and Finance 
Financial administration 
ORS ch. 294 
Public contracts and purchasing 
ORS chs. 279A-279C 
Assessments for local improvements 
ORS ch. 223 
Limitations on powers of city to assist corporations 
Oregon Const. Art. XI § 9 
Revenue sharing for cities 
ORS § 221.770 
Business Licenses and Regulations 
Taxation of liquor prohibited 
ORS § 473.190 
Animals 
Animal control 
ORS ch. 609 
Rabies control 
ORS § 433.340 et seq. 
Health and Safety 
General authority 
ORS § 221.410 
Health Hazard Abatement Law 
ORS § 222.840 et seq. 
Camping by homeless 
ORS § 203.077 et seq. 
Fireworks 
ORS § 480.111 et seq. 
Public Peace, Morals and Welfare 
General authority 
ORS § 221.410 
State penal code 
ORS title 16 
Curfew 
ORS § 419C.680 
Firearms regulation 
ORS § 166.170 et seq. 
Public intoxication 
ORS § 430.402 
Vehicles and Traffic 
Oregon vehicle code 
ORS title 59 
Local authority 
ORS §§ 801.038, 801.040 
Rules of the road 
ORS ch. 811 
Driving under influence of intoxicants 
ORS ch. 813 
Off-road vehicles 
ORS ch. 821 
Abandoned vehicles 
ORS ch. 819 
Parking offenses 
ORS § 221.275 et seq. 
Bicycles 
ORS § 814.400 et seq. 
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places 
City improvements and works 
ORS ch. 223 
City parks, memorials and cemeteries 
ORS ch. 226 
Public Services 
Municipal utilities 
ORS ch. 225 
Regulation of public utilities 
ORS § 221.420 et seq. 
City sewers and sanitation 
ORS ch. 224 
System development charges 
ORS § 223.297 et seq. 
Buildings and Construction 
State building code 
ORS ch. 455 
Adoption of codes by reference 
ORS § 221.330 
Radio antennas 
ORS § 221.295 
Subdivisions 
Subdivisions and partitions 
ORS ch. 92 
Zoning 
City planning and zoning 
ORS ch. 227 
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Ordinance 
Number 1 (Repealed by 237) 2 (Repealed by 237) 3 (Repealed by 830) 4 (Repealed by 225) 5 (Repealed by 818) 6 (Repealed by 818) 7 (Repealed by 818) 8 (Repealed by 818) 9 Public ways, grades (Special) 10 Public improvements, streets (Special) 11 Public improvements, streets (Special) 12 Tax levy (Special) 13 (Number not used) 14 (Repealed by 818) 15 (Repealed by 237) 16 (Repealed by 818) 17 (Repealed by 818) 18 (Number not used) 19 Public ways, grades (Special) 20 Public improvements, streets (Special) 21 Public improvements, streets (Special) 22 Tax levy (Special) 23 (Repealed by 818) 24 (Repealed by 818) 25 Public improvements, sidewalks (Special) 26 (Number not used) 27 Public ways, grades (Special) 28 Public improvements, streets (Special) 29 Public improvements, sidewalks (Special) 30 Public improvements, sidewalks (Special) 31 Tax levy (Special) 32 (Repealed by 237) 33 Tax levy (Special) 34 (Repealed by 237) 35 Tax levy (Special) 36 (Repealed by 237) 37 (Repealed by 818) 38 Public improvements, streets (Special) 39 (Repealed by 88) 40 Miscellaneous (Special) 41 Tax levy (Special) 42 Franchises (Special) 43 (Repealed by 242) 44 (Repealed by 818) 45 (Repealed by 818) 46 (Repealed by 820) 47 (Repealed by 818) 48 (Repealed by 226) 49 Tax levy (Special) 50 (Repealed by 237) 51 Franchises (Special) 52 Tax levy (Special) 53 Public improvements, sidewalks (Special) 54 Franchises (Special) 55 Tax levy (Special) 56 (Repealed by 818) 57 Public ways, grades (Special) 58 (Repealed by 818) 59 Public improvements, streets (Special) 60 Public improvements, streets (Special) 61 (Repealed by 67) 62 Public improvements, streets (Special) 63 Public ways, grades (Special) 64 (Repealed by 818) 65 (Repealed by 79) 66 Tax levy (Special) 67 Repeals Ord. 61 (Repealer) 68 Public ways, grades (Special) 69 (Repealed by 818) 70 (Repealed by 818) 71 Public improvements, streets (Special) 72 Tax levy (Special) 73 Public improvements, streets (Special) 74 Public ways, grades (Special) 75 Franchises (Special) 76 Public improvements, streets (Special) 77 (Repealed by 818) 78 Tax levy (Special) 79 Repeals Ord. 65 (Repealer) 80 Public ways, dedications (Special) 81 Public improvements, streets (Special) 82 Charter amendments (Special) 83 Charter amendments (Special) 84 (Number not used) 85 (Number not used) 86 Tax levy (Special) 87 (Repealed by 237 and 436) 88 Repeals Ord. 39 (Repealer) 89 (Repealed by 818) 90 Bond issues (Special) 91 (Repealed by 820) 92 (Repealed by 818) 93 Charter amendments (Special) 94 Franchises (Special) 95 (Repealed by 818) 96 (Repealed by 818) 97 Franchises (Special) 98 Bond issues (Special) 99 (Repealed by 818) 100 (Repealed by 818) 101 (Repealed by 444) 102 Bond issues (Special) 103 Franchises (Special) 104 Franchises (Special) 105 Tax levy (Special) 106 (Repealed by 818) 107 Public improvements, streets (Special) 108 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 109 Public ways, grades (Special) 110 Public ways, grades (Special) 111 Public improvements, sidewalks (Special) 112 Public improvements, sidewalks (Special) 113 Public improvements, sidewalks (Special) 114 Miscellaneous (Special) 115 Public improvements, streets (Special) 116 Public ways, grades (Special) 117 Public ways, grades (Special) 118 Public ways, grades (Special) 119 Tax levy (Special) 120 Franchises (Special) 121 (Repealed by 818) 122 (Repealed by 818) 123 Franchises (Special) 124 (Repealed by 820) 125 (Repealed by 821) 126 Public improvements, streets (Special) 127 Public improvements, streets (Special) 128 Tax levy (Special) 129 (Repealed by 818) 130 Public ways, vacations (Special) 131 (Repealed by 820) 132 Public ways, grades (Special) 133 (Repealed by 818) 134 (Repealed by 818) 135 Public improvements, streets (Special) 136 (Repealed by 820) 137 Franchises (Special) 138 Charter amendments (Special) 139 Tax levy (Special) 140 Charter amendments (Special) 141 Public improvements, streets (Special) 142 Public improvements, streets (Special) 143 Public improvements, streets (Special) 144 Charter amendments (Special) 145 Charter amendments (Special) 146 Charter amendments (Special) 147 Tax levy (Special) 148 Charter amendments (Special) 149 Charter amendments (Special) 150 Charter amendments (Special) 151 Franchises (Special) 152 Public improvements, sidewalks (Special) 153 Miscellaneous (Special) 154 Public improvements (Special) 155 Public improvements, sidewalks (Special) 156 Public improvements, sidewalks (Special) 157 Bond issues (Special) 158 Bond issues (Special) 159 Bond issues (Special) 160 Tax levy (Special) 161 Public ways, grades (Special) 162 Public improvements, streets (Special) 163 Public improvements, streets (Special) 164 (Repealed by 818) 165 (Repealed by 818) 166 (Failed to pass) 167 Public ways, vacations (Special) 168 (Repealed by 822) 169 Public improvements, streets (Special) 170 Bond issues (Special) 171 Public improvements, streets (Special) 172 Public improvements, streets (Special) 173 Public improvements, streets (Special) 174 Franchises (Special) 175 Tax levy (Special) 176 (Repealed by 818) 177 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 178 (Repealed by 820) 179 Public improvements, streets (Special) 180 Public improvements, streets (Special) 181 Public improvements, streets (Special) 182 Public improvements, streets (Special) 183 Public ways, vacations (Special) 184 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 185 Public ways, grades (Special) 186 (Repealed by 821) 187 Public ways, grades (Special) 188 Public improvements, streets (Special) 189 Public improvements, streets (Special) 190 Public improvements, streets (Special) 191 (Repealed by 818) 192 Public improvements, streets (Special) 193 Bond issues (Special) 194 Bond issues (Special) 195 Public improvements, streets (Special) 196 Public improvements, streets (Special) 197 Public improvements, streets (Special) 198 Public improvements, streets (Special) 199 Public ways, grades (Special) 200 Public improvements, streets (Special) 201 Public improvements, streets (Special) 202 (Repealed by 427) 203 Bond issues (Special) 204 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 205 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 206 Public improvements, streets (Special) 207 Public improvements, streets (Special) 208 (Repealed by 818) 209 Public improvements, streets (Special) 210 (Repealed by 242 and 261) 211 (Repealed by 820) 212 Public ways, grades (Special) 213 (Repealed by 818) 214 Public ways, grades (Special) 215 Public improvements, streets (Special) 216 Public improvements, streets (Special) 217 (Repealed by 818) 218 Public improvements, streets (Special) 219 Bond issues (Special) 220 (Repealed by 221) 221 (Repealed by 349) 222 (Repealed by 818) 223 (Repealed by 818) 224 (Repealed by 398) 225 (Repealed by 287) 226 (Repealed by 830) 227 (Repealed by 830) 228 (Repealed by 830) 229 (Repealed by 830) 230 (Repealed by 830) 231 (Repealed by 830) 232 (Repealed by 821) 233 (Repealed by 818) 234 (Repealed by 830) 235 (Repealed by 830) 236 (Repealed by 830) 237 Repeals Ords. 1, 2, 15, 32, 34, 36, 50, 87 (Repealer) 238 (Repealed by 830) 239 (Repealed by 830) 240 (Repealed by 818) 241 (Repealed by 818) 242 (Repealed by 261) 243 Public ways, grades (Special) 244 Public ways, grades (Special) 245 Public ways, grades (Special) 246 Public ways, grades (Special) 247 (Repealed by 441) 248 Public ways, grades (Special) 249 Public ways, grades (Special) 250 Public ways, grades (Special) 251 (Repealed by 821) 252 (Repealed by 821) 253 Public improvements, streets (Special) 254 Bond issues (Special) 255 Public improvements, streets (Special) 256 Public improvements, streets (Special) 257 Tax levy (Special) 258 (Repealed by 830) 259 Bond issues (Special) 260 Bond issues (Special) 261 (Repealed by 336) 262 Public ways, grades (Special) 263 Public ways, grades (Special) 264 (Failed to pass) 265 Public ways, grades (Special) 266 Public ways, grades (Special) 267 Public ways, grades (Special) 268 Public ways, grades (Special) 269 Public ways, grades (Special) 270 Public improvements, streets (Special) 271 Public improvements, streets (Special) 272 Public improvements, streets (Special) 273 Public improvements, streets (Special) 274 Public ways, grades (Special) 275 Public improvements, streets (Special) 276 Public improvements, streets (Special) 277 Public improvements, streets (Special) 278 Tax levy (Special) 279 Public improvements, streets (Special) 280 Public improvements, streets (Special) 281 Public improvements, streets (Special) 282 Public improvements, streets (Special) 283 Public improvements, streets (Special) 284 Public improvements, streets (Special) 285 Public improvements, streets (Special) 286 Public improvements, streets (Special) 287 (Repealed by 690) 287A (Repealed by 818) 288 Franchises (Special) 289 Public ways, vacations (Special) 290 Public ways, grades (Special) 291 Public ways, grades (Special) 292 Public ways, grades (Special) 293 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 294 (Repealed by 818) 295 Public improvements, streets (Special) 296 Public improvements, streets (Special) 297 Public ways, grades (Special) 298 Public ways, grades (Special) 299 Public ways, grades (Special) 300 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 301 Public ways, grades (Special) 302 Public ways, grades (Special) 303 Public ways, grades (Special) 304 Public improvements, streets (Special) 305 Public improvements, streets (Special) 306 Public ways, grades (Special) 307 Public ways, grades (Special) 308 (Repealed by 820) 309 Public ways, grades (Special) 310 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 311 Public improvements, streets (Special) 312 Public improvements, streets (Special) 313 Public improvements, streets (Special) 314 Public improvements, streets (Special) 315 Public improvements, sidewalks (Special) 316 Public improvements, sidewalks (Special) 317 Public improvements, streets (Special) 318 Public improvements, streets (Special) 319 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 320 Public improvements, streets (Special) 321 Public improvements, streets (Special) 322 Public improvements, streets (Special) 323 Tax levy (Special) 324 Public ways, grades (Special) 325 Public ways, grades (Special) 326 Public ways, grades (Special) 327 Public improvements, streets (Special) 328 Public improvements, streets (Special) 329 Public improvements, streets (Special) 330 Public improvements, streets (Special) 331 (Repealed by 818) 332 Public ways, grades (Special) 333 Public improvements, streets (Special) 334 (Repealed by 818) 335 (Repealed by 818) 336 (Repealed by 406 and 424) 337 Bond issues (Special) 338 Bond issues (Special) 339 Public improvements, sidewalks (Special) 340 Public ways, grades (Special) 341 Public improvements, sidewalks (Special) 342 Public ways, grades (Special) 343 (Repealed by 821) 344 Public improvements, sidewalks (Special) 345 Public improvements, streets (Special) 346 Public improvements, streets (Special) 347 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 348 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 349 (Repealed by 821) 350 (Repealed by 821) 351 Public ways, grades (Special) 352 Public ways, grades (Special) 353 Public ways, grades (Special) 354 Public ways, grades (Special) 355 Public improvements, streets (Special) 356 Public improvements, streets (Special) 357 Public improvements, streets (Special) 358 Public improvements, streets (Special) 359 Public improvements, streets (Special) 360 Bond issues (Special) 361 Bond issues (Special) 362 Bond issues (Special) 363 Bond issues (Special) 364 Bond issues (Special) 365 Bond issues (Special) 367 Bond issues (Special) 368 Bond issues (Special) 369 Bond issues (Special) 370 Public improvements, streets (Special) 371 Tax levy (Special) 372 Public improvements, streets (Special) 373 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 374 Public improvements, streets (Special) 375 Public improvements, streets (Special) 376 Public improvements, sidewalks (Special) 377 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 378 Bond issues (Special) 379 Bond issues (Special) 380 Bond issues (Special) 381 Bond issues (Special) 382 Bond issues (Special) 383 Bond issues (Special) 384 Public improvements, streets (Special) 385 Bond issues (Special) 386 Bond issues (Special) 387 Bond issues (Special) 388 Bond issues (Special) 389 Bond issues (Special) 390 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 391 Public improvements, sidewalks (Special) 392 (Repealed by 820) 393 Public ways, grades (Special) 394 Bond issues (Special) 395 (Repealed by 818) 396 Public ways, grades (Special) 397 Public improvements, streets (Special) 398 (Repealed by 830) 399 (Repealed by 818) 400 Public improvements, sidewalks (Special) 401 Public ways, grades (Special) 402 Bond issues (Special) 403 Tax levy (Special) 404 (Failed to pass) 405 Public improvements, streets (Special) 406 (Repealed by 424) 407 Public improvements, streets (Special) 408 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 409 Public improvements, streets (Special) 410 Public ways, grades (Special) 411 Bond issues (Special) 412 Bond issues (Special) 413 Tax levy (Special) 414 Public improvements, streets (Special) 415 (Failed to pass) 416 Miscellaneous (Special) 417 (Repealed by 428) 418 Public ways, grades (Special) 419 Tax levy (Special) 420 (Repealed by 422) 421 (Repealed by 423) 422 (Repealed by 426) 423 Numbering of houses, buildings and structures in city (15.04) 424 (Repealed by 455) 425 (Repealed by 821) 426 Naming streets (12.04) 427 (Repealed by 818) 428 Bond issues (Special) 429 Tax levy (Special) 430 (Repealed by 1127) 431 (Repealed by 818) 432 Tax levy (Special) 433 (Repealed by 830) 434 (Repealed by 830) 435 Public ways, county roads, public improvements, streets (Special) 436 Repeals Ord. 87 (Repealer) 437 (Repealed by 444) 438 (Repealed by 818) 439 (Repealed by 818) 440 (Repealed by 818) 441 (Repealed by 818) 442 (Repealed by 818) 443 Tax levy (Special) 444 (Repealed by 445) 445 (Repealed by 830) 446 (Repealed by 818) 447 Tax levy (Special) 448 (Repealed by 832) 449 (Repealed by 818) 450 (Repealed by 828) 451 Miscellaneous (Special) 452 Franchises (Special) 453 (Repealed by 818) 454 (Repealed by 821) 455 Miscellaneous (Special) 456 (Repealed by 818) 457 Public ways, grades (Special) 458 Public ways, grades (Special) 459 Public ways, grades (Special) 460 Public ways, grades (Special) 461 Public ways, grades (Special) 462 Public ways, grades (Special) 463 Public ways, grades (Special) 464 Public ways, grades (Special) 465 Public ways, grades (Special) 466 (Repealed by 821) 467 (Repealed by 1127) 468 Miscellaneous (Special) 469 Tax levy (Special) 470 Bond issues (Special) 471 (Repealed by 818) 472 (Repealed by 821) 473 (Repealed by 818) 474 Public ways, vacations (Special) 475 Miscellaneous (Special) 476 Tax levy (Special) 477 (Repealed by 818) 478 (Repealed by 821) 479 (Repealed by 1127) 480 (Repealed by 830) 481 (Repealed by 818) 482 (Repealed by 1122) 483 Bond issues (Special) 484 Bond issues (Special) 485 Tax levy (Special) 486 Bond issues (Special) 487 Bond issues (Special) 488 (Repealed by 821) 489 (Repealed by 820) 490 (Repealed by 818) 491 Public improvements, streets (Special) 492 Public improvements, streets (Special) 493 Public improvements, streets (Special) 494 Public improvements, streets (Special) 495 (Repealed by 830) 496 Public improvements, streets (Special) 497 Public improvements, streets (Special) 498 Public improvements, streets (Special) 499 Public improvements, streets (Special) 500 Public improvements, streets (Special) 501 Public improvements, streets (Special) 502 Public improvements, streets (Special) 503 Public improvements, streets (Special) 504 Public improvements, streets (Special) 505 Public improvements, streets (Special) 506 (Repealed by 821) 507 Franchises (Special) 508 (Repealed by 821) 509 (Repealed by 821) 510 Public improvements, streets (Special) 511 Public improvements, streets (Special) 512 Public improvements, streets (Special) 513 Public improvements, streets (Special) 514 Public improvements, streets (Special) 515 Public improvements, streets (Special) 516 Tax levy (Special) 517 Miscellaneous (Special) 518 Public ways, grades (Special) 519 (Repealed by 818) 520 Tax levy (Special) 521 Public ways, vacations (Special) 522 Tax levy (Special) 523 (Repealed by 818) 524 Tax levy (Special) 525 (Repealed by 818) 526 (Repealed by 821) 527 (Repealed by 821) 528 Tax levy (Special) 529 (Repealed by 531) 530 (Repealed by 830) 531 Repeals Ord. 529 (Repealer) 532 Public ways, vacations (Special) 533 Tax levy (Special) 534 Tax levy (Special) 535 Tax levy (Special) 536 Public ways, grades (Special) 537 Public ways, vacations (Special) 538 (Repealed by 821) 539 (Repealed by 821) 540 Public ways, grades (Special) 541 Public ways, grades (Special) 542 Tax levy (Special) 543 Public ways, vacations (Special) 544 (Repealed by 1119) 545 (Repealed by 821) 546 (Repealed by 757) 547 Tax levy (Special) 548 (Repealed by 639) 549 Public ways, grades (Special) 550 Charter amendments (Special) 551 Public improvements, streets (Special) 552 (Repealed by 563) 553 Tax levy (Special) 554 (Repealed by 821) 555 (Repealed by 557) 556 Public improvements, streets (Special) 557 Repeals Ord. 555 (Repealer) 558 Bond issues (Special) 559 (Repealed by 1081) 560 Miscellaneous (Special) 561 Miscellaneous (Special) 562 Public ways, vacations (Special) 563 Public improvements, streets (Special) 564 (Repealed by 567) 565 Public ways, grades (Special) 566 Tax levy (Special) 567 Public improvements, streets (Special) 568 Civil defense (Repealed by 1245) 569 (Repealed by 830) 570 (Repealed by 821) 571 (Repealed by 821) 572 (Repealed by 873) 573 Games, mechanical amusement devices licensing and regulations (Repealed by 1233) 574 Public ways, vacations (Special) 575 (Repealed by 818) 576 Tax levy (Special) 577 Public ways, dedications (Special) 578 Public ways, dedications (Special) 579 (Repealed by 821) 580 (Repealed by 821) 581 (Repealed by 821) 582 (Repealed by 587) 583 (Repealed by 588) 584 (Repealed by 589) 585 Tax levy (Special) 586 Public ways, grades (Special) 587 Repeals Ord. 582 (Repealer) 588 Repeals Ord. 583 (Repealer) 589 Repeals Ord. 584 (Repealer) 590 Charter amendments (Special) 591 (Repealed by 602) 592 Charter amendments (Special) 593 Bond issues (Special) 594 Bond issues (Special) 595 Public ways, grades (Special) 596 (Repealed by 641) 597 (Repealed by 616) 598 (Repealed by 821) 599 (Repealed by 818) 600 (Repealed by 601) 601 (Repealed by 1119) 602 Repeals Ord. 591 (Repealer) 603 Charter amendments (Special) 604 Charter amendments (Special) 605 Charter amendments (Special) 606 (Repealed by 818) 607 (Repealed by 645) 608 Bond issues (Special) 609 Bond issues (Special) 610 Public improvements, streets (Special) 611 Public improvements, streets (Special) 612 Public improvements, streets (Special) 613 Public improvements, streets (Special) 614 Public improvements, streets (Special) 615 (Repealed by 1050) 616 (Repealed by 821) 617 Tax levy (Special) 618 Public ways, vacations (Special) 619 (Repealed by 821) 620 Franchises (Special) 621 (Repealed by 821) 622 (Repealed by 821) 623 (Repealed by 821) 624 (Repealed by 819) 625 Miscellaneous (Special) 626 Annexations (Special) 627 Annexations (Special) 628 Tax levy (Special) 629 (Repealed by 818) 630 (Repealed by 1127) 631 Public improvements, streets (Special) 632 Public ways, dedications (Special) 633 Tax levy (Special) 634 Franchises (Special) 635 Franchises (Special) 636 Public improvements, streets (Special) 637 Public improvements, streets (Special) 638 (Repealed by 821) 639 Repeals Ord. 548 (Repealer) 640 (Repealed by 1109) 641 Repeals Ord. 596 (Repealer) 642 Public improvements, streets (Special) 643 Public improvements, streets (Special) 644 Charter amendments (Special) 645 Repeals Ord. 607 (Repealer) 646 (Repealed by 818) 647 (Repealed by 821) 648 Charter amendments (Special) 649 Charter amendments (Special) 650 Annexations (Special) 651 (Repealed by 667) 652 Tax levy (Special) 653 Charter amendments (Special) 654 Public ways, vacations (Special) 655 (Repealed by 754) 656 Public ways, vacations (Special) 657 Public ways, vacations (Special) 658 Public ways, dedications (Special) 659 Public improvements, streets (Special) 660 Public ways, dedications (Special) 661 Public ways, vacations (Special) 662 Bond issues (Special) 663 Bond issues (Special) 664 (Failed to pass) 665 Public ways, vacations (Special) 666 (Repealed by 830) 667 Repeals Ord. 651 (Repealer) 668 (Repealed by 830) 669 (Repealed by 830) 670 (Repealed by 1127) 671 Franchises (Repealed by 1280) 672 (Repealed by 991) 673 Public improvements, streets (Special) 674 (Repealed by 738) 675 Tax levy (Special) 676 (Repealed by 803) 677 (Repealed by 738) 678 (Repealed by 821) 679 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 680 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 681 (Repealed by 819) 682 Public ways, vacations (Special) 683 (Repealed by 686, 694 and 697) 684 Tax levy (Special) 685 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 686 (Repealed by 694 and 697) 687 (Repealed by 1127) 688 (Repealed by 830) 689 (Repealed by 1081) 690 City officer bond amounts, repeals Ord. 287 (Repealed by 1174) 691 Public improvements, streets (Special) 692 (Repealed by 818) 693 Miscellaneous (Special) 694 (Repealed by 697) 695 (Repealed by 819) 696 (Repealed by 991) 697 Bond issues (Special) 698 (Repealed by 1093) 699 Public ways, dedications (Special) 700 (Repealed by 835) 701 Public ways, dedications (Special) 702 Franchises (Special) 703 Miscellaneous (Special) 704 Public ways, easements (Special) 705 Public ways, easements (Special) 706 Charter amendments (Special) 707 (Repealed by 1093) 708 Franchises (Special) 709 Franchises (Repealed by 1280) 710 Bond issues (Special) 711 Public ways, dedications (Special) 712 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 713 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 714 Public improvements, streets (Special) 715 Public ways, dedications (Special) 716 (Repealed by 873) 717 Public ways, county roads (Special) 718 Miscellaneous (Special) 719 Juries (2.20) 720 (Repealed by 868 and 1127) 721 Establishing city funds (Repealed by 1245) 722 Bond issues (Special) 723 Public ways, dedications (Special) 724 Sidewalks (12.08) 725 Public ways, dedications (Special) 726 Public ways, easements (Special) 727 Miscellaneous (Special) 728 (Repealed by 754) 729 Annexations (Special) 730 Annexations (Special) 731 Annexations (Special) 732 Public ways, dedications (Special) 733 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 734 Annexations (Special) 735 Public ways, dedications (Special) 736 Annexations (Special) 737 Public ways, grades (Special) 738 (Repealed by 868 and 1127) 739 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 740 Public ways, county roads (Special) 741 Public improvements, streets and sewers (Special) 742 (Repealed by 821) 743 Public ways, vacations (Special) 744 Public ways, vacations (Special) 745 Annexations (Special) 746 Miscellaneous (Special) 747 Annexations (Special) 748 Annexations (Special) 749 Annexations (Special) 750 Public ways, easements (Special) 751 Public ways, easements (Special) 752 Public ways, easements (Special) 753 Public improvements, streets (Special) 754 (Repealed by 1107) 755 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 756 Public ways, dedications (Special) 757 (Repealed by 821) 758 Public improvements, streets (Special) 759 Public ways, dedications (Special) 760 (Repealed by 1127) 761 Public ways, dedications (Special) 762 Annexations (Special) 763 Franchises (Special) 764 Annexations (Special) 765 Public ways, easements (Special) 766 (Repealed by 1127) 767 Public improvements, streets (Special) 768 Public improvements, streets (Special) 769 (Repealed by 1081) 770 Public ways, vacations (Special) 771 Bond issues (Special) 772 Public ways, vacations (Special) 773 (Repealed by 818) 774 Annexations (Special) 775 Annexations (Special) 776 Annexations (Special) 777 Annexations (Special) 778 Annexations (Special) 779 Annexations (Special) 780 (Repealed by 821) 781 Franchises (Special) 782 Franchises (Special) 783 Public ways, vacations (Special) 784 (Repealed by 821) 785 Franchises (Special) 786 Franchises (Special) 787 Miscellaneous (Special) 788 (Repealed by 828) 789 (Repealed by 791) 790 Public ways, vacations (Special) 791 Repeals Ord. 789 (Repealer) 792 (Repealed by 829) 793 Annexations (Special) 794 Annexations (Special) 795 (Repealed by 798) 796 Annexations (Special) 797 Franchises (Special) 798 Annexations; repeals Ord. 795 (Special) 799 Annexations (Special) 800 Public ways, vacations (Special) 801 (Repealed by 830) 802 Public ways, vacations (Special) 803 (Repealed by 821) 804 Annexations (Special) 805 Annexations (Special) 806 Public ways, vacations (Special) 807 (Repealed by 1098) 808 (Repealed by 1127) 809 Public ways, county roads (Special) 810 (Repealed by 1107) 811 Annexations (Special) 812 Annexations (Special) 813 Annexations (Special) 814 Annexations (Special) 815 (Repealed by 830) 816 (Repealed by 830) 817 Public ways, vacations (Special) 818 Repeals Ords. 5, 6, 7, 8, 14, 16, 17, 23, 24, 37, 44, 45, 47, 56, 58, 64, 69, 70, 77, 89, 92, 95, 96, 99, 100, 106, 121, 122, 129, 133, 134, 164, 165, 176, 191, 208, 213, 217, 222, 223, 233, 240, 241, 287a, 294, 331, 334, 335, 395, 399, 427, 431, 438, 439, 440, 441, 442, 446, 449, 450, 453, 456, 471, 473, 477, 481, 490, 519, 523, 525, 575, 599, 606, 629, 646, 692, 773 (Repealer) 819 Repeals Ords. 624, 681, 695 (Repealer) 820 Nuisances; repeals Ords. 46, 91, 124, 141, 136, 178, 211, 308, 392 and 489 (8.04) 821 (Repealed by 1072) 822 (Repealed by 849) 823 (Repealed by 1119) 824 Amends § 4 of Ord. 568, civil defense (Repealed by 1245) 825 (Repealed by 1081) 826 (Repealed by 1127) 827 (Repealed by 1127) 828 (Repealed by 944) 829 (Repealed by 1093) 830 (Repealed by 882) 831 Annexations (Special) 832 Real property foreclosures; repeals Ord. 448 (3.04) 833 Public ways, grades (Special) 834 Public ways, vacations (Special) 835 Repeals Ord. 700 (Repealer) 836 (Repealed by 1081) 837 (Repealed by 1119) 838 (Repealed by 1120) 839 (Repealed by 991) 840 Annexations (Special) 841 (Failed to pass) 842 Public improvements, streets (Special) 843 Public improvements, streets (Special) 844 Public improvements, streets (Special) 845 (Repealed by 1108) 846 Establishes free public library (2.24) 847 (Repealed by 1093) 848 Franchises (Special) 849 (Repealed by 1124) 850 (Repealed by 1101) 851 Franchises (Special) 852 Inspections of property and premises (1.16) 853 (Repealed by 1093) 854 Franchises (Special) 855 Public ways, county roads (Special) 856 Public improvements, streets and sewers (Special) 857 Public ways, vacations (Special) 858 Annexations (Special) 859 Annexations (Special) 860 Impounding and disposition of discarded vehicles (Repealed by 1245) 861 Public improvements, streets (Special) 862 Public improvements, streets and sewers (Special) 863 Annexations (Special) 864 (Repealed by 1057 and 1127) 865 Public ways, vacations (Special) 866 (Number not used) 867 (Repealed by 1093) 868 (Repealed by 1127) 869 Creates public utility commission (Repealed by 1198) 870 Amends § 11 of Ord. 860, impounding and disposition of discarded vehicles (Repealed by 1245) 871 (Repealed by 1127) 872 Licensing regulations for outdoor events, entertainment, amusements and assemblies (8.12) 873 Licensing regulations for pinball machines and similar devices; repeals Ord. 572 (5.08) 874 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 875 Public improvements, streets (Special) 876 Amends §§ 2 and 7 of Ord. 423, numbering of houses, buildings and structures (15.04) 877 Annexations (Special) 878 Annexations (Special) 879 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 880 Annexations (Special) 881 (Repealed by 1012) 882 (Repealed by 1073) 883 Miscellaneous (Special) 884 Annexations (Special) 885 Annexations (Special) 886 (Repealed by 1073) 887 Annexations (Special) 888 Annexations (Special) 889 Annexations (Special) 890 Annexations (Special) 891 Annexations (Special) 892 Annexations (Special) 893 Annexations (Special) 894 Annexations (Special) 895 Annexations (Special) 896 Miscellaneous (Special) 897 Annexations (Special) 898 Annexations (Special) 899 Annexations (Special) 900 Annexations (Special) 901 Annexations (Special) 902 Annexations (Special) 903 Annexations (Special) 904 Annexations (Special) 905 Annexations (Special) 906 Annexations (Special) 907 Annexations (Special) 908 Annexations (Special) 909 Annexations (Special) 910 Annexations (Special) 911 Public improvements, streets (Special) 912 Annexations (Special) 913 Annexations (Special) 914 Annexations (Special) 915 Annexations (Special) 916 Annexations (Special) 917 Annexations (Special) 918 Annexations (Special) 919 (Repealed by 1150) 920 (Repealed by 1108) 921 Public ways, vacations (Special) 922 Annexations (Special) 923 Annexations (Special) 924 Annexations (Special) 925 Annexations (Special) 926 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 927 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 928 Established utility service system (13.24) 929 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 930 Annexations (Special) 931 Annexations (Special) 932 Annexations (Special) 933 (Failed to pass) 934 Annexations (Special) 935 (Repealed by 1057) 936 (Repealed by 1168) 937 Senior citizens' special assessment deferrals (13.28) 938 Annexations (Special) 939 Annexations (Special) 940 Annexations (Special) 941 Annexations (Special) 942 Miscellaneous (Special) 943 Miscellaneous (Special) 944 Building code (Repealed by 1220) 945 Annexations (Special) 946 Annexations (Special) 947 Annexations (Special) 948 Annexations (Special) 949 Annexations (Special) 950 Annexations (Special) 951 Annexations (Special) 952 Annexations (Special) 953 Annexations (Special) 954 Annexations (Special) 955 Annexations (Special) 956 (Repealed by 1220) 957 Amends § 5, 10, 11 and 12 of Ord. 719, jury lists (2.20) 958 Annexations (Special) 959 Annexations (Special) 960 Annexations (Special) 961 Annexations (Special) 962 Annexations (Special) 963 Annexations (Special) 964 Annexations (Special) 965 Annexations (Special) 966 Annexations (Special) 967 Annexations (Special) 968 Annexations (Special) 969 (Repealed by 1093) 970 Miscellaneous (Special) 971 Public improvements, streets (Special) 972 Public improvements, streets (Special) 973 Public improvements, streets and sewers (Special) 974 Public improvements, streets and sewers (Special) 975 Public ways, vacations (Special) 976 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 977 Miscellaneous (Special) 978 (Repealed) 979 Bond issues (Special) 980 Public ways, vacations (Special) 981 Annexations (Special) 982 Annexations (Special) 983 (Number not used) 984 Annexations (Special) 985 Annexations (Special) 986 Public improvements, streets (Special) 987 Public improvements, streets and sewers (Special) 988 Public ways, vacations (Special) 989 Establishes local contract review board, competitive biddingprocedures (2.32) 990 Amends §§ 2, 4, 5 and 6 of Ord. 846, free public library (2.24) 991 Establishes procedures for public improvements, levying and collecting special assessments; repeals Ord. 672 (13.08) 992 Public ways, vacations (Special) 993 (Repealed by 1175) 994 Public improvements, streets (Special) 995 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 996 Annexations (Special) 997 Annexations (Special) 998 Public and private sewers and sewage disposal regulations (Repealed by 1190) 999 Public ways, vacations (Special) 1000 Annexations (Special) 1001 Annexations (Special) 1002 Annexations (Special) 1003 Annexations (Special) 1004 Annexations (Special) 1005 Annexations (Special) 1006 Annexations (Special) 1007 Annexations (Special) 1008 (Failed to pass) 1009 (Failed to pass) 1010 Public ways, county roads (Special) 1011 (Failed to pass) 1012 Dogs, running at large (Repealed by 1245) 1013 (Repealed by 1073) 1014 Adds §§ 28-33 to, and amends §§ 18-27 of, Ord. 820, nuisances (8.04) 1015 Public ways, vacations (Special) 1016 Annexations (Special) 1017 Annexations (Special) 1018 Annexations (Special) 1019 Annexations (Repealed by 1085) 1020 Annexations (Special) 1021 (Failed to pass) 1022 Annexations (Special) 1023 Annexations (Special) 1024 Franchises (Repealed by 1280) 1025 Annexations (Repealed by 1085) 1026 Miscellaneous, revenue sharing (Special) 1027 Annexations (Special) 1028 (Repealed by 1128) 1029 Annexations (Special) 1030 Annexations (Repealed by 1085) 1031 Annexations (Special) 1032 Annexations (Special) 1033 Annexations (Special) 1034 Underground utilities connections (13.32) 1035 Annexations (Special) 1036 (Repealed by 1220) 1037 Annexations (Special) 1038 Public ways, vacations (Special) 1039 Public ways, vacations (Special) 1040 Annexations (Special) 1041 Annexations (Special) 1042 (Repealed by 1093) 1043 (Repealed by 1093) 1044 (Repealed) 1045 Miscellaneous, revenue sharing (Special) 1046 Annexations (Special) 1047 (Repealed by 1093) 1048 Annexations (Special) 1049 Annexations (Special) 1050 Impounding and disposition of abandoned vehicles; repeals Ord. 615 (Repealed by 1245) 1051 Bond issues (Special) 1052 Annexations (Special) 1053 Public improvements, streets and sewers (Special) 1054 Public ways, vacations (Special) 1055 Annexations (Special) 1056 (Repealed) 1057 (Repealed by 1107) 1058 (Repealed by 1107) 1059 Public improvements, streets and sewers (Special) 1060 (Repealed by 1063) 1061 Miscellaneous, revenue sharing (Special) 1062 Annexations (Special) 1063 Floodplain regulations; repeals Ord. 1060 (Repealed by 1181) 1064 (Failed to pass) 1065 Public improvements, streets and sewers (Special) 1066 (Repealed by 1107) 1067 (Repealed by 1108) 1068 Amends § 1 of Ord. 991, establishing procedures for public improvements, levying and collecting special assessments (13.08) 1069 Annexations (Special) 1070 Amends § 6 of Ord. 944, regulations for construction, alteration, repair and moving of buildings (Repealed by 1220) 1071 (Repealed by 1127) 1072 Vehicular and pedestrian traffic regulations; repeals Ord. 821 (10.04, 10.08, 10.12, 10.16, 10.20, 12.16) 1073 Adopts state criminal laws, general offenses; repeals Ords. 882, 886, 1013 (9.04) 1074 Public improvements, sewers (Special) 1075 Franchises (Repealed by 1280) 1076 Amends § 11 of Ord. 991, establishing procedures for public improvements, levying and collecting special assessments (13.08) 1077 Amends § 5 of Ord. 1072, vehicular and pedestrian traffic regulations (10.08) 1078 (Repealed by 1107) 1079 Bond issues (Special) 1080 Taxicab franchise (Repealed by 1245) 1081 Sewerage system and disposal plant; repeals Ords. 559, 689 and 769 (Repealed by 1191) 1082 Annexations (Special) 1083 Annexations (Special) 1084 Annexations (Special) 1085 Repeals Ords. 1019, 1025 and 1030 (Repealer) 1086 Annexations (Special) 1087 Annexations (Special) 1088 Annexations (Special) 1089 Annexations (Special) 1090 Annexations (Special) 1091 Annexations (Special) 1092 Amends §§ 3 and 8 of Ord. 989, establishing local contract review board, competitive bidding procedures (2.32) 1093 Establishing water utility, rules and regulations; repeals Ords. 698, 1042, 1043 (13.12) 1094 Miscellaneous, revenue sharing (Special) 1095 Amends §§ 2 and 5-17 of Ord. 1050, impounding and disposition of abandoned vehicles (Repealed by 1245) 1096 Amends § 2 of Ord. 1073, adopting state criminal laws, general offenses (9.04) 1097 Public improvements, streets and sewers (Special) 1098 Travel trailer regulations; repeals Ord. 807 (Repealed by 1212) 1099 Amends § 4 of Ord. 1080, taxicab franchise (Repealed by 1245) 1100 Amends §§ 1-6 of Ord. 928, utility service system (13.24) 1101 Abatement of dangerous buildings; repeals Ord. 850 (15.12) 1102 Amends §§ 6 and 42 of Ord. 1093, water utility (13.12) 1103 Miscellaneous (Special) 1104 Amends §§ 8, 9, 10 and 11 of Ord. 1081, sewerage system and disposal plant (Repealed by 1191) 1105 (Repealed by 1146) 1106 Public ways, vacations (Special) 1107 (Repealed by 1147) 1108 Subdivisions and planned developments (Repealed by 1301B) 1109 Establishes planning commission; repeals Ord. 640 (2.04) 1110 (Number not used) 1111 Amends § 4 of Ord. 937, senior citizens' special assessment deferrals (13.28) 1112 (Repealed by 1226) 1113 Amends § 6 of Ord. 820, nuisances (8.04) 1114 Business licensing regulations; repeals Ord. 544 (5.04) 1115 Construction/work permit regulations (12.12) 1116 (Repealed by 1220) 1117 Amends § 6 of Ord. 1108, subdivisions and planned developments (Repealed by 1301B) 1118 Amends § 10 of Ord. 1101, abatement of dangerous buildings (15.12) 1119 Amends § 9 of Ord. 1114, business licensing regulations (5.04) 1120 Personnel rules and regulations promulgation; repeals Ord. 838 (2.36) 1121 Amends § 2 of Ord. 690, bonds on certain city officers (Repealed by 1174) 1122 Open fire regulations; repeals Ord. 482 (Repealed by 1245) 1123 Franchises (Repealed by 1284) 1124 (Repealed by 1160) 1125 (Repealed by 1220) 1126 Annexations (Special) 1127 Repeals Ord. 430, 467, 469, 630, 670, 687, 720, 738, 760, 766, 808, 826, 827, 864, 868, 871, 1071 (Repealer) 1128 Uniform Fire Code, repeals Ord. 1028 (8.20) 1129 Annexations (Special) 1130 Miscellaneous (Special) 1131 Miscellaneous (Special) 1132 Amends §§ 1 and 9 of Ord. 719, jury lists (2.20) 1133 Annexations (Special) 1134 Amends § 11 of Ord. 991, establishing procedures for public improvements, levying and collecting special assessments (13.08) 1135 Annexations (Special) 1136 Miscellaneous (Special) 1137 Annexations (Special) 1138 Public improvements (Special) 1139 Amends § 1 of Ord. 1128, Uniform Fire Code (Repealed by 1229) 1140 Bond issues (Special) 1141 Public improvements (Special) 1142 Annexations (Special) 1143 Annexations (Special) 1144 Amends § 8 of Ord. 820, nuisances (8.04) 1145 Amends §§ 2 and 3 of Ord. 846, free public library (2.24) 1146 Comprehensive land use plan (1.08) 1147 (Repealed by 1286) 1148 Amends Ord. 1108, subdivisions (Repealed by 1301B) 1149 (Repealed by 1120) 1150 Solid waste collection and disposal; repeals Ord. 919 (8.16) 1151 Amends § 1A of Ord. 1146, comprehensive land use plan (1.08) 1152 Franchises (Special) 1153 Miscellaneous (Special) 1154 Amends § 13 of Ord. 820, nuisances (8.04) 1155 (Repealed by 1286) 1156 Amends §§ 1, 4 and 7 of Ord. 1012, dogs running at large (Repealed by 1245) 1157 Amends § 8 of Ord. 1081, sewerage system and disposal plan (Repealed by 1191) 1158 Public improvements (Special) 1159 Franchises (Repealed by 1279) 1160 Repeals Ord. 1124 (Repealer) 1161 Procedures for nomination and election of city officers (1.12) 1162 Amends § 4 of Ord. 928, utility service system (13.24) 1163 Miscellaneous (Special) 1164 Amends § 6 of Ord. 1109, planning commission (2.04) 1165 (Repealed by 1286) 1166 Franchises (Special) 1167 Amends § 1 of Ord. 846, free public library (2.24) 1168 Authorizing playing of social games; repeals Ord. 936 (5.12) 1169 Amends § 2 of Ord. 1072, vehicular and pedestrian traffic regulations (10.04) 1170 Amends §§ 2-4 of Ord. 1073, adopting state criminal law, general offenses (9.04) 1171 Amends § 42 of Ord. 1093, water utility (13.12) 1172 Annexations (Special) 1173 Miscellaneous (Special) 1174 Repeals Ord. 690 (Repealer) 1175 Retention of public records; repeals Ord. 993 (2.28) 1176 (Repealed by 1120) 1177 Nonexclusive gas utility franchise to Northwest Natural Gas Company (Special) 1178 Election to receive state revenues (Special) 1179 Establishing local incentives for enterprize zone (Special) 1180 Forfeiture of real, personal and intangible property (Repealed by 1245) 1181 Floodplain regulations (15.16) 1182 Amends Ord. 1179(1)(b), enterprise zone (Repealed by 1187) 1183 Election to receive state revenues (Special) 1184 Amends Ord. 1072, vehicular and pedestrian traffic regulations (10.04, 10.12, 10.16) 1185 Election to receive state revenues (Special) 1186 Amends Ord. 1184, roller skates, skateboards and sleds (10.16) 1187 Amends Ord. 1179(1)(b), enterprise zone; repeals Ord. 1182 (Repealed by 1192) 1188 Withdrawal of land from Toledo Rural Fire Protection District (Special) 1189 TCI Cablevision franchise (Special) 1190 Regulations for public and private sewers and sewage disposal (Repealed by 1194) 1191 Sewer service charges (Repealed by 1195) 1192 Amends Ord. 1179(1)(b), local incentives for enterprise zone; repeals Ord. 1187 (Special) 1193 Withdrawal of land from Toledo Rural Fire Protection District (Special) 1194 Regulations for public and private sewers and sewage disposal (13.16) 1195 Sewer service charges; repeals Ord. 1191 (13.20) 1196 Grants general communication service rights to Pacific Northwest Bell Telephone Company (Special) 1197 Withdrawal of land from Toledo Rural Fire Protection District (Special) 1198 Public utility commission; repeals Ord. 869 (2.08) 1199 Authorization to set rates for pool, park and recreation activities (12.20) 1200 Amends Ord. 1177(12)(1), nonexclusive gas utility franchise (Repealed by 1202) 1201 Street vacation (Special) 1202 Amends Ord. 1177(12)(1); repeals Ord. 1200 (Repealed by 1216) 1203 Creates parks and recreation advisory board (2.12) 1204 Withdrawal of land from Toledo Rural Fire Protection District (Special) 1205 Amends §§ 1 and 3 of Ord. 944, building code (Repealed by 1220) 1206 Street vacation (Repealed by 1213) 1207 Adopts 1990 standard specifications for public works construction (Repealed by 1228) 1208 Creates city tree board (2.16) 1209 Repeals § 12 of Ord. 820 (Repealer) 1210 Withdrawal of land from Toledo Rural Fire Protection District and Lincoln County library district (Special) 1211 Withdrawal of land from Lincoln County Library District (Special) 1212 Regulates use of recreational vehicles for dwellings or business purposes; repeals Ord. 1098 (Repealed by 1310) 1213 Street vacation; repeals Ord. 1206 (Special) 1214 Amends § 1 of Ord. 1210, withdrawal of land from Toledo Rural Fire Protection District and Lincoln County Library District (Special) 1215 Withdrawal of land from Toledo Rural Fire Protection District and Lincoln County Library District (Special) 1216 Amends Ord. 1177, gas utility franchise; repeals Ord. 1202 (Special) 1217 Street vacation (Special) 1218 Amends § (3)(b) of Ord. 989, competitive bidding procedures (2.32) 1219 Withdrawal of land from Toledo Rural Fire Protection District and Lincoln County Library District (Special) 1220 Adoption of uniform codes; repeals Ords. 944, 956, 1036, 1116, 1125, 1149, 1176 and 1205 (15.08) 1221 Withdrawal of land from Toledo Rural Fire Protection District and Lincoln County Library District (Special) 1222 (Repealed by 1286) 1223 Withdrawal of land from Toledo Rural Fire Protection District and Lincoln County Library District (Special) 1224 (Number not used) 1225 Street vacation (Special) 1226 Amends § 4 of Ord. 573 and § 3 of Ord. 873, licensing fees; repeals Ord. 1112 (5.08) 1227 (Pending) 1228 Adopts 1990 standard specifications for public works construction; repeals Ord. 1207 (13.04) 1229 Amends § 1 of Ord. 1128, Uniform Fire Code; repeals Ord. 1139 (8.20) 1230 Withdraws property from the Toledo Rural Fire Protection District and the Lincoln County Library District (Special) 1231 Business licensing regulations (5.04) 1232 Accepts transfer of jurisdiction of a portion of Old Sturdevant Road (Special) 1233 Repeals Ord. 573 (Repealer) 1234 Authorizes loan from the special public works fund (Special) 1235 Provides for "pickup" of mandatory employee contribution to retirement system (Special) 1236 Withdraws property from the Toledo Rural Fire Protection District and the Lincoln County Library District (Special) 1237 (Repealed by 1286) 1238 (Repealed by 1286) 1239 (Repealed by 1286) 1240 Amends §§ 5, 6 and 13 of Ord. 1108, subdivisions (Repealed by 1301B) 1241 Withdraws property from the Toledo Rural Fire Protection District and the Lincoln County Library District (Special) 1242 (Repealed by 1286) 1243 Civil infractions (1.20) 1244 Repeals and replaces §§ 26 and 27(1) of Ord. 820, § 3 of Ord. 1034, § 49 of Ord. 1093, § 6 of Ord. 1115, and amends § 7 of Ord. 423, § 9 of Ord. 724, § 6 of Ord. 846, § 6 of Ord. 852, § 7 of Ord. 872, § 6 of Ord. 873, § 39 of Ord. 1072, § 2 of Ord. 1073, § 10 of Ord. 1101, § 8 of Ord. 1108, § 9(a) of Ord. 1128, § 91 of Ord. 1147, § 3.3 of Ord. 1181, Art. VIII, § 2 of Ord. 1194, § 14 of Ord. 1208, § 8 of Ord. 1212, § 7 of Ord. 1220 and § 13 of Ord. 1231, violations-penalties (1.16, 2.16, 2.24, 5.04, 5.12, 8.04, 8.20, 8.12, 9.04, 10.08, 12.08, 12.12, 12.16, 13.12, 13.16, 13.32, 15.04, 15.08, 15.12, 15.16, 17.04) 1245 Repeals Ords. 568, 824, 860, 1050, 721, 1080, 1099, 1012, 1156, 1122, 1180 and § 14 of Ord. 1073, criminal code and §§ 2-8 of Ord. 1128, fire code (8.20, 9.04) 1246 Amends § 11(1) of Ord. 1186, miscellaneous vehicle and traffic regulations (10.16) 1247 (Repealed by 1286) 1248 Adds §§ 5 and 6 and Art. V to Ord. 1108; amends §§ 4 and 24(f); renumbers and amends § 6 to be 8, Art. III to be II, and renumbers articles following, and § 41 to be 38; renumbers § 27 to be 24, Arts. IV and V to be III and IV; repeals Art. II, subdivisions (Repealed by 1301B) 1249 Ratifies Oregon Cascades West council of governments (Special) 1250 Adopts 1996 edition of Public Improvement Regulations and Design Standards (13.04) 1251 Authorizes loan from Oregon Economic Development Department Water Fund (Special) 1252 Amends Ord. 1146, comprehensive plan (1.08) 1253 Adopts municipal code (1.01) 1254 Annexation (Special) 1255 Amends § 1.08.020, comprehensive plan amendments (1.08) 1256 Street vacation (Special) 1257 Amends § 2.32.030(A)(2), competitive bid exemptions (2.32) 1258 (Repealed by 1286) 1259 Street vacation (Special) 1260 Street vacation (Special) 1261 Withdraws certain property from Lincoln County transportation service district (Special) 1262 Annexation (Special) 1263 Authorizes loan from the Oregon Economic Development Department Special Public Works Fund (Special) 1264 Adds Ch. 10.24, impounding and disposition of discarded vehicles (10.24) 1265 (Repealed by 1286) 1266 Amends Ord. 1146, comprehensive plan (1.08) 1267 Amends Ord. 1146, comprehensive plan (1.08) 1268 Rezone (Special) 1269 (§ 2 repealed by 1286) 1270 Amends Ord. 1260, street vacation (Special) 1271 Rezone (Special) 1272 Rezone (Special) 1273 (Repealed by 1286) 1274 Public nonvehicular access area vacation (Special) 1275 Rezone (Special) 1276 Rezone (Special) 1277 Annexation and rezone (Special) 1278 Annexation and rezone (Special) 1279 Franchise grant to Georgia-Pacific West, Inc., water pipeline repeals Ord. 1159 (Special) 1280 Franchise grant to Georgia-Pacific West, Inc., waste pipeline; repeals Ords. 671, 709, 1024 and 1075 (Special) 1281 Annexation and rezone (Special) 1282 (Repealed by 1286) 1283 Amends § 16.04.040, adding additional definitions; adds chapter 16.24 to Title 16 (Repealed by 1301B) 1284 Repeals and rescinds Ord. 1123 (Special) 1285 Amends Ord. 1146, specifically § 1.08.010 and deletes § 1.08.020, comprehensive plan (1.08) 1286 Repeals and replaces Title 17, zoning (17) 1287 Creates Title 19, land use procedures (19) 1288 Adds Ch. 15.20, erosion control standards, drainage control, and geologic hazards (15.20) 1289 Amends Ord. 1181, specifically §§ 15.16.020 and 15.16.160 (15.16) 1290 Creates Title 18, miscellaneous land use regulation (18) 1291 Oregon Cascades West Council of Governments (Special) 1292 Central Coast Water Council (Special) 1293 Intergovernmental Water Consortium (Special) 1294 Creates Title 6, animals and repeals §§ 8.04.020, 8.04.030, 8.04.040(B), 8.04.050, and 9.04.140 1295 Amends §§ 13.12.090, 13.12.330 and 13.12.420; repeals and replaces §§ 13.12.240, 13.12.430 and 13.12.440, water service system (13.12) 1296 Amends §§ 10.08.070, 10.24.010-10.24.060, 10.24.080 and 10.24.130, vehicles and traffic (10.08, 10.24) 1297 Annexation and rezone (Special) 1298 Annexation and rezone (Special) 1299 Annexation and rezone (Special) 1300 Annexation and rezone (Special) 1301A Amends §§ 8.16.030, 8.16.090 and 8.16.140, solid waste management (8.16) 1301B Repeals and replaces Title 16, subdivisions (16.04, 16.08, 16.12, 16.16, 16.20, 16.24, 16.28, 16.32) 1302 Franchises (Repealed by 1317) 1303 Adds Ch. 13.36, street lighting utility fee (13.36) 1304 Annexation and rezone (Special) 1305 Adopts Ballot Measure 37 concerning real property compensation (18.08) 1306 Adds § 9.04.161, Criminal Code (9.04) 1307 Adds Ch. 17.46; amends §§ 17.04.020, 17.08.020, 17.08.030, 17.08.090, 17.12.020-17.12.060, 17.16.020, 17.20.020, 17.20.040, 17.24.020, 17.24.040, 17.44.030, 17.56.050, 17.56.060, 17.68.030, 17.68.040 and 17.72.020; repeals Ch. 17.76, zoning (17.04, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16, 17.20, 17.24, 17.44, 17.46, 17.56, 17.68, 17.72) 1308 Adds § 10.16.090, miscellaneous vehicle and traffic regulations (10.16) 1309 (Number not used) 1310 Repeals and replaces Ch. 8.08, temporary uses, temporary structures and recreational vehicles (8.08) 1311 Amends §§ 17.16.020, 17.20.020 and 17.24.020, zoning (17.16, 17.20, 17.24) 1312 Amends Ord. 1280, franchise granted to Georgia-Pacific West, Inc. (Special) 1313 Annexation and rezone (Special) 1314 Adds Ch. 3.08, transient room tax (3.08) 1315 Annexation and rezone (Special) 1316 Amends § 10.16.030, miscellaneous vehicle and traffic regulations (10.16) 1317 Amends Ord. 1284; repeals Ord. 1302, industrial franchise fee review (Special)  
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE AND DISPOSITION LIST 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of Toledo, Oregon beginning with Supplement No. 4, included in this Code. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Description Section Section 
this Code 1318 10-17-2007 Amends procedures for public contracting       Rpld 2.32.010-2.32.100 1-8       Added 2.32.010-2.32.080 1319  2-20-2008 Establishes criminal history record check policies Not 
Codified 1320  3-19-2008 Amends provisions governing cross connection control measures 1 13.12.030 2       Rpld 13.12.240       Added 13.12.240 1321  8- 6-2008 Annexation Not 
Codified 1322 12-17-2008 Telecommunications franchise Not 
Codified 1323 12-17-2008 Amends solid waste management franchise to Dahl Disposal Service 1 8.16.030 8.16.040(B) 8.16.040(D) 8.16.040(F) 8.16.080 8.16.090 
(A)(1) 8.16.100(B) 8.16.100 
(J)(2) 8.16.150(B), (C) 8.16.150(L) 1324  4- 1-2009 Gas utility franchise Not 
Codified 1325  5- 6-2009 Establishes road maintenance regulatory program and adopts fees for road maintenance service 1       Added 13.40.010- 
13.40.090 1326  6- 3-2009 Adds provisions pertaining to violation of posted truck routes and prohibited braking 10.08.070       Added 10.16.100       Added 10.16.110 1327  6- 3-2009 Establishes annual transportation permit requirements for oversized vehicles       Added 12.24.010- 
12.24.090 1328  8- 5-2009 Amends provisions relating to outdoor public events, entertainments and assemblies, and parades and processions 1 8.12.020 2 8.12.030 3 12.16.020 
(A) 1329 10- 7-2009 Amends flood plain ordinance 1, 2 15.16.020 3 15.16.040 4 15.16.110 5       Added 15.16.140 
(E)-(H) 6 15.16.160 
(A)(1) 7 15.16.160 
(C) 8 15.16.160 
(D)(1) 9       Added 15.16.180 1330 10- 7-2009 Amends provisions relating to nuisances 1 8.04.040 2 8.04.060 3 8.04.070 4 8.04.080(A) 5 8.04.090 6 8.04.100 7 8.04.110 8 8.04.120 9 8.04.130(A) 10 8.04.140(A) 11 8.04.160 1331 11- 4-2009 Amends comprehensive land use plan and zoning map Not 
Codified 1332 11-11-2009 Amends provisions relating to discarded vehicles 1       Added 10.24.040 
(C) 1333  2- 3-2010 Eliminates parks and recreation advisory board; amends city tree board 1       Rpld 2.12.010-2.12.040 2 2.16.020 1334  2-17-2010 Adopts City of Toledo Public Infrastructure Design Standards Manual 1 13.04.010 1335  6- 7-2010 Amends provisions relating to system development charges in all infrastructure categories 1       Rpld 13.24.010- 
13.24.080 3-22 
      Added 13.24.010- 
13.24.200 1336  6- 2-2010 Providing for the vacation of a public street and public parking place Not 
codified 1337  7- 7-2010 Amending Ord. No. 1284 (which granted the Central Lincoln People's Utility District a franchise) Not 
codified 1338  1- 5-2011 Accepting jurisdiction over a number of county roads or portions of county roads Not 
codified 1338A  3- 2-2011 Adopting provisions providing for declaration of emergencies, authorizing the emergency program director to order measures in response to emergencies 2-10 
      Added 2.40.010- 
2.40.090 1339  3- 2-2011 Adopting provisions providing for offenses against public decency 2-4 9.08.010- 
9.08.030 1340  6- 1-2011 Amending Ord. No. 1284 (which granted the Central Lincoln People's Utility District a franchise) Not 
codified 1341  8- 3-2011 Amends comprehensive land use plan and zoning maps Not 
codified 1342 11- 2-2011 Adopting provisions providing for the disposal of city-owned surplus real property 2-9 
      Added 3.12.010-3.12.080 1343  2-15-2012 Authorizing the issuance of a revenue financing agreement to finance the costs of constructing, repairing and expanding the city's water system Not 
codified 1344  4- 4-2012 Amend and restate Ord. No. 1343 Not 
codified 1345 11- 7-2012 Amending Title 17 and Ch. 1.08 1 17.04.020 
(B) 2-5 17.20.010- 
17.20.040 6-9 17.24.010- 
17.24.040 10       Added 17.32.020 
(M) 11 17.32.030 
(E) 12 17.32.030 
(G) 13 17.32.030 
(K) 14 17.32.040 15       Added 17.44.060 16 17.64.040 17 17.64.050 18       Dltd 17.64.060 19       Rnbd 17.64.070       as 17.64.060 20 1.08.010 
(A) 21 1.08.010 
(G) 1346 11- 7-2012 Amends the comprehensive land use plan and zoning map Not 
codified 1347 11-21-2012 Amending Chs. 8.04, 10.12 and 10.16 1 8.04.010 2 8.04.040 3       Added 8.04.050 4, 5 8.04.060 
(B), (F) 6       Added 8.04.060 
(H)-(J) 7       Added 8.04.080 
(A)(5) 8 8.04.080 
(B) 9 8.04.100 10 8.04.110 11 8.04.120 
(A) 12       Added 8.04.120 
(C)-(E) 13 8.04.130 14 10.12.010 15 10.12.020 16 10.16.160 1348  2- 6-2013 Amends the comprehensive land use plan and zoning maps Not 
codified 1349  7- 3-2013 Adopting provisions relating to licensing and regulation of taxicabs 2-25 
      Added 5.16.010-5.16.240 1350  7- 3-2013 Adopting provisions relating to criminal history record policies 2-4 
      Added 2.44.010-2.44.030 1351  9- 4-2013 Amending Ch. 12.20 1       Rpld 12.20.010 3-13 
      Added 12.20.010- 
12.20.110 1352 12- 4-2013 Amending the comprehensive land use plan and policies; adopting the transportation system plan 1, 2 1.08.010 1353  2-19-2014 Telecommunications conduit placement requirements 2       Added 13.32.015 1354  4- 2-2014 Revising zoning regulations 1 17.16.030 1355  9-17-2014 Revising land use regulations 1-3 16.04.040 4 16.04.050 5       Added 16.06.010-16.06.010 6 16.16.090 7       Added 16.30.010-16.30.090 8 17.04.020 9 17.08.020 10 17.12.020 11 17.16.020 12 17.20.020 13 17.24.020 14 17.28.020 15 17.32.020 16 17.36.020 17, 18 
      Added 17.44.070, 17.44.080 19 17.48.030 20       Added 17.48.055 1356 10-29-2014 Establishing a tax on the sale of marijuana and marijuana-infused products 2-5 
      Added 3.16.010-3.16.140 1357 11-19-2014 Regulation of medical marijuana dispensaries 1 17.04.020 2-5 17.16.030 6 17.46.080 1358 11-19-2014 Licensing and regulation of medical marijuana dispensaries 2-20 
      Added 5.20.010-5.20.190 1359 12-16-2015 Planning commission as the tree board 1 2.16.020 1360  2- 3-2016 Regulation of recreational marijuana 1 17.04.020 2, 3 17.16.030 4, 5 17.20.030 6, 7 17.24.030 8 17.46.080 9 17.64.050 1361  4-20-2016 Amending Ord. No. 1284 (which granted the Central Lincoln People's Utility District a franchise) Not codified 1362  7- 6-2016 Sidewalks 2-19 
      Added 12.10.010-12.10.180 1363  7- 6-2016 Licensing and regulation of marijuana dispensaries; regulation of recreational marijuana facilities 2-22       Rpld 5.20.010-5.20.190       Added 5.20.010-5.20.220 1364 11- 2-2016 Amending the comprehensive land use plan and policies; revising the public lands zone chapter 1 1.08.010 2 17.04.020 3 17.36.010 4, 5 17.36.030 5, 6       Added 17.36.040, 17.36.050 1365 Not used 1366 Not used 1367 Not used 1368 Not used 1369 Not used 1370 Not used 1371 Not used 1372 Not used 1373 Not used 1374  9- 7-2016 Repealing Ord. No. 1322 and granting telecommunication franchise to Coastcom, Inc. Not codified 1375  4-19-2017 Repealing Ord. No. 1189 and granting a cable television franchise to Falcon Telecable Not codified 1376  5-17-2017 Amending the comprehensive land use plan and zoning maps Not codified 1377  7- 5-2017 Establishing procedures for public contracting 1-12       Rpld 2.32.010-2.32.080       Added 2.32.010-2.32.110  
