1
CHARTER
Tillamook - Charter
2
3
CHARTER
Section
Preamble
Chapter 1. Names and Boundaries
1. Title of charter
2. Name of the city
3. Boundaries
Chapter 2. Form of Government
4. Council
5. Councilors
6. Mayor
7. Terms of office
8. Appointive offices
9. Qualifications of elective and appointive officers
10. Compensation
11. Oath
12. Elections
Chapter 3. Powers
13. Powers of the city
14. Construction of powers
Chapter 4. Council - Powers and Duties
15. Distribution of power
16. Regular meetings
17. Special meetings
18. Quorum
19. Mayor=s functions at Council meetings
20. Council President
21. Vote required
22. Vacancies: occurrence
23. Vacancies: filling
Chapter 5. Powers and Duties of Officers
Tillamook - Charter
4
24. Mayor
25. Other city officers shall include but not be limited to: City Manager, City Recorder and
Municipal Judge
Chapter 6. Ordinances
26. Ordaining clauses
27. Ordinance adoption by the City Council
28. When ordinances take effect
Chapter 7. Public Improvements
29. Public works and improvements
30. Improvements
31. Special assessment
Chapter 8. Miscellaneous Provisions
32. Existing ordinances continue
33. Repeal of previously enacted provisions
34. Time of effect of charter
35. Debt
36. Severability
Charter
5
PREAMBLE
We, the people of the City of Tillamook, Oregon, in order to avail ourselves of self-determination in
municipal affairs to the fullest extent now or hereafter possible under the constitution and laws of the
United States and the State of Oregon, through this charter confer upon the city the following powers,
subject it to the following restrictions, prescribe for it the following procedures and governmental
structure and repeal all previous charter provisions of the city.
Chapter 1
NAMES AND BOUNDARIES
Section 1. Title of Charter. This charter may be referred to as the 1999 City of Tillamook Charter.
Section 2. Name of the City. The City of Tillamook, Oregon, continues under this charter to be a
municipal corporation with the name City of Tillamook.
Section 3. Boundaries. The city includes all territory within its boundaries and all land currently
owned by the City of Tillamook as they now exist or hereafter are modified pursuant to state law. The
custodian of the city=s records shall keep an accurate, current description of the boundaries and make a
copy of it available for public inspection in the city during regular city office hours.
Tillamook - Charter
6
Chapter 2
FORM OF GOVERNMENT
Section 4. Council. The council consists of six councilors elected from the city by wards.
Section 5. Councilors. The term of office of a councilor in office when this charter is adopted is
the term of office for which the councilor has been elected before adoption of the charter or is elected at
the time of the adoption. At each general election after the adoption, three councilors shall be elected,
each for a four year term.
Section 6. Mayor. The term of office of the mayor in office when this charter is adopted continues
until that term expires. A mayor shall be elected for a four year term at a general election.
Section 7. Terms of Office. The term of office of an elective officer who is elected at a general
election begins at the first council meeting in January of the year immediately after the election and
continues until the successor to the office assumes the office.
Section 8. Appointive Offices. A majority of the council may:
(1) Create, abolish, and combine appointive city offices, and
(2) Except as the majority prescribes otherwise, fill such offices by appointment and vacate
them by removal.
Section 9. Qualifications of Elective and Appointive Officers.
(a) An elective city officer shall be a qualified elector under the State of Oregon constitution
and shall have resided in the city during the 12 months immediately before being elected or
appointed to the office. In this subsection Acity@ means area inside the city limits at the
time of the election or appointment.
(b) No person may be a candidate at a single election for more than one elective city office.
(c) An elective officer shall not be an employee of the city. However, an elective officer may
serve in a volunteer capacity with the city subject to council approval.
(d) The council is the final judge of the election and qualifications of its members.
(e) The qualifications of appointive officers of the city are whatever the council prescribes or
authorizes.
Section 10. Compensation. The council shall prescribe the compensation of city personnel. The
council shall prescribe a plan for reimbursing city personnel, the mayor and council members for
expenses that they incur in serving the city.
Section 11. Oath. Before assuming city office, an officer shall take an oath or shall affirm that he
or she will faithfully perform the duties of the office and support the constitution and laws of the United
States and of the state of Oregon.
Section 12. Elections.
a) State Law - Except as this charter or a city ordinance prescribes to the contrary, a city
election shall conform to state law applicable to the election.
Charter
7
b) Nominations - A person may be nominated in a manner as provided by city ordinance to
run for an elective office of the city.
c) In the event of a tie vote for candidates for a city office, the successful candidate shall be
determined by a public drawing of lots in a manner prescribed by the council.
Tillamook - Charter
8
Chapter 3
POWERS
Section 13. Powers of the City. The city has all powers that the constitutions, statutes, and
common law of the United States and of this state now or hereafter expressly or implied grant or allow
the city, as fully as though this charter specifically enumerated each of those powers.
Section 14. Construction of Powers. In this charter, no specification of a power is exclusive or
restricts authority that the city would have if the power were not specified. The charter shall be liberally
construed, so that the city may exercise fully all its powers possible under this charter and under the
United States and Oregon law. The City Council shall be the primary interpreter of this charter. All
powers are continuing unless a specific grant of power clearly indicates the contrary. The City Council
shall enact such laws as are necessary or convenient to fulfill the provisions and intentions of this charter.
Charter
9
Chapter 4
COUNCIL - POWERS AND DUTIES
Section 15. Distribution of Power. Except as this charter prescribes otherwise and as the Oregon
Constitution reserves municipal legislative power to the voters of the city, all powers of the city are
vested in the council. The council shall, by ordinance, prescribe rules to govern its meetings and
proceedings.
Section 16. Regular Meetings. The council shall meet twice a month in a manner prescribed by
ordinance.
Section 17. Special Meetings.
a) The Mayor may, or at written request of three members of the council, shall, by giving
written notice thereof to all members of the council then in the city, call a special meeting
of the council for a time not earlier than 24 hours after notice is given but prior to the next
regular council meeting.
b) An emergency meeting may be called on less than 24 hours noticenon by the Mayor or at
the written request of three members of the council.
c) No other business shall be transacted at any special or emergency meeting other than that
for which it was called. All proceedings of the special or emergency meeting must be
reviewed at the next regular council meeting.
Section 18. Quorum. A majority of the council, excluding the Mayor, constitutes a quorum for its
business, but at least three members of the council may meet and compel attendance of absent councilors
as prescribed by council rules.
Section 19. Mayor=s Functions at Council Meetings.
(1) When present at council meetings the mayor shall:
a) Preside over deliberations of the council,
b) Preserve order,
c) Enforce council rules, and
d) Determine the order of business under the rules.
(2) The Mayor may delegate the functions described in subsection (1) to the Council President
or, if the Council President is absent, to another council member. This delegation shall be
for not more than two meetings, unless otherwise specified and with the council=s consent.
(3) The Mayor shall have a vote only in case of a tie-vote.
Section 20. Council President.
(1) At its first meeting of each year, the council shall elect a president from its councilors by a
majority of the votes cast.
(2) The President shall function as Mayor when the Mayor is:
a) Absent from a council meeting,
b) Unable to function as Mayor.
(3) If the council president acts as Mayor or presides over a meeting, the council president shall
retain a vote as councilor.
Tillamook - Charter
10
Section 21. Vote Required. Except as this charter otherwise provides, the express concurrence of
a majority of the council members present and constituting a quorum is necessary to decide affirmatively
a question before the council.
Section 22. Vacancies: Occurrence. The office of a member of the council becomes vacant:
(1) Upon the incumbent=s:
a) Death,
b) Adjudicated incompetence, or
c) Recall from the office, or
(2) Upon declaration by the council of the vacancy in case of incumbent=s:
a) Failure to assume the duties of the office following election or appointment to the
office within ten days after the time for his or her term of office to begin,
b) Absence from the city for 30 days without the council=s consent or from all meetings
of the council within a 90 day period, or failure to attend two consecutive regular
meetings of the council without council consent,
c) Failure to reside within the appropriate ward in the city,
d) Ceasing to be a qualified elector under state law,
e) Conviction of a public offense punishable by loss of liberty, or
f) Resignation of the office.
Section 23. Vacancies: Filling. A vacancy in the council shall be filled by appointment by a
majority of the council. The appointee=s term shall run until the next available state biennial general
election and at that election the office shall be filled for the remainder of the four year term. During a
council member=s disability to serve on the council or during a member=s absence from the city, a
majority of the other council members may, by appointment, fill the vacancy temporarily until the
elected official is able to resume the duties or the end of the term of office of the council member,
whichever occurs first.
Charter
11
Chapter 5
POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS
Section 24. Mayor. The Mayor:
(1) Shall appoint and remove with the consent of the majority of the council, members of
committees established by council rules.
(2) Shall sign all approved records of proceedings of the council and shall endorse all bonds of
city officers and all bonds of licenses, contracts and proposals.
(3) No ordinance passed by the council shall go into effect, as provided for in Chapter 6,
Section 30 of this Charter, until approved by the Mayor.
(4) If the Mayor does not approve an ordinance passed by the council, then the Mayor must
return the ordinance within ten (10) calendar days of its passage to the City Recorder with
written reasons for not approving it. If the mayor does not return the ordinance with written
reasons for not approving it within the time specified in this subsection, then the ordinance
shall go into effect as if the Mayor had approved it based on the provisions of Chapter 6,
Section 30 of this Charter.
(5) At the first regular council meeting after the return of an ordinance not approved by the
mayor, the City Recorder shall deliver the ordinance to the council with the mayor=s
written reasons for not approving it. Those written reasons must be read at that council
meeting. The ordinance may then again be passed by the council provided that at least five
(5) council members are present to deliberate on the ordinance. If four (4) of the members
of the council vote to approve the ordinance, the ordinance shall go into effect without the
Mayor=s approval based on the provisions of Chapter 6, Section 30 of this Charter.
Section 25. Other city officers shall include but not be limited to: City Manager, City Recorder and
Municipal Judge.
The offices of City Manager, City Recorder and Municipal Judge shall be filled by appointment
and such officers may be removed at any time by a majority vote of the members of the council.
City Manager shall:
(a) Carry out the policy decisions of the Council and serve as the administrative head of the
city government;
(b) Manage the daily business of the city;
(c) Appoint, discipline and remove personnel, except appointees of the Mayor and or Council;
(d) Attend all council meetings unless excused by the Council or Mayor;
(e) Keep the Council advised of the affairs and needs of the city;
(f) See that the provisions of all ordinances are administered to the satisfaction of the Council;
(g) See that all terms of franchises, leases, contracts, permits, and privileges granted by the city
are fulfilled;
(h) Supervise and control the manager=s appointees in their service to the city;
(i) Organize and reorganize the departmental structure of city government;
(j) Prepare and transmit to the Council an annual city budget;
(k) Supervise city contracts;
(1) Supervise operation of all city-owned public utilities and property;
(m) Perform other duties as the Council prescribes consistently with this charter.
Tillamook - Charter
12
City Recorder shall:
(a) Work in cooperation with the City Manager and under the general direction of the City
Council;
(b) Administer, plan and direct the accounting, payroll, and financial management functions of
the City;
(c) Maintain official City Records and perform other duties as the council prescribes.
Municipal Court and Judge.
Municipal Court shall be held within the City at such place and times specified by the Court.
(1) All area within the City and, to the extent provided by law, area outside the City is within
the territorial jurisdiction of the court.
(2) The Municipal Court has original jurisdiction over every offense that an Ordinance of the
City makes punishable.
(3) The Municipal Judge shall have such authority and perform such duties as otherwise
provided by local and other law.
(4) The Council may authorize the Municipal Judge to appoint the Municipal Judge Pro Tem
for terms of office set by the judge or the Council.
(5) Notwithstanding this section, the Council may transfer some or all of the functions of the
Municipal Court to an appropriate State Court.
Charter
13
Chapter 6
ORDINANCES
Section 26. Ordaining Clauses. The ordaining clause of an ordinance shall be AThe City of
Tillamook ordains as follows:@
Section 27. Ordinance adoption by the City Council.
(1) An ordinance, except an emergency ordinance, shall be read by title only at two separate
regular council meetings before being adopted by the council. However, an ordinance shall
be read in whole or any part upon request of any council member.
(2) An emergency ordinance necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health and
safety of the city and its citizens shall be read fully and distinctly once and then by title only
at a regular or special council meeting before being adopted by the council. A separate
section in the ordinance shall state the reasons why the ordinance should become
immediately effective. Emergency ordinances shall require four (4) affirmative votes of all
members of the city council.
(3) The following shall apply at least one week before the reading of any non emergency
ordinance:
(a) A copy of the ordinance will be provided to each council member,
One copy of the ordinance will be available for public inspection in the office of the
City Recorder, and
(b) Notice of its availability will be given by written notice posted at city hall and two
other public places in the city.
(3) An ordinance read by title only has no legal effect if it differs substantially from its terms as
it was filed prior to the reading unless each section so differing is read fully and distinctly in
open council meeting before the council adopts the ordinance.
(4) After adoption of an ordinance, the City Recorder and the Mayor shall endorse it with its
date of adoption and the City Recorder and Mayor=s name and title.
Section 28. When Ordinances Take Effect. A non-emergency ordinance takes effect on the
thirtieth (30th) day after its adoption by the council or on a later day the ordinance prescribes. An
ordinance adopted to meet an emergency shall take effect as soon as adopted.
Tillamook - Charter
14
Chapter 7
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Section 29. Public Works and Improvements.
(1) The City Council of the City of Tillamook is now and in the future authorized to acquire,
construct, equip, operate and maintain within and without the city limits of Tillamook such
public works systems as it deems necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of the City of Tillamook. Public works shall include, but not be limited to such streets,
storm drainage, parks, water and sewerage systems necessary, useful or convenient for
urban development. Public works shall not include any utilities the city has franchised out.
The city shall be the sole and exclusive purveyor of water and sewer service within the city
limits, unless otherwise approved by the City Council.
(2) The revenues derived from each specific public works system shall be applied directly back
to cover the costs associated with the maintenance, repairs, operations, management,
expansion, renovation, payment of debt service and general betterment of that specific
system from which those revenues were derived.
Section 30. Improvements. The procedure for making, altering, vacating or abandoning a public
improvement shall be governed by general ordinance, or, to the extent not so governed, by applicable
state laws. A remonstrance by the owners of two-thirds of the property to be specially assessed for a
proposed public improvement shall suspend action regarding the improvement for no more than six
months. For the purpose of this section Aowner@ shall mean the record holder of legal title to the land
according to a recorded land sale contract or according to a verified writing by the record holder of legal
title to the land filed with the custodian of city records, the said purchaser shall be deemed the Aowner@.
Section 31. Special Assessment. The procedure for levying, contracting and enforcing the
payment of special assessments for public improvements or other services to be charged against real
property shall be governed by general ordinance.
Charter
15
Chapter 8
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 32. Existing Ordinances Continue. All ordinances of the city consistent with this charter
and in force when it takes effect shall remain in effect until amended or repealed.
Section 33. Repeal of Previously Enacted Provisions. All charter provisions adopted before this
charter takes effect are hereby repealed.
Section 34. Time of Effect of Charter. This charter shall take effect thirty days after the election
date at which it was approved by the voters of the City of Tillamook.
Section 35. Debt. The city=s indebtedness may not exceed debt limits imposed by state law. A
city officer or employee who creates or officially approves indebtedness in excess of this limitation is
jointly and severally liable for the excess. A charter amendment is not required to authorize city
indebtedness.
Section 36. Severability. The terms of this charter are severable. If a part of the charter is held
invalid, the invalidity does not affect another part of the charter, except as the logical relation between the
two parts requires.
Approved by City of Tillamook voters at a special election on May 18, 1999.
This Charter took effect on June 18, 1999.
1
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
10. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
11. CITY STANDARDS
Tillamook - General Provisions
2
3
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
10.01 Title of code
10.02 Interpretation
10.03 Application to future ordinances
10.04 Captions
10.05 Definitions
10.06 Rules of interpretation
10.07 Severability
10.08 Reference to other sections
10.09 Reference to offices
10.10 Errors and omissions
10.11 Official time
10.12 Reasonable time
10.13 Ordinances repealed
10.14 Ordinances unaffected
10.15 Effective date of ordinances
10.16 Repeal or modification of ordinance
10.17 Ordinances which amend or supplement code
10.18 Section histories; statutory references
10.19 Additional procedures for the jurisdiction and enforcement of city ordinance offenses
10.99 General penalty
' 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Tillamook shall be designated as the Code of
the City of Tillamook and may be so cited.
' 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction,
definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the
interpretation of state law.
' 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
Tillamook - General Provisions
4
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter
adopted amending or supplementing this code unless otherwise specifically provided.
' 10.04 CAPTIONS.
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and section numbers are
employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
' 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
(A) General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual sense.
However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be
understood according to their technical import.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Tillamook, Oregon.
CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as modified
by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
COUNTY. Tillamook County, Oregon.
MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
MONTH. A calendar month.
OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an
oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and
AFFIRMED.
OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this city unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee,
lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms
PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
Rules of Construction; General Penalty
5
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE. The State of Oregon.
SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the chapter
analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by
the subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
' 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that
construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same
ordinance.
(A) AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written Aand/or,@ if the sense
requires it.
(B) Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an
agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of
the act by an authorized agent or deputy.
(C) Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to
include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the
plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
(D) General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to
the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
Tillamook - General Provisions
6
' 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance
is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.
' 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that reference shall extend and
apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the
subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
' 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of
this city exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
' 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any
word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to
which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied,
omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
' 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws, shall be the official time within
this city for the transaction of all city business.
' 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires
reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is
necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
Rules of Construction; General Penalty
7
(B) The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding
the first day and including the last. If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
' 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature
pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the
subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
' 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not
embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
' 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect from and after
the due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication
shall take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
' 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
(A) Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent
ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until
the due publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(B) No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted, created, given, secured or
accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged,
but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force, unless
it is otherwise expressly provided.
(C) When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed,
the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.
Tillamook - General Provisions
8
' 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
(A) If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this code, the
chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired
amendment, substituted in its place.
(B) Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section shall
indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of that chapter or section. In
addition to the indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
' 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
(A) As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage date of the original
ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section.
Example:
(Ord. 161, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 170, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 180, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 185, passed
1-1-1985)
(B) (1) If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text of the section reads
substantially the same as the statute. Example:
(O.R.S. 192.410)
(2) If a statutory cite is set forth as a statutory reference following the text of the section, this
indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for further information. Example:
' 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
This city shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise
exempted by state law.
Statutory reference:
Inspection of public records, see O.R.S. 192.420
(C) If a section of this code is derived from the prior compilation of ordinances of the city, the prior
compilation section number shall be indicated in the history by A(1977 Code, ' ).@
' 10.19 ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES FOR THE JURISDICTION AND ENFORCEMENT
OF CITY ORDINANCE OFFENSES.
(A) Purpose. The purposes of this procedural provision are to:
(1) Provide rules and procedures necessary for the enforcement of city ordinances;
Rules of Construction; General Penalty
9
(2) Supplement existing jurisdictional law and to supplement Oregon Revised Statutes
(“O.R.S.”) Chapter 153 by being “other specifically provided law” for the issuance of a summons and
complaint of any alleged city ordinance offense whether or not prosecuted as a violation; and
(3) Make clear the bases for obtaining jurisdiction over persons and property for offenses
committed within the jurisdiction of the city.
(B) Rules. Oregon Civil Rules of Procedure (ORCP) Nos. 4 (Personal Jurisdiction), 5 (In rem
Jurisdiction), 6 (Jurisdiction without Service), 7 (Summons) and 8 (Process) are incorporated here, are
adopted by reference and are made a part of this section. Where Astate@ is referenced within those rules,
then ACity of Tillamook@ shall be included within the definition of Astate@ or shall replace Astate@ as
may be required to fulfill the purposes of the law or laws. Each ORCP rule above shall apply to the
enforcement of city ordinances in addition to rules for the enforcement of violations within O.R.S.
Chapter 153 and any other law. Where any conflict exists, then this section shall control. However, this
section shall as far as possible be interpreted broadly to complement, rather than conflict with, other law.
(C) Persons authorized to issue and serve citation, summons and complaints. Peace officers are
authorized to issue citations for ordinance violations provided the citation is subscribed in a manner
provided by law. The City Attorney or other authorized public official may issue a summons and
complaint provided the citation is subscribed in a manner provided by law. OTHER AUTHORIZED
PUBLIC OFFICIAL shall include a land use or code enforcement officer. A citizen may sign a citation
in a manner provided by law, which manner shall include a signature under an acknowledgment of
penalty for any false swearing or perjury. Peace officers shall cause the service of any citation,
summons and complaint, or any other process authorized by this section in a manner consistent with the
law, including division (B) above. This service shall include but is not limited to service by another
police department as agent for the City Police Department.
(D) City Attorney. The City Attorney shall act as legal counsel for the city in any enforcement
proceeding conducted pursuant to this section. The City Attorney may prosecute a violator of any city
ordinance in the name of the city.
(E) Resolution reaffirmation. The provisions of division (B) of this section may be reaffirmed by
resolution annually or any other time as the Council may decide.
(Ord. 1207, passed 3-20-2006)
Tillamook - General Provisions
10
' 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
(A) Application of state penalties. It is hereby declared to be the policy of this city that, for acts,
conduct or offenses proscribed by the city, the fines and penalties under all existing ordinances and the
fines and penalties under all ordinances which may be enacted in the future shall be no greater than the
fines and penalties imposed under state law for any act, conduct or offense proscribed by state law which
is of a like or similar nature to the offense proscribed by the city.
(B) Limitation on present penalty provisions. The maximum fine and penalty which may be
assessed against any person for the commission of any offense proscribed by any ordinance in effect in
the city shall be no greater than the maximum fine and penalty provided by the statutes of this state which
provide for a fine and penalty for an act, conduct or offense proscribed by the state, which act, conduct or
offense is identical or similar to the act, conduct or offense proscribed by any city ordinance.
(C) Limitation on future penalty provisions. The maximum fine and penalty which may be
assessed against any person for the commission of any offense proscribed by any future ordinance
enacted by the city shall be no greater than the maximum fine and penalty provided by the statutes of the
state which may be enacted in the future and which provide for a fine and penalty for an act, conduct or
offense proscribed by the state; which act, conduct or offense is identical or similar to the act, conduct or
offense proscribed by any future city ordinance.
(D) Continuation of ordinance provisions. The fines and penalties provided in ordinances of the
city for acts, conduct or offenses which are not the subject of proscription by state law shall continue to
remain in full force and effect and shall continue to have the fines and penalties provided for in those
respective ordinances.
(E) Penalties set by resolution. Unless otherwise indicated, any offense against provisions of the
CCT is classified as a violation punishable by a fine set by resolution.
(1977 Code, ' 1-2) (Ord. 842, passed 11-3-1975; Ord. 1301, passed 4-20-2015; Ord. 1315, passed
6-6-2016)
Rules of Construction; General Penalty
11
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
11.01 Ward boundaries
' 11.01 WARD BOUNDARIES.
(A) Map. An updated ward/precinct map describing the city’s exterior jurisdictional boundary and
interior ward boundaries is attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated here by reference.
(B) Ward boundaries. The boundaries of each ward are established by map and tax lot number. An
updated listing describing each ward’s list of property is attached to the ordinance and codified herein
and incorporated here by reference.
(C) Tenure of present officials. The boundaries of each ward as established by this section shall
not affect the tenure of any Council member who is in office on the effective date of this section.
(Ord. 1340, passed 12-4-2018)
1
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. CITY COUNCIL, GOVERNMENT AND
ADMINISTRATION
31. CITY OFFICIALS
32. CITY ORGANIZATIONS AND DEPARTMENTS
33. ELECTION PROCEDURES
34. CITY POLICIES
35. FINANCES; TAXES AND FEES
36. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
3
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL, GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
Meetings Generally
30.01 Regular meeting times
30.02 Special meetings
30.03 Emergency meetings
30.04 Executive sessions
30.05 Conference calls
30.06 Study sessions
Business of Council
30.20 Meeting conduct
30.21 Quorum
30.22 Agenda
30.23 Suggested order of business
30.24 Voting
30.25 Reconsideration of actions taken
30.26 Public hearings
30.27 Sergeant-at-arms
30.28 Designation of hearings officer
30.29 Speaking by Council members generally
30.30 Public members addressing the Council
30.31 Order and decorum
30.32 Picture taking or filming
30.33 Flags, signs and posters
30.34 News media
Administration
30.45 Council committees
30.46 Chain of command
30.47 Annual position review
30.48 Use of legal and professional services
Tillamook - Administration
4
30.49 Representing the city
30.50 Rules in general
Appendix A: Delegation of Authority to the City Manager and City Recorder Policy
Appendix B: Executive Accountability Policies
Appendix C: Strategic Plan for the Current Year
MEETINGS GENERALLY
' 30.01 REGULAR MEETING TIMES.
The City Council shall meet on the first and third Monday of each month at the City Hall. In the
event of a holiday, the meeting shall take place the day following or on a day agreed upon by the
Council at the meeting prior to the holiday.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.02 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
The Mayor, or in his or her absence, the President of the Council, may, or at the request of three
members of the Council shall, by giving notice thereof to all members of the Council then in the city,
call a special meeting of the Council by giving 24 hours’ advance notice to members of the Council,
the media and other interested persons, and the public. No other business shall be transacted other than
that for which the meeting was called. All proceedings of the meeting must be reviewed at the next
regular Council meeting.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.03 EMERGENCY MEETINGS.
An emergency meeting is a special meeting called on less than 24 hours’ notice. There must be an
actual emergency, and the minutes must describe the emergency justifying less than 24 hours’ notice.
The governing body must attempt to notify the media and other interested persons, generally by
telephone. No other business shall be transacted other than that for which the meeting was called. All
proceedings of the meeting must be reviewed at the next regular Council meeting.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.04 EXECUTIVE SESSIONS.
City Council, Government and Administration
5
Executive sessions may be held during any meeting of the Council providing all applicable
statutory limitations are met. Any member of the Council may call for an executive session at a
regular, special or emergency meeting for which notice has already been given in accordance with
public meetings law requirements.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.05 CONFERENCE CALLS.
Notice and opportunity for the media and public to be present must be provided when meetings are
conducted by conference calls. For non-executive sessions, meetings held by telephone or other
electronic means of communication, the public must be provided at least one place where its members
may listen to the meeting by speakers or other devices. The media must be provided access to these
facilities even for executive sessions, except where those sessions are exempt from the media.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.06 STUDY SESSIONS.
A meeting held solely for the purpose of receiving information, except an on-site inspection, is
subject to the public meetings law and must be advertised the same as regular meetings.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
BUSINESS OF COUNCIL
' 30.20 MEETING CONDUCT.
(A) Robert’s Rules of Order Revised (the most current version) shall be used as a guide in the
conduct of Council meetings. These rules of order may be relaxed at the discretion of the presiding
officer to simplify and clarify matters before the Council.
(B) Each session is limited to three hours in length unless there is a unanimous vote of the Council
to continue beyond that duration.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.21 QUORUM.
Tillamook - Administration
6
The Mayor, or in his or her absence the President of the Council, shall call the meeting to order at
the hour designated for the meeting. If a quorum is not present, the Recorder or designee shall
immediately notify the absent member(s), except those known to be unavoidably detained or absent,
that their presence is required. If there are three Council members present, they may order an officer of
the city to direct any available absent member to attend the meeting. If a quorum cannot be obtained,
the members present shall adjourn until another specified time or until the next regular meeting.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.22 AGENDA.
(A) The Mayor and the City Manager shall prepare together the agenda for each meeting. In the
absence of the Mayor or City Manager, or his or her official designees, the other may set the agenda
individually.
(B) Any person desiring inclusion of agenda items (including Councilors, committees, the City
Attorney and City Recorder) shall direct these to the Mayor and City Manager. This agenda shall be
closed for further items at 5:00 p.m. on the Tuesday preceding the meeting except in the case of special
meetings. All background materials shall be submitted by the following day, unless otherwise
authorized by the Mayor or Manager.
(C) No vote shall be allowed on items not on the published agenda with the exception of an
emergency. Any member of the Council may introduce an item not on the agenda if it constitutes an
emergency. Emergency placement of an item onto the agenda requires a unanimous vote of the
Council members present.
(D) A majority of the Council may approve the placement of a non-emergency item on the
agenda; however, in order to provide adequate public notice, all non-emergency items shall be placed
on the next regular agenda.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.23 SUGGESTED ORDER OF BUSINESS.
The suggested order of business is as follows:
(A) Call to order;
(B) Approval of minutes of the previous meeting;
(C) Proclamations and presentations;
(D) Audience comments;
(E) Noticed public hearings;
City Council, Government and Administration
7
(F) Old business;
(G) New business;
(H) Committee, Council and staff reports;
(I) Bills against the city; and
(J) Adjournment.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.24 VOTING.
(A) A vote on every motion or question relating to the expenditure of funds shall be by roll call
vote conducted by the City Recorder or designee.
(B) Written ballots are not prohibited, but each ballot must identify the member voting and the
vote must be announced by the City Recorder or designee. Secret ballots are prohibited. In the event
of a unanimous vote, it may be entered into the record as Aunanimously approved/disapproved.@
(C) A Council member may not indicate his or her vote during the course of discussion.
(D) A Council member may change his or her vote before the next item of business is taken.
(E) A member may not vote on any issue or matter in which he or she may have a potential
conflict of interest, as defined by O.R.S. 244.020.
(F) A member may request to be excused from voting for special reason when approved by a
majority of the Council. A member who abstains from voting must state the reason for his or her
abstention.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.25 RECONSIDERATION OF ACTIONS TAKEN.
Any member who voted with the majority may move for a reconsideration of the action during the
meeting at which the vote was taken. If the action is reconsidered, no further reconsideration may take
place without the majority consent of Council.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.26 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
Tillamook - Administration
8
When a public hearing or a bid opening is scheduled, any agenda items in progress shall be
recessed to comply with the advertised time. In the case of a public hearing, the presiding officer
(hearing officer), upon completion of required announced information, shall call upon the members of
the audience to come forth to be heard. If appropriate, the presiding officer may first ask those persons
in favor of the stated matter to come forward, with those speaking in opposition to come after. The
presiding officer may limit the time and number of speakers at the public hearing. In that event, the
presiding officer shall announce these restrictions prior to commencement of the hearing.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.27 SERGEANT-AT-ARMS.
The sergeant-at-arms shall be the Chief of Police, if present, or an appropriate designate.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.28 DESIGNATION OF HEARINGS OFFICER.
A hearings officer may be appointed by the presiding officer to conduct special public hearings,
when appropriate.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.29 SPEAKING BY COUNCIL MEMBERS GENERALLY.
Every Council member desiring to speak shall address the Chair. Upon recognition, he or she shall
confine remarks to the issue under debate.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.30 PUBLIC MEMBERS ADDRESSING THE COUNCIL.
(A) Any person who may wish to address the Council may be asked to stand and wait to be
recognized by the presiding officer. After recognition, the person’s name and address shall be stated
for the record and the remarks shall be limited to the question under discussion. (All remarks and
questions shall be addressed to the presiding officer and not to an individual Councilor, staff person or
other individual.) No person may enter into any discussion without first being recognized by the Chair.
(B) Persons addressing the Council shall be limited to five minutes or less, unless a longer or
shorter time has been granted by the presiding officer and announced before the proceeding takes
place. No public member may speak twice on any one subject until every other public member
wishing to speak has been heard. The second address shall be limited to three minutes unless
permission is otherwise granted by the presiding officer.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
City Council, Government and Administration
9
' 30.31 ORDER AND DECORUM.
(A) The Council commits itself and its members to ethical, businesslike and lawful conduct,
including proper use of authority and appropriate decorum when acting as Council members.
Accordingly:
(1) Council members will represent the interests of the citizens of the entire city. This
accountability to the whole city supersedes:
(a) Any conflicting loyalty a member may have to other advocacy or interest groups;
(b) Loyalty based upon membership on other councils or staffs;
(c) Conflicts based upon the personal interest of any Council member;
(d) Conflicts based upon being a relative of an employee of the city; and
(e) Any other conflicts of interest as outlined by the State Standards and Practices
Commission.
(2) Council members will not attempt to exercise individual authority over the organization.
(3) Council members may not attempt to exercise individual authority over the organization.
As such:
(a) Council member interaction with the City Manager, City Recorder or with staff must
recognize the lack of authority vested in individuals except when explicitly authorized by the Council;
and
(b) Council member interaction with the public, press or other entities must recognize
the same limitation and the inability of any Council member to speak for the Council except to repeat
explicitly stated Council decisions.
(4) Council members shall maintain confidentiality appropriate to sensitive issues and
information that otherwise may tend to compromise the integrity or legal standing of the Council
and/or city, especially those matters discussed in closed session.
(B) The job of the Council is to represent the citizens and taxpayers and to lead the city by
determining and requiring appropriate and excellent organizational performance.
(1) To distinguish the Council’s own unique job from the jobs of the City Manager and staff,
the Council will concentrate its efforts on the following:
(a) Determining and using proactive strategies to ensure constructive two-way dialogue
for input from staff and citizens as a means to link the entire city around goal achievement;
(b) Developing written policies which, at the broadest levels, address:
Tillamook - Administration
10
1. Council process policies: how the Council will conceive, carry out and monitor
its own work;
2. Council/executive relationship policies: how authority is delegated and its proper
use monitored; the City Manager role, the City Recorder role and their authority and accountability
(see Appendix A, which may be amended by resolution);
3. Executive accountability policies: constraints on executive authority which
establish the practical, ethical and legal boundaries within which all staff activity and decision-making
will take place and be monitored (see Appendix B, which may be amended by resolution); and
4. Strategic direction policies: what the Council intends for the city to achieve (see
Appendix C, which may be amended by resolution).
(c) Ensuring City Manager performance by monitoring of the annual performance plan;
(d) Ensuring City Recorder performance by monitoring of the City Recorder’s annual
performance plan objectives; and
(e) Ensuring that the annual performance plan is the focus of organizational
performance.
(2) Unless expressly stated otherwise, nothing in this or any other City Council rule or policy
shall change any collective bargaining agreement, employment contract or Aat-will@ employment of
any city employee.
(C) (1) Actions which cause the Council or general public to be unable to comfortably hear, see
or breathe; to experience unwelcomed physical contact; or pose any threat to the health, welfare or
safety of attendees, shall be sufficient cause for the sergeant-at-arms, at the direction of the Chair, to
remove a person from the Council chambers or meeting hall for the duration of the meeting. These
actions may include but are not limited to:
(a) The use of unreasonably loud or disruptive language;
(b) Making loud or disruptive noises, flashes or light;
(c) Engaging in violent or distractive actions;
(d) The willful injury to city property of any kind;
(e) Refusal to obey any rules of conduct provided within this chapter, including
limitation on occupancy or seating capacity;
City Council, Government and Administration
11
(f) Refusal to obey an order of the presiding officer; or
(g) Refusal to obey an order by a Council member, which has been approved by a
majority of the Council members present.
(2) In division (A)(1) of this section, UNREASONABLY LOUD OR DISRUPTIVE means
any noise, light, odor or conduct that intentionally or negligently disrupts or obstructs the ability of one
or more Councilors to receive any communication from another during work or conduct of the business
of the Council.
(D) Before the sergeant-at-arms is directed to remove a person(s) from the Council chambers or
meeting place for conduct described in division (B) of this section, that person shall be given warning
by the presiding officer to cease his or her disruptive conduct, unless the conduct poses an immediate
threat to the health, welfare or safety of any person or city property.
(E) If a meeting is disrupted by members of the audience, a majority of the Council members
present may order that the Council chamber or meeting hall be cleared. (State public meeting law will
still apply. This will not allow the Council to deliberate toward a decision or to hold a closed or
executive session except as provided in that law. A recess of the meeting should be considered to
allow matters to calm down.)
(F) Signs or other devices which obstruct the ability of the Council and the general public to see
each other are not allowed, nor shall signs or devices be adhered to the Chamber walls, with the
exception of those needed as part of agenda presentations.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.32 PICTURE TAKING OR FILMING.
The taking of photographs or filming in the Council chambers or meeting hall shall be allowed
except when it is done in violation of ' 30.31.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.33 FLAGS, SIGNS AND POSTERS.
No flags, signs, posters or placards, unless authorized by the presiding officer, may be carried,
displayed or placed within the Council chambers or meeting hall in which the Council is officially
meeting. This restriction shall not apply to arm bands, emblems, badges or other articles worn on
personal clothing of individuals, providing that the devices are of a size and nature as not to interfere
with the vision of other persons attending the meeting, and provided that the devices do not extend
from the wearer in such a manner as to present a possible cause of injury to another.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.34 NEWS MEDIA.
Tillamook - Administration
12
The provisions of these rules shall not be construed to prevent news media representatives from
performing their duties as long as the manner of performance is not unreasonably disruptive to the
conduct of the meeting.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
ADMINISTRATION
' 30.45 COUNCIL COMMITTEES.
(A) The Mayor, at his or her discretion, may also convene special ad hoc committees of limited
duration with the consent of a majority of the Council. These committees shall be charged with
making recommendations regarding to the Council.
(B) Members of all standing committees shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of a
majority of the Council, at the second Council meeting in January of each year or as soon thereafter as
convenient. Members of standing committees must reside or own a business within the city limits.
(1) The Mayor shall also designate Council members to serve as chair, vice-chair and liaison
between the standing committees and the City Council. Each Council member should expect to serve
on not less than two standing committees.
(2) Each member of a committee shall hold office for two years and until a successor is
appointed.
(3) If a vacancy occurs in a committee, the Mayor, at the next succeeding regular meeting of
the Council, with the consent of a majority of the Council, shall appoint a member of the Council to fill
the vacancy. Any member so appointed shall hold office until January of the year following the
appointment or as soon thereafter as convenient and until a successor is duly appointed.
(4) The committees are limited to a maximum of seven members (excluding staff). The
member limitation does not apply to the Associations Committee, whose purpose is to be inclusive.
The chair shall set the agenda in conference with staff.
(5) A majority of a quorum of a committee is sufficient to conduct committee business.
Business shall be conducted in a manner similar to that proscribed in '' 30.20 and 30.29 through
30.34 above.
(6) The city staff will provide staff support and input and may make recommendations to
committees but shall not have a vote on the committee.
(7) At the regular meeting of the Council following a committee meeting, the committees
shall make a report, written or oral, of their activities or as soon thereafter as convenient.
City Council, Government and Administration
13
(C) The City Council may establish or abolish standing committees by resolution in order to
report and make appropriate recommendations to the Council, and recommend adoption of ordinances
and/or resolutions that it considers necessary for the welfare of the city. At the time of the ratification
of these rules, the following standing committees shall be considered in place:
(1) Committee on Personnel. The Committee on Personnel shall:
(a) Coordinate City Manager, City Recorder and Municipal Judge annual evaluations;
(b) Coordinate and make recommendations for changes to the Employee Handbook; and
(c) Periodically evaluate all personal service contracts.
(2) Committee on Beautification, Parks and Open Space. The Committee on City
Beautification, Parks and Open Space shall consider all matters relating to parks, open space, seasonal
street decoration, and uses of city beautification funds, city beautification needs and holiday
celebrations and matters that are referred to it by the Mayor.
(3) Committee on Finance. The Committee on Finance shall consider all matters relating to
city budget, city fiscal affairs, loans, grants, assessment impacts and government grants and matters
that are referred to it by the Mayor.
(4) Committee on Public Safety. The Committee on Public Safety shall consider all matters
relating to public health and safety, city police, intergovernmental relations with the Fire District, 911,
County Sheriff, state police and outreach, schools, youth and elderly.
(5) Committee on Public Works. The Committee on Public Works shall:
(a) Consider all matters relating to streets, on-street parking, parking district, sewers,
alleys, sidewalks, public ways, water facilities and public buildings and matters that are referred to it by
the Mayor;
(b) Recommend rates to be charged for city water and sewer services; and
(c) Propose improvements to streets, on-street parking, parking district, sewer facilities,
alleys, sidewalks, public ways, water facilities and public buildings.
(6) Committee on Associations. The Committee on Associations shall consider all matters
relating to city visioning, downtown development and city partnerships.
(D) Notwithstanding the above divisions (A) through (C), the following commissions and
committees shall require Council consent for membership and shall be guided by the requirements of
state law and any supplemental bylaws that they may adopt:
(1) Planning Commission; and
Tillamook - Administration
14
(2) Budget Committee.
(E) City Councilors appointed to any committee or commission, which may from time to time
request and/or require municipal funds, shall work with the committee in the formation of its budget
and be prepared to support and explain the budget items presented to the City Council.
(F) All committees shall keep action minutes or shall electronically record the proceedings of
their meetings. The committee chair or his or her designate shall be responsible for turning the record
in to City Hall.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.46 CHAIN OF COMMAND.
(A) (1) No elected or appointed official shall issue directives individually to department heads or
city employees. Complaints about an employee’s job performance are to be directed to the City
Manager. Complaints about the City Recorder or City Manager’s job performance are to be directed to
the Personnel Committee.
(2) The City Manager and City Recorder are the Council’s only links to operational
achievement and conduct; all authority and accountability of employees, as far as the Council is
concerned, is considered the authority and accountability of the City Manager. Accordingly:
(a) The Council will not give instructions to persons who report directly or indirectly to
the City Manager;
(b) The Council will not evaluate the performance of any employee other than the City
Manager and the City Recorder; and
(c) The Council will review City Manager and City Recorder performance annually and
will consider City Manager performance as identical to city performance. This includes achievement
of the strategic direction policies, and financial performance as identified in the approved budget.
(B) No department head or employee, with the exception of the City Recorder and Municipal
Judge, shall present requests to elected or appointed officials except in an emergency. All
nonemergency requests are to be submitted first to the appropriate department head before submission
to the City Manager. The City Manager shall determine which requests are forwarded to the City
Council. This division (B) shall not pertain to grievance or Awhistleblowing@ concerns, which shall be
subject to the processes described in the Employee Handbook and any relevant union contract.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.47 ANNUAL POSITION REVIEW.
While the Council is encouraged to communicate with staff, the Council’s connection to the city’s
City Council, Government and Administration
15
daily operations, its achievements and conduct will be through the City Manager (except for those
areas of responsibility that are the City Recorder’s, where it will be through the City Recorder).
(A) Systematic and rigorous monitoring of City Manager and City Recorder job performance will
be against the expected progress and eventual results of the annual performance plan and in compliance
with the boundaries specified in executive accountability policies. The Council will acquire
monitoring data by one or more of three methods:
(1) By internal report, in which the City Manager or City Recorder discloses compliance
information to the Council;
(2) By external report, in which an external, disinterested third party selected by the Council
assesses compliance with city policy; and/or
(3) By direct Council member inspection, in which the member assesses compliance with the
appropriate policy criteria.
(B) All policies that set boundaries for the City Manager and City Recorder will be monitored at a
frequency and by a method recommended and approved by the Council. The Council can monitor any
policy at any time by any method.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.48 USE OF LEGAL AND PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
(A) All requests for formal opinion and information to and from the City Attorney or other
personal service contractors shall be channeled through the Mayor, Council President or City Manager.
If three or more Councilors request certain professional services, the Council President shall authorize
the use. This does not preclude an individual Councilor from contacting the City Attorney for a brief
informal legal opinion that must then be promptly communicated to the entire Council.
(B) All requests for legal or other professional opinion shall be submitted in writing.
(C) The City Attorney shall not deal directly with developer’s legal agents or other individuals
desiring to initiate actions requiring Council and/or Planning Commission approval, unless directed to
do so by the City Council.
(D) Attorneys representing developers and/or other parties shall direct all matters regarding the
city to the attention of city staff for routing through established procedural protocols. Should there be
any question of proceeding outside of established protocols, the City Council of the city will determine
the appropriate disposition of the referenced matter and whether the matter is capable of being resolved
by City Council action or requiring legal services.
(E) All records of billing submitted to the city for professional services shall reflect the subject
and topic of each and every topic area (for example, phone call re: (topic) and to whom;
conference/meeting re: (topic and purpose)).
Tillamook - Administration
16
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.49 REPRESENTING THE CITY.
(A) City stationery and an official’s title shall be used when stating previously expressed (verbal
or written) city policy or when requesting information or assistance, except as so directed at a public
meeting by a majority of Council members present.
(B) The Mayor, as a chief elected official, and thus spokesperson for the city along with the City
Manager, shall be allowed to use city stationery to extend invitations to city-related functions and to
send letters of appreciation or condolence. The Mayor or City Council may delegate this authority to
another.
(C) No elected or appointed official shall use city stationery to express personal viewpoints or for
private correspondence.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
' 30.50 RULES IN GENERAL.
(A) In the event any rule established by Council is found to be contrary to the Municipal Charter,
state or federal law, the appropriate Charter provisions or laws shall take precedence.
(B) If any rule within these rules is found to be in conflict with previous Council rules, the
previous Council rules shall be amended to resolve the conflict.
(C) As needed or required by law or administrative order, the Council rules shall be revised,
deleted or new rules introduced by amendment or revision. Modification or changing of one or more
rules shall have no effect upon the other rules of Council.
(D) The appendices to these rules (see Appendices A, B and C following) may be modified by
resolution.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
City Council, Government and Administration
17
APPENDIX A: DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY TO THE
CITY MANAGER AND CITY RECORDER POLICY
Delegation of Authority to the City Manager and City Recorder Policy
The Council will instruct the City Manager and City Recorder through written policies that
prescribe the city goals to be achieved and describe organizational situations and actions to be avoided.
The Council will support any reasonable interpretation of those policies by the City Manager or City
Recorder respective to their assigned responsibilities. Accordingly:
(A) Council will develop policies instructing the City Manager or City Recorder to achieve
defined goal results. These policies will be developed systematically from the broadest, most general
level to more defined levels, and may be called strategic direction policies;
(B) Council will develop policies that limit the latitude the City Manager or City Recorder may
exercise in choosing the organizational means. These policies will be developed systematically from
the broadest, most general level to more defined levels, and they may be called executive
accountability policies;
(C) As long as the City Manager or City Recorder uses any reasonable interpretation of the
Council’s strategic direction policies and executive accountability policies, the City Manager or City
Recorder is authorized to establish all further policies, make all decisions, establish all practices and
develop all activities they deems appropriate to achieve the Council’s goals; and
(D) The Council may change its strategic direction policies and/or executive accountability
policies at any time, thereby shifting the boundary between Council and City Manager/City Recorder
domains. By doing so, the Council changes the latitude of choice given to the City Manager or City
Recorder. However, as long as any Council-specified delegation of authority is in place, the Council
will respect and support any reasonable interpretation of its policies.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
City Council, Government and Administration
19
APPENDIX B: EXECUTIVE ACCOUNTABILITY POLICIES
Policy I: City Manager Executive Accountability Policy:
(A) City Manager responsibility. The City Manager shall ensure that all city practices, activities,
decisions and organizational circumstances are lawful, prudent and in conformance with commonly
accepted business and professional ethics, including but not limited to the following:
(1) The City Manager shall ensure the city’s assets are protected, adequately maintained and
risked only as necessary. Accordingly the City Manager shall:
(a) Allow only authorized personnel access to material amounts of funds;
(b) Monitor facilities or equipment for improper wear and tear or insufficient routine
maintenance;
(c) Protect the city, Council or staff from unnecessary claims of liability;
(d) Assure that any non-inventory purchase:
1. Of over $5,000 has obtained at least three comparative prices and qualities where
brand consistency is not a consideration (i.e., Dell/Gateway/Apple computers); and
2. Of over $150,000 has utilized a stringent method of assuring the balance of
long-term quality and cost through a formal bidding process.
(e) Be limited in authority to only purchases under $5,000 without Council approval,
with the exception of budgeted maintenance items;
(f) Protect intellectual property, information and files from loss or significant damage, or
access by unauthorized persons;
(g) Receive, distribute and/or account for funds under controls that are sufficient to meet
standard accounting practices and/or to protect the city;
(h) Invest or hold operating capital in secure instruments, including insured checking
accounts or in interest-bearing accounts except where necessary to facilitate ease in operational
transactions or where it benefits the city;
(i) Enhance the city’s image or credibility, particularly in ways that would facilitate its
accomplishment of its mission; and
(j) Timely provide Council, City Recorder, staff, contract vendors and the public with
the information necessary to carry on the city’s business.
(2) With respect to the treatment of employees, the City Manager shall cause or allow
Tillamook - Administration
20
conditions that are fair or dignified. Accordingly, the City Manager shall:
(a) Operate by following written personnel policies that clarify personnel rules for
employees, provide for effective handling of complaints and protect against wrongful or illegal
conditions;
(b) Protect all employees from discrimination at any time for any reason;
(c) Facilitate employees in taking a complaint to the Council when internal complaint
procedures have been exhausted; and
(d) Acquaint staff with this policy.
(3) Financial planning in any fiscal year mandates that actual expenditures remain within the
budget parameters, except for approved budget adjustments. Accordingly, the City Manager shall
provide a budget that:
(a) Contains sufficient information to enable credible projection of revenues and
expenses, separation of capital and operational items, cash flows and disclosure of planning
assumptions; and
(b) Acquires, encumbers or disposes of real property with the Council’s approval.
(4) Regarding employment, compensation and benefits to employees, consultants and
contract workers, the City Manager shall protect the city’s fiscal integrity and image. Accordingly, the
City Manager may not:
(a) Change his or her own compensation and/or benefits;
(b) Promise or imply benefits that are outside approved benefit policies;
(c) Promise or imply permanent or guaranteed employment; or
(d) Establish compensation that deviates materially from the geographic or professional
market for the skills employed and/or that is outside of the approved budget.
(5) The City Manager shall keep the Council informed and supported in its work.
Accordingly, the City Manager shall:
(a) Submit monitoring data, status reports, financial information or other pertinent
information required by the Council in a timely, accurate and understandable manner;
(b) Let the Council be aware of relevant trends or significant changes of any kind that
could or have negatively impacted the city; and
(c) Report in a timely manner an actual or anticipated noncompliance with any
City Council, Government and Administration
21
Council-approved policy.
(6) Regarding city insurance, employee benefit providers and employee wages, the City
Manager shall:
(a) Review annually all benefits providers for cost and comparative services; and
(b) Do bi-annual wage research and analysis.
(B) Staff treatment. With respect to treatment of paid and volunteer staff, the City Manager shall
cause or allow conditions, procedures, actions or decisions which are lawful, ethical, safe, respectful,
dignified, moral, reputable and in accordance with Council policy. Accordingly, the City Manager
shall:
(1) Develop procedures for reasonable background inquiries and checks prior to hiring any
paid personnel or utilizing the services of any volunteers;
(2) Operate within the parameters of written personnel and administrative policies which:
(a) Clarify personnel rules and procedures for staff;
(b) Provide for effective handling of grievances;
(c) Include adequate job descriptions for all staff positions;
(d) Include salary and compensation plans that comply with state law;
(e) Include an effective personnel performance evaluation system;
(f) Establish procedures for reductions in force;
(g) Protect against sexual harassment;
(h) Protect against racial, religious, gender, age, disability and ethnic bias or
discrimination; and
(i) Provide for a drug-, smoke- and alcohol-free workplace.
(3) Facilitate employees in grieving to the Council when internal grievance procedures have
been exhausted and the employee alleges that Council policy has been violated;
(4) Protect confidential information;
(5) Provide for open communication and the sharing of ideas; and
(6) Provide staff with an opportunity to become familiar with the provisions of this policy.
Tillamook - Administration
22
Policy II: City Recorder Executive Accountability Policy:
The City Recorder shall help to ensure that all city practices, activities, decisions or organizational
circumstances are lawful, prudent and in conformance with commonly accepted business and
professional ethics, including but not limited to the following:
(A) The City Recorder shall assure that the city’s assets are protected, adequately maintained and
risked only as necessary. Accordingly, the City Recorder shall:
(1) Insure against theft and casualty losses to at least 100% of replacement value and against
liability losses to the city, employees and the organization itself in an amount greater than the average
for comparable organizations;
(2) Allow only authorized personnel access to material amounts of funds;
(3) Protect the city, Council or staff from unnecessary claims of liability;
(4) Assure that any non-inventory purchase of over $5,000 has obtained at least three
comparative prices and qualities where brand consistency is not a consideration (i.e.,
Dell/Gateway/Apple computers);
(5) Be limited in authority to only purchases under $5,000 without Council approval with the
exception of budgeted maintenance items;
(6) Protect intellectual property, information and files from loss or significant damage, or
access by unauthorized persons;
(7) Receive, distribute and/or account for funds under controls that are sufficient to meet
standard accounting practices and/or to protect the city;
(8) Invest or hold operating capital in secure instruments, including insured checking
accounts or in interest-bearing accounts, except where necessary to facilitate ease in operational
transactions or where it benefits the city;
(9) Protect the city’s image or credibility, particularly in ways that would enhance its
accomplishment of its mission; and
(10) Timely provide Council, City Manager, staff, contract vendors and the public with the
information necessary to carry on the city’s business.
(B) With respect to the treatment of employees, the City Recorder shall ensure conditions that are
fair or dignified. Accordingly, the City Recorder shall:
(1) Operate within the written personnel policies that clarify personnel rules for employees,
provide for effective handling of complaints, and protect against wrongful or illegal conditions;
City Council, Government and Administration
23
(2) Protect against discrimination toward any employee at any time for any reason;
(3) Facilitate employees in taking a complaint to the Council when internal complaint
procedures have been exhausted; and
(4) Acquaint staff with this policy.
(C) Financial planning in any fiscal year mandates that actual expenditures remain within the
budget parameters, except for approved budget adjustments. Accordingly, the City Recorder shall
assist in budgeting that:
(1) Settles payroll and debts in a timely manner;
(2) Assures that tax payments or other government-ordered payments or filings will not
become overdue or inaccurately filed; and
(3) Aggressively pursues receivables after a reasonable grace period.
(D) Regarding employment, compensation and benefits to employees, consultants and contract
workers, the City Recorder shall protect the city’s fiscal integrity or image. Accordingly, the City
Recorder may not:
(1) Change her or his own compensation and/or benefits; or
(2) Promise or imply benefits that are outside approved benefit policies.
(E) The City Recorder shall keep the Council informed or supported in its work. Accordingly, the
City Recorder shall:
(1) Submit monitoring data, status reports, financial information or other pertinent
information required by the Council in a timely, accurate and understandable manner;
(2) Make the Council aware of relevant trends or significant changes of any kind that could
or have negatively impacted the city; and
(3) Report in a timely manner any actual or anticipated noncompliance with any
Council-approved policy.
(F) Regarding city insurance, employee benefit providers and employee wages, the City Recorder
shall get bi-annual bids from insurance broker.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
Tillamook - Administration
24
APPENDIX C: STRATEGIC PLAN FOR THE CURRENT YEAR
The strategic plan for the current year is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in full herein.
Copies are available in city offices.
(Ord. 1256a, passed 8-1-2011)
26
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
31.01 Bond of Recorder-Treasurer
31.02 City Recorder; maintenance of ordinance book
' 31.01 BOND OF RECORDER-TREASURER.
(A) Recorder’s bond. Before assuming the duties of his or her office, the Recorder-Treasurer
shall execute and deliver to the Mayor a bond in a penal sum of not less than $25,000 and any
additional amounts as the Council may find necessary. The bond shall be conditioned upon the
Recorder-Treasurer faithfully performing the duties of his or her office and truthfully accounting for all
money and other valuable property coming into his or her possession by virtue of his or her office.
(B) Sureties. Any bond required by this section shall be executed by two or more sureties, who
shall be freeholders and residents of the city, having the qualifications of bail upon arrest. In lieu of
these sureties, any bond required by this section may be executed by an indemnity insurance or surety
company organized or licensed to transact business in this state.
(C) Approval; premiums. Each bond required by this section shall be subject to the approval of
the Mayor acting by and with the advice and consent of the Council; and if the bonds are executed by a
surety company, the premiums thereon shall be paid by the city in the same manner as other claims
against the city are paid.
(1977 Code, ' 1-6) (Ord. 719, passed 8-3-1959)
' 31.02 CITY RECORDER; MAINTENANCE OF ORDINANCE BOOK.
(A) Ordinance numbering and retention. The City Recorder shall number each ordinance passed
by the City Council in order of its passage and file it in his or her office in the same order. No original
ordinance shall be permitted to be taken from the office of the City Recorder.
(B) Signature and seal. The City Recorder shall record in numerical order in a permanent record
book a copy of every ordinance passed by the City Council. The copy shall contain a statement signed
by the City Recorder over the seal of the city to the effect that the same was recorded by the City
Recorder and is a full, true and correct copy of the original ordinance, and of the whole thereof. This
record shall be prima facie evidence of the passage of the ordinance in all legal proceedings and in
every other case.
(C) Compilation revision. In addition, it shall be the duty of the City Recorder, as ordinances or
City Officials
27
Charter provisions may hereafter be passed and repealed, to revise the cumulative compilation of
ordinances known as AA Compilation of the Ordinances of Tillamook City@ in the manner best
adapted to the maintenance of the efficiency of the cumulative compilation and in accordance with the
suggested methods for revision contained in the introduction to the compilation.
(1977 Code, ' 1-1) (Ord. 567, passed 6-2-1941)
28
CHAPTER 32: CITY ORGANIZATIONS AND DEPARTMENTS
Section
Boards and Commissions
32.01 City Planning Commission; bylaws
32.02 Contract Review Board
32.03 Urban Renewal Agency
Police
32.15 Auxiliary reserve police force
32.16 Authorization to check criminal information records of State Law Enforcement Data
System
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
' 32.01 CITY PLANNING COMMISSION; BYLAWS.
The City Council hereby ordains that previous Planning Commission provisions are replaced by
the new Planning Commission bylaws contained in Exhibit A attached to Ordinance 1257, which are
hereby incorporated by reference and adopted herein.
(1977 Code, ' 1-5) (Ord. 1257, passed 9-6-2011)
' 32.02 CONTRACT REVIEW BOARD.
(A) Contract Review Board designated. The members of the Tillamook City Council are designated
the City's Local Contract Review Board (hereafter "Board") in which body is vested all the rights,
responsibilities and duties pertaining thereto under Oregon law, including without limitation the right to
adopt and maintain rules ofprocedure that the contracting agency will use for public contracts.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BOARD. The local Contract Review Board as established in division (A) above.
City Organizations and Departments
29
PUBLIC CONTRACT. Any purchase, lease or sale by this City Council of personal property,
public improvements or services other than agreements which are exclusively for personal service.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any construction or improvements on real property by or for
the city or the City Council.
(C) Bids required. All public contracts defined as any purchase, lease or sale by the City
Council, public improvements or services other than agreements for personal service shall be based
upon competitive bids except those exempted by the laws of this state or by Board rule.
(D) Rules adopted. The Local Contract Review Board as established in this section shall adopt by
resolution rules pertaining to all contracting at the local level; the rules may exempt from competitive
bidding certain contracts and shall set forth procedures for competitive bidding.
(1977 Code, ' 1-16) (Ord. 927, passed 10-18-1978)
' 32.03 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY.
(A) Declaration of blight. Pursuant to O.R.S. 457.035, the City Council, hereinafter referred to as
Acity,@ hereby finds and declares that blighted areas, as defined in O.R.S. 457.010, exist within the city
based upon the findings marked in Exhibit A attached to the ordinance establishing this section and
incorporated by reference as fully set forth herein.
(B) Need. The city declares and recognizes that there is a need for an Urban Renewal Agency to
function within the city.
(C) Powers and limitations. The city further declares, pursuant to O.R.S. 457.045(2) that all of
the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities granted to and vested in an Urban Renewal
Agency by the laws of this state shall be exercised by and vested in the Urban Renewal Agency of the
city; provided, however, that any act of the governing body acting as the Urban Renewal Agency shall
be, and shall be considered, the act of the Urban Renewal Agency only and not of the City Council.
(D) Agency title. The corporate name of the agency created by this section shall be and the agency
shall be known as the ACity Urban Renewal Agency.@
(E) Membership. The City Urban Renewal Agency shall be comprised of seven members,
including two members of the City Council as it lawfully exists from time to time; and five at-large
positions as prescribed in the Agency’s bylaws.
(F) Effective date. This section shall take effect 30 days following its adoption by the Council.
(Ord. 1211, passed 7-17-2006)
Tillamook - Administration
30
POLICE
' 32.15 AUXILIARY RESERVE POLICE FORCE.
(A) Auxiliary reserve police force; residence requirement. The Chief of Police of the city is
hereby authorized to organize an auxiliary reserve police force for the city, which reserve police force
to consist of not more than 15 in number, to serve without compensation, and to be residents of the city
or to live within a distance of five miles of the city limits of this city.
(B) Selection and tenure. The Chief of Police of the city is hereby authorized to provide and
furnish forms for signature by applicants for membership in the auxiliary reserve police force of the
city, and the selection for membership shall be made by the Chief of Police. Any member of the
auxiliary police reserve may be removed by the Chief of Police with or without cause.
(C) Supervision; duties and powers. Any applicant selected for service in the auxiliary reserve
police force of the city shall take and subscribe to the oath of office required of police officers of the
city and shall be subject to the directions and orders of the Chief of Police of the city and shall, during
that service, have the powers and duties of a regular police officer of the city.
(D) Badges. Membership and authority as a member of the auxiliary police reserve of the city
shall be indicated by arm bands and/or appropriate insignia and badges to be designated, selected and
furnished by the Police Department of this city.
(1977 Code, ' 1-7) (Ord. 755, passed 2-19-1962)
' 32.16 AUTHORIZATION TO CHECK CRIMINAL INFORMATION RECORDS OF STATE
LAW ENFORCEMENT DATA SYSTEM.
(A) Purpose.
(1) In order to maintain the public’s trust and confidence, and to safeguard the city’s general
health, safety and welfare responsibilities, including without limitation fiscal responsibilities protecting
the public funds and property, and in protecting confidential, privileged and/or proprietary information,
the city requires:
(a) Its employees, public officials, volunteers and contractors performing or assisting a
function of municipal government to be trustworthy, ethical and competent in fulfilling their respective
public duties; and
(b) Persons applying for, and maintaining, any commercial license subject to the City
Council’s prior approval.
(2) In order for the city to fulfill the purpose here and to make informed decisions toward
licensing recommendations or approvals, the city requires a criminal information record check of each
person applying for and/or holding employment with the city, and/or a commercial license subject to
City Organizations and Departments
31
the City Council’s prior approval. Further, the city may require a criminal information record check of
any city volunteer or contractor as the city, in its sole discretion, considers necessary or desirable in
connection with the functions to be performed.
(B) Definitions.
(1) Specifics. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
LICENSE. Permission from a competent municipal or state government authority to do
an act which, without this permission, would be illegal, a trespass or a tort. LICENSE includes but is
not limited to commercial resale business license, transient merchant license, taxi license and/or State
Liquor Control Commission licenses or renewals. A LICENSE here does not include a registration
with any government entity where the person’s action is legal whether or not the person is registered,
e.g., the city’s business registration license.
(2) State law definitions. Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the
definitions contained in the Oregon Revised Statutes (Astate statutes,@ abbreviated O.R.S.) and Oregon
Administrative Rules (abbreviated O.A.R.), as now or hereafter constituted, are adopted by reference
and made a part of this section. In any conflict of laws, the city’s definitions and interpretation shall
control. The City Council expressly retains the exclusive authority to define and interpret the meaning
and application of the city’s ordinances, orders, rules, resolutions and/or other city law, even those laws
borrowed from any other jurisdiction and incorporated as city law, e.g., state statutes.
(C) Procedure for criminal information record check.
(1) The city shall conduct requests for criminal information records checks according to the
procedure herein, O.R.S. Chapter 181, specifically including O.R.S. 181.555 and 181.557, and
applicable State Administrative Rules, specifically including O.A.R. 257-10-025 to 257-10-050, all of
which establish procedures for access to Oregon State Police (OSP) criminal record information
through the Law Enforcement Data System (LEDS).
(2) Whenever possible or required, the city shall first obtain a person’s consent before
submitting a request for criminal information record check through the City Police Department. Where
a criminal information record check is required and consent either is refused or cannot be obtained
reasonably, the city shall provide the person subject to this subchapter with notice the criminal
information record check may be made. Notice to the person shall be made prior to the city’s request
for the criminal information record check.
(3) Notice shall advise the person of:
(a) The manner in which the person may be informed of the procedures adopted under
O.R.S. 181.555(3) for challenging inaccurate criminal offender information;
(b) Rights, if any, under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964;
Tillamook - Administration
32
(c) The notice shall also advise the person that discrimination by an employer on the
basis of arrest records alone may violate federal civil rights law; and
(d) The individual may obtain further information by contacting the State Bureau of
Labor and Industries.
(4) A city official, e.g., a member of the City Police Department, trained and authorized to
perform criminal history checks through the LEDS system shall conduct the city’s criminal information
record checks. Report results shall be provided to the appropriate city official responsible for making a
decision which includes such a check as a part of that decision. The results shall first indicate either
Ano criminal record@ or Acriminal record@ exists. If a criminal record exists, then the city shall
request a written criminal history report from the City Police Department. This criminal history report
shall be made available to the appropriate city official responsible for making a decision in
consideration whether or not to grant or deny the employment, license or other approval requested.
(5) The appropriate city official responsible for making a decision shall also consider factors,
such as but not limited to the number and types of crimes or offenses, the age of the offense,
subsequent rehabilitation, and public sensitivity relative to the nature of the position or decision under
consideration. Access to criminal information records reports shall be limited to only authorized
persons who have an official need as sanctioned by law or regulation.
(6) Any contested case hearing required by the law of this subchapter shall be before the
Municipal Judge sitting as city’s administrative law judge or hearing officer. For purposes of this
subchapter, where any state law or rule referenced by this subchapter and where the context requires,
any reference to the state or state agency shall include the city, and any department or subdivision
thereof.
(D) City Recorder duties and responsibilities.
(1) The City Recorder shall be responsible for maintaining a record of:
(a) Signed consents from persons authorizing the city to conduct a criminal information
record check;
(b) Notices required under this subchapter to persons who do not consent to a criminal
information record check where that check is otherwise required;
(c) Results of a criminal information record check on persons not hired to city employ in
accordance with the city general records retention schedule;
(d) Results of a criminal information record check on persons hired to city employ as
part of the person’s confidential personnel file; and
(e) Results of a criminal information record check of any applicant for any commercial
license, contractor and/or volunteer.
City Organizations and Departments
33
(2) Further, the City Recorder shall destroy criminal information records as soon as they are
no longer required for the city’s purposes here and according to the city’s general records retention
schedule.
(E) Effective date. This section shall take effect 30 days following the date of its passage and
adoption.
(Ord. 1233, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 1244, passed 12-21-2009; Ord. 1265, passed 1-3-2012)
34
CHAPTER 33: ELECTION PROCEDURES
Section
Tax Levy Elections
33.25 Resolution for special election
33.26 Election procedure
33.27 Polling place
33.28 Voting; results of election
33.29 Ballot title; explanation
33.30 Statement of question on ballot
33.31 Form of tax measure submission; limitations
Compensation under O.R.S. Chapter 197
33.45 Review of demands for compensation under O.R.S. Chapter 197, adopted
33.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Taxation, see Ch. 35
’’
TAX LEVY ELECTIONS
' 33.25 RESOLUTION FOR SPECIAL ELECTION.
Whenever it is necessary in the estimation of the City Council of this city to increase the amount of
the tax levy over the amount limited by the Constitution of this state except on vote of the people, the
City Council shall make and enter a resolution for a special election on a date certain on the question
and shall certify to the City Recorder that the increase, in its judgment, is necessary, stating the amount
of the increase. The resolution shall be made not more than 35 days nor less than 15 days prior to the
date set for the special election in the resolution and shall require the City Recorder to perform the acts
set forth in ' 33.26.
(1977 Code, ' 1-11) (Ord. 836, passed 5-19-1975)
Election Procedures
35
' 33.26 ELECTION PROCEDURE.
Upon the passage of the resolution referred to in ' 33.25, the City Recorder shall:
(A) Give notice of the election by:
(1) Posting written notice of the election not less than 14 days prior to the date of the election
in three public places within the city: on the bulletin board of the City Hall of this city; on the bulletin
board inside the northwest entrance to the County Courthouse; and any other public place as may be
determined by the City Recorder; and/or
(2) By publishing in two consecutive issues of a newspaper designated by the City Council,
the first publication to be not less than 14 days prior to the date of the election and the last publication
not less than seven days before the date of the election.
(B) Appoint an Election Board consisting of a chairperson and not less than two clerks;
(C) Appoint a Counting Board consisting of a chairperson and not less than two clerks;
(D) Obtain from the County Clerk current poll books containing the names of all voters qualified
to vote at the election within this city; and
(E) Provide the printed ballots to be used at the special election in conformity with the provisions
of this subchapter, and to make all other provisions and arrangements for the fair and efficient conduct
of the election.
(1977 Code, ' 1-11) (Ord. 836, passed 5-19-1975)
' 33.27 POLLING PLACE.
Unless a special election, called pursuant to resolution under this subchapter, can be held at the
same time a regular election is to be held throughout the state, or a special election is held throughout
the state or county for any other purpose, the polling place for the special election called pursuant to
this subchapter shall be at the City Hall of this city from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
(1977 Code, ' 1-11) (Ord. 836, passed 5-19-1975)
' 33.28 VOTING; RESULTS OF ELECTION.
Tillamook - Administration
36
A special election called by the City Council as herein provided for shall be held on the date set;
and the votes cast upon the election shall be received, counted, returned and canvassed by the Election
Board and the Counting Board, with the results thereof reported to the City Recorder, who shall have
custody of the ballots and ballot boxes following election and who shall immediately report the results
of the election to the City Council of this city.
(1977 Code, ' 1-11) (Ord. 836, passed 5-19-1975)
' 33.29 BALLOT TITLE; EXPLANATION.
In submitting a question to the voters under this subchapter, the City Council may submit an
explanation of the question in not more than 150 words. This explanation shall be printed on the ballot
and shall be in addition to the ballot title. The explanation shall be plainly worded and factual and shall
avoid as far as practicable the use of technical terms. The explanation shall not advocate a Ayes@ or
Ano@ vote on the question.
(1977 Code, ' 1-11) (Ord. 836, passed 5-19-1975)
' 33.30 STATEMENT OF QUESTION ON BALLOT.
The question of increasing any tax levy when submitted to the vote of the people as provided in
this subchapter shall be stated on the ballot by including in the question the statement of the reasons for
increasing the tax levy made by the tax levying body of the city. The votes of the people shall be given
upon the answers, Ayes@ and Ano@ in the usual manner of submitting questions to the vote of the
people.
(1977 Code, ' 1-11) (Ord. 836, passed 5-19-1975)
' 33.31 FORM OF TAX MEASURE SUBMISSION; LIMITATIONS.
(A) Whenever a proposed tax levy, whether a continuing fixed levy, continuing levy or levy for a
single year, is submitted to a vote of the people by the city, the measure submitted shall state the total
amount of money to be raised by the proposed levy in dollars and cents.
(B) Except as provided in divisions (C) and (D) of this section, in any election requesting
authorization to levy taxes over the amount limited by the Constitution except on vote of the people, if
the total taxes which would be levied if the voters approve the request will differ from the total taxes
levied in the prior year, the measure shall state the dollar amount by which that portion of the operating
budget to be financed wholly by the levy of property taxes for the fiscal year beginning July 1 of the
current calendar year is increased or decreased over the dollar amount for the preceding year in
substantially the following form:
If this measure is approved, the operating budget to be financed by local taxes for the year
20 - 20 will be $ greater (or less) than the operating budget financed by local
taxes for the preceding year.
Election Procedures
37
(C) Division (B) of this section has no application to budgets for serial levies or for levies for
bonds, nor shall these budgets be included in the computation of the dollar amounts under division (B)
of this section.
(D) If more than one measure to levy taxes over the amount limited by the Constitution except on
a vote of the people referred to in division (B) of this section is submitted to the voters in a manner that
the voters may accept or reject one or more of the measures, each measure shall show the dollar
amount required by division (B) of this section computed on the basis of the operating budget for the
same purpose for the preceding year.
(E) This section has no application to elections and levies with respect to bonds for which
provision is made in O.R.S. Chapter 287A or other laws.
(F) The statement required by this section shall be added to and made a part of the 150-word
explanation required by ' 33.29, but the number of words contained in the statement required by this
section shall not be included in the 150-word limitation.
(1977 Code, ' 1-11) (Ord. 836, passed 5-19-1975)
COMPENSATION UNDER O.R.S. CHAPTER 197
' 33.45 REVIEW OF DEMANDS FOR COMPENSATION UNDER O.R.S. CHAPTER 197,
ADOPTED.
Ordinance 1197, which establishes a process and procedures for the city for the AReview of
Demands for Compensation under O.R.S. Chapter 197 as Amended by Ballot Measure 37 Passed
November 2, 2004,@ and creating a private cause of action, is hereby adopted by reference as if set out
in full herein. Copies are available through city offices.
(Ord. 1197, passed 1-3-2005)
' 33.99 PENALTY.
(A) Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is
prescribed shall be subject to ' 10.99.
(B) Initiative and referendum. A person who violates a provision of '' 33.01 through 33.10 shall
be punished by:
(1) A fine of not more than $100;
(2) Imprisonment in jail not more than 50 days; or
Tillamook - Administration
38
(3) Both.
(1977 Code, ' 1-4) (Ord. 570, passed 6-2-1941)
39
CHAPTER 34: CITY POLICIES
Section
Employer-Employee Relations
34.01 Title
34.02 Purpose
34.03 Definitions
34.04 Rights of city employees
34.05 Certification and recognition
34.06 Unfair labor practices
34.07 Processing unfair labor practices
34.08 Representation questions
34.09 Representation election
34.10 Collective bargaining procedures
34.11 Impasse procedures
34.12 Peaceful performance of city services
34.13 Costs
34.14 Severability; time schedule
Procurement and Contract Administration
34.20 Title
34.21 Purpose
34.22 Attorney General’s Model Rules do not apply
34.23 Local Public Contracting Rules Prescribed
34.24 Matters not covered by Local Public Contracting Rules
Appendix A: Procurement Policy and Procedures, Personal Service Contracting
34.99 Penalty
EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE RELATIONS
' 34.01 TITLE.
This subchapter shall be known as the ACity Employer-Employee Relations Ordinance.@
(1977 Code, ' 1-13) (Ord. 849, passed 5-15-1976)
40
' 34.02 PURPOSE.
The City Council finds and declares the following:
(A) The people of the city have a fundamental interest in the development of harmonious and
cooperative relationships between the governing body and its employees;
(B) Recognition by the city of the rights of the employees to organize and full acceptance of the
principle and procedure of collective negotiation between the city and public employee organizations
can alleviate various forms of strife and unrest. Experience in the private and public sectors of our
economy has proved that unresolved disputes in the public service are injurious to the public, the
governmental agencies and the employees;
(C) Experience in private and public employment has also proved that protection by law of the
right of employees to organize and negotiate collectively safeguards the employees and the public from
injury, impairment and interruptions of necessary services and removes certain recognized sources of
strife and unrest by encouraging practices fundamental to the peaceful adjustment of disputes arising
out of differences as to wages, hours, terms and other working conditions, and by establishing greater
equality of bargaining power between public employers and public employees;
(D) It is recognized that the State Collective Bargaining Law found in O.R.S. 243.650 et seq.
adequately lays out the general rules and guidelines which this subchapter will attempt to generally
incorporate and follow, with the exception of those areas that are determined to be of strictly local
concern for the city. Any deviations from the State Collective Bargaining Law are made only after a
determination that the matter in question is of local concern;
(E) This subchapter and any agreement pursuant hereto shall not impair any constitutional,
common law, charter, statutory or traditional right of responsibility of the city to act unilaterally:
(1) To determine the overall mission of the city as a unit of government;
(2) To maintain and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of city operations;
(3) To determine the services to be rendered, the operations to be performed, the technology
to be utilized or the programs to be budgeted;
(4) To determine the overall methods, processes, means and job classifications of personnel
by which city operations are to be conducted;
(5) To direct, supervise or hire employees;
(6) To promote, suspend, discipline, discharge for cause, transfer, assign, schedule, retain or
lay off employees;
(7) To relieve employees from duties because of lack of work or funds or under conditions
where the city determines continued work would be unnecessary;
City Policies
41
(8) To take whatever other actions may be necessary to carry out the wishes of the public not
otherwise specified herein or limited by a collective bargaining agreement;
(9) To take actions to carry out the missions of the city as the governmental unit in situations
of emergency; and
(10) To sign a contract with any group of employees which provides for grievance or
arbitration proceedings to protect an employee from arbitrary discipline, transfer or discharge.
(F) Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to limit the discretion of the city to voluntarily
confer with city employees in the process of developing policies to effectuate or implement any of the
above enumerated rights.
(1977 Code, ' 1-13) (Ord. 849, passed 5-15-1976)
' 34.03 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
APPROPRIATE BARGAINING UNIT. The unit designated by the Board to be appropriate for
the purpose of collective bargaining.
BOARD. The state’s Employment Relations Board.
CERTIFICATIONS. Official recognition by the Board or the City Council that a labor
organization is the exclusive representative for all of the employees in the appropriate bargaining unit.
CITY. The City of Tillamook City.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING. The performance of the mutual obligation of the city and the
representative of its employees to meet at reasonable times and confer in good faith with respect to
employment relations or the negotiation of any agreement or any question arising thereunder, and the
execution of a written contract incorporating any agreement reached and requested by either party.
However, this obligation does not compel either party to agree to a proposal or require the making of a
concession.
CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEE. One who assists and acts in a confidential capacity to a person
who formulates, determines and effectuates management policies in the area of collective bargaining.
EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS. Includes wages, hours and other conditions of employment.
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE. The labor organization which, as a result of certification by
the Board or recognition by the employer, has the right to be the collective bargaining agent to all
employees in an appropriate bargaining unit.
Tillamook - Administration
42
FAIR-SHARE AGREEMENT. An agreement between the city and the recognized or certified
bargaining representative of public employees, whereby employees who are not members of the
employee organization are required to make in-lieu-of-dues payment to an employee organization.
This agreement shall reflect the opinion of the majority of the employees in the bargaining unit.
LABOR DISPUTE. Any controversy concerning employment relations or concerning the
association or representation of persons in negotiating, fixing, maintaining, changing or seeking to
arrange terms or conditions of employment relations, regardless of whether the disputants stand in the
proximate relationship of employer and employee.
LABOR ORGANIZATION. Any organization which has as one of its purposes representing
employees in their employment relations with the city.
LEGISLATIVE BODY. The City Council of this city.
MEDIATION. Assistance by an impartial third party in reconciling a labor dispute between the
city and the exclusive representative regarding employment relations.
PAYMENT IN-LIEU-OF-DUES. An assessment of all employees in an appropriate bargaining
unit to defray the costs for services of the exclusive representative in negotiations and contract
administration as agreed to by the parties. This amount shall not exceed normal dues.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE. An employee of the city but does not include elected officials, persons
appointed to serve on boards or commissions, or persons who are confidential employees or
supervisory employees.
SUPERVISORY EMPLOYEE. Any individual having authority in the interest of the city to hire,
transfer, suspend, lay off, recall, promote, discharge, assign, reward or discipline other employees or
having responsibility to direct them or to adjust their grievances to effectively recommend this action
if, in connection therewith, the exercise of that authority is not of merely routine or clerical nature but
requires the use of independent judgment.
UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICE. The commission of an act designated an unfair labor practice in
' 34.06.
(1977 Code, ' 1-13) (Ord. 849, passed 5-15-1976; Ord. 938, passed 1-2-1979)
' 34.04 RIGHTS OF CITY EMPLOYEES.
City employees have the right to form, join and participate in the activities of labor organizations
of their own choosing for the purpose of representation and collective bargaining with the city on
matters concerning employment relations.
(1977 Code, ' 1-13) (Ord. 849, passed 5-15-1976)
' 34.05 CERTIFICATION AND RECOGNITION.
City Policies
43
(A) A labor organization certified by the state’s Employment Relations Board or recognized by
the city is the exclusive representative of the employees of the city for the purpose of collective
bargaining with respect to employment relations. Nevertheless, any agreements entered into involving
union security or fair-share agreement must safeguard the rights of non-association for employees
based on bona fide religious tenets or teachings of a church or a religious body of which the employee
is a member. The employee shall pay an amount of money agreed upon through negotiations to a
non-religious charity or to another charitable organization mutually agreed upon by the employee
affected and the representative of the labor organization to which the employee would otherwise be
required to pay dues. The employee shall furnish written proof to his or her employer that this has
been done.
(B) Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) of this section, an individual employee or
group of employees at any time may present grievances to his or her employer and have the grievances
adjusted without the intervention of the labor organization, if:
(1) The adjustment is not inconsistent with the terms of a collective bargaining contract or
agreement then in effect; and
(2) The labor organization has been given opportunity to be present at the adjustment.
(C) Nothing in this section prevents the city from recognizing a labor organization which
represents at least a majority of employees as an exclusive representative of the employees of the city
when the Board has not designated the appropriate bargaining unit or when the Board has not certified
an exclusive representative in accordance with O.R.S. 243.686.
(1977 Code, ' 1-13) (Ord. 849, passed 5-15-1976)
' 34.06 UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICES.
(A) It is an unfair labor practice for the city or its designated representative to do any of the
following:
(1) Interfere with, restrain or coerce employees in or because of the exercise of the rights
guaranteed in ' 34.04;
(2) Dominate, interfere with or assist in the formation, existence or administration of any
employee organization;
(3) Discriminate in regard to hiring, tenure or any terms or conditions of employment for the
purpose of encouraging or discouraging the membership in an employee organization. Nothing in this
section is intended to prohibit the entering into of a fair-share agreement between the city and the
exclusive bargaining representative of its employees. If a fair-share agreement has been agreed to by
the city and exclusive representative, nothing shall prohibit the deduction of the payment
in-lieu-of-dues from the salaries or wages of the employees;
Tillamook - Administration
44
(4) Discharge or otherwise discriminate against an employee because the employee has
signed or filed an affidavit, petition or complaint or has given information or testimony under this
subchapter;
(5) Refuse to bargain collectively in good faith with the exclusive representative;
(6) Refuse or fail to comply with any provision of this subchapter;
(7) Refuse to reduce an agreement reached as a result of collective bargaining to writing and
sign the contract;
(8) Communicate directly or indirectly during the period of negotiations with other than the
designated bargaining representative regarding issues subject to the current negotiations. This shall not
be construed as to prohibit the processing of grievances, the issuance of a public statement by the factfinding
board or the issuance of press releases by the parties;
(9) To refuse to recognize the rights of the employees to organize and to refuse to recognize
the principle and procedure of collective negotiations between the city and public employee
organizations; and
(10) Violate the provisions of any written contract with respect to employment relations,
including an agreement to arbitrate or to accept the terms of an arbitration award, where previously the
parties have agreed to accept the award as final and binding upon them.
(B) It is also an unfair labor practice for a public employee or for a labor organization or its
designated representative to do any of the following:
(1) Interfere with, restrain or coerce any employee in or because of the exercise of any right
guaranteed under this subchapter;
(2) Refuse to bargain collectively and in good faith with the city if the labor organization is
an exclusive representative;
(3) Refuse or fail to comply with any provisions of this subchapter;
(4) Violate the provisions of any written contract with respect to employment relations,
including an agreement to arbitrate or to accept the terms of an arbitration award, where previously the
parties have agreed to accept the award as final and binding upon them; or
(5) Refuse to reduce an agreement reached as a result of collective bargaining to writing and
sign the resultant contract.
(C) An injured party may file a written complaint with the Board not later than 180 days following
the occurrence of an unfair labor practice.
(1977 Code, ' 1-13) (Ord. 849, passed 5-15-1976)
City Policies
45
' 34.07 PROCESSING UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICES.
Whenever a written complaint is filed, alleging that any person has engaged in or is engaging in
any unfair labor practice listed in ' 34.06, the Board or its agents shall follow the procedures set out in
O.R.S. 243.676.
(1977 Code, ' 1-13) (Ord. 849, passed 5-15-1976)
' 34.08 REPRESENTATION QUESTIONS.
If a question of representation exists, the Board shall follow the procedure outlined in O.R.S.
243.682.
(1977 Code, ' 1-13) (Ord. 849, passed 5-15-1976)
' 34.09 REPRESENTATION ELECTION.
Representation elections shall be conducted and shall be governed by the Board’s regulations.
(1977 Code, ' 1-13) (Ord. 849, passed 5-15-1976)
' 34.10 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING PROCEDURES.
The city and the bargaining agent shall provide for and make every reasonable effort to conclude
negotiations, including provisions for an effective date, a reopening date and an expiration date at a
time to coincide with the period during which the Budget Committee and the City Council shall decide
on the operating budget of the city. The process of negotiations shall begin not before January 10 nor
later than January 25.
(1977 Code, ' 1-13) (Ord. 849, passed 5-15-1976; Ord. 938, passed 1-2-1979)
' 34.11 IMPASSE PROCEDURES.
(A) If, after a period of negotiation not to exceed the date of February 28, unless otherwise
mutually agreed upon, or recognition of an exclusive representative, no agreement has been signed,
either party may request that mediation be provided by the State Employment Relations Board or its
successor.
(B) Where either party has determined that the parties have failed to achieve agreement through
negotiation, either party may request from the Employment Relations Board assistance in resolving the
labor dispute according to the following schedule:
(1) Mediation shall be provided by the State Conciliation Service as provided by O.R.S.
662.405 to 662.455;
Tillamook - Administration
46
(2) If the labor dispute has not been settled after 15 calendar days after the mediator has first
met with both parties, but in no case later than April 15, the negotiations shall be deemed in a state of
impasse. Each party shall submit to the other his, her or their final unresolved issue(s) in writing
within five working days following either of the above time limits, whichever occurs first. The final
offer shall include all issues which have been resolved as well as all issues which have been the subject
of negotiations but not resolved. Each issue shall be separately stated; and
(3) Within ten working days following the time limits in division (B)(2) above, the final
unresolved issues, with all attachments, shall be submitted to the City Council for final determination
or the city, at its option, may submit any or all of either party’s unresolved issue(s) to the voters in a
special city election to be held within 45 days from the date of submission of the separately stated
unresolved issue or issues as the case may be. The election ballot shall specify the last offer of the
rejecting party and, if involving wages, the dollar amount of each party’s last offer over and above or
below the current year’s operating budget amount for those specific items, and also state the percentage
of increase or decrease over the current operating budget. The decision of the voters shall be final and
binding upon the parties.
(1977 Code, ' 1-13) (Ord. 849, passed 5-15-1976; Ord. 938, passed 1-2-1979)
' 34.12 PEACEFUL PERFORMANCE OF CITY SERVICES.
(A) In order that the vital performance of city services can be maintained, no employee shall strike
or recognize a picket line of a labor organization while in the performance of his or her official duties.
(B) The following shall apply.
(1) Participation by any employee in a strike or work stoppage is unlawful and shall subject
the employee to disciplinary action, up to and including discharge.
(2) No employee organization, its representatives or members shall engage in a strike or work
stoppage of any kind.
(3) If a certified employee organization, its representatives or members engage in a strike or
work stoppage of any kind, in addition to any other lawful remedies or disciplinary actions, the City
Council may suspend or revoke the recognition or certification granted to the employee organizations
and prohibit the use of bulletin boards, prohibit the use of city facilities and prohibit access to former
work or duty stations by the organization.
(4) As used in this section, STRIKE or WORK STOPPAGE means the concerted failure to
report for duty, the willful absence from one’s position, the stoppage of work, or the abstinence in
whole or in part from the full, faithful performance of the duties of employment for the purpose of
influencing or coercing a change in the conditions of compensation, or the rights, privileges or
obligations of employment.
City Policies
47
(5) The city may petition the appropriate courts for an injunction or other appropriate relief if
a strike, work stoppage or recognition of a picket line in violation of this section is occurring or is
about to occur. The city may also hire new permanent or temporary employees or transfer other city
employees to perform the services and duties of these employees engaged in a strike or work stoppage
in violation of this section.
(1977 Code, ' 1-13) (Ord. 849, passed 5-15-1976)
' 34.13 COSTS.
Costs of any procedures as outlined in this subchapter, including but not limited to bargaining unit
determination, shall be borne equally by the city and bargaining unit. Any labor organization seeking
certification as a bargaining agent shall be required to demonstrate financial responsibility to meet the
requirements of this section to the satisfaction of the city. The city shall furnish meeting space when
requested for these proceedings without charge.
(1977 Code, ' 1-13) (Ord. 849, passed 5-15-1976; Ord. 938, passed 1-2-1979)
' 34.14 SEVERABILITY; TIME SCHEDULE.
It is the intent of the City Council that only the portion of the time schedule set herein for
consultation, negotiation and impasse procedures that can be met in the forthcoming budget process
shall apply.
(1977 Code, ' 1-13) (Ord. 849, passed 5-15-1976)
Tillamook - Administration
48
PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION
' 34.20 TITLE.
This subchapter shall be known as the “Procurement and Contract Administration Ordinance.”
(Ord. 1284, passed 12-16-2014)
' 34.21 PURPOSES.
The purpose of this subchapter is to create and express a set of simple public contracting policies
and processes for the city of Tillamook, Oregon (hereafter “City”), to achieve effective outcomes at
optimal values in contracts for goods, services and public improvements with those persons who do
business with the City. These policies and processes should instill public confidence through ethical
and fair dealing, honesty and good faith in the City and in those who do business with City. These
policies and processes should promote impartial and open competition, efficient use of City resources,
and modern, evolving procurement practices.
' 34.22 OREGON ATTORNEY GENERAL’S MODEL RULES DO NOT APPLY.
The model rules adopted by the Oregon Attorney General on or before this date for public
contracting by local contracting agencies do not apply to the city of Tillamook, Oregon.
' 34.23 LOCAL PUBLIC CONTRACTING RULES PRESCRIBED.
The initial local public contracting policies and procedures which apply to public contracts with
the City are expressed in Appendix A entitled “Procurement Policies and Procedures for the City of
Tillamook, Oregon”, attached and incorporated here by reference. The Board, consistent with section 2
above, is delegated the authority to amend these rules, and to enact and amend future rules, by
resolution following the due process of a public notice and public hearing for this purpose. Such
amendment shall be as needed. However, the Board shall review its rules each time the Oregon
Attorney General (“AG”) modifies the AG’s model rules to determine whether the Board should
modify the Board’s rules to ensure compliance with state statutory changes. Actions by the Board shall
be designated as “BY THE TILLAMOOK LOCAL CONTRACT REVIEW BOARD” and signed by
the presiding member or designee. Actions pursuant to authority delegated by the Tillamook Local
Contact Review Board shall be signed and subscribed “Agent for the Tillamook Local Contract Review
Board”.
' 34.24 MATTERS NOT COVERED BY LOCAL PUBLIC CONTRACTING RULES.
Those model public contracting rules adopted by the Oregon Attorney General now and in the
City Policies
49
future covering public contracting procedures and/or criteria which are not superseded by City’s
“Procurement Policies and Procedures for the city of Tillamook, Oregon” shall apply to City contracts,
subject to the Board’s authority in Section 4 to enact local public contracting policies and procedures
appropriate to City contracts to replace the AG’s rules.
APPENDIX A
SECTION I:
PROCUREMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURES FOR THE CITY OF TILLAMOOK
A. Policies and Procedures: Procurements, contracts and purchases for goods and services and personal
services shall be made in the following manner:
(1) General Purchases. The City Manager, Recorder/Treasurer, Department Heads, or other designated
individuals delegated in writing by the City Manager may make purchases with petty cash, City VISA
card or City check not to exceed $1,000.00, any amount greater than this will require approval. Every
effort shall be made to consolidate purchases among all departments to ensure that the price obtained is
the most advantageous to the City. To eliminate the potential for abuse or misuse, the City Manager
shall request that the City Recorder make periodic audits of the petty cash fund and/or VISA or Check
purchases and report the results to the City Manager or the Designated Alternate.
(2) Small Procurements. A highly informal procedure for small procurements, contracts, and purchases
of goods and services, personal services including architectural, engineering, land surveying and
related services and public improvement including minor alterations, repair and maintenance involving
a single project and a dollar amount of$5,000 or less (ORS 279B.065). The Agent for the Tillamook
Local Contract Review Board, otherwise known hereinafter as the “Contracting Agency”, shall
informally solicit quotation(s) orally, by telephone, or in writing and make direct selection and award.
Procurements may not be fragmented or artificially divided to be included in small procurements
procedures.
(a) A written transaction file shall be kept with abstracts of invitations made, offers received,
and awards made. Within one fiscal year, no individual contractor may be awarded contracts, in
the aggregate of $30,000 without formal competitive bidding.
(b) Subject to the provisions of subsections F through I below, Personal Service Contract
requirements are detailed in Section II.
(3) Intermediate Procurements. For Intermediate procurements, contracts and purchases for goods and
services (including minor alterations, ordinary repair and maintenance) and personal service contracts
including architectural, engineering, land surveying and related services in excess of$5,000 but less
than $150,000.00 (ORS 279B.070), the Contracting Agency shall seek at least three informally
solicited competitive price quotes or competitive proposals from prospective contractors. A written
record will be kept of all quotations and proposals, including related communications. The Tillamook
Local Contract Review Board may make award to the contractor whose quote or proposal best serves
Tillamook - Administration
50
the interests of the City, taking into account but not limited to price, experience, expertise, product
functionality, suitability and contractor responsibility.
(4) For procurements, contracts and purchases for goods and services including minor alterations,
ordinary repair and maintenance and personal service contracts including architectural, engineering,
land surveying and related services in excess of $150,000.00 competitive sealed bidding procedures
will be made for either competitive quotes or competitive Qualification Based proposals with contract
award being made by the Contracting Review Board.
a) Should three quotes or Qualification Based proposals from contractors not be available,
award shall be made with a written record and details of the efforts made to obtain the
sources maintained. Procurements will not be artificially divided or fragmented to meet the
informal solicitations procedures.
b) All procurement methods shall comply with the statutory requirements.
c) Subject to the provisions of subsections F through I below, Personal Service Contract
requirements are detailed in Section II.
B. Procurement and contracts of Public Improvement Contracts for construction, maintenance and
repair of City property shall be made in the following manner:
(1) For contracts and procurements valued at not more than $150,000 the Contracting Agency shall
follow the procedures described in Section I. A (3) above for "Intermediate Procurement", by soliciting
informal competitive price quotes or competitive proposals from at least three prospective contractors,
with contract award being granted to the contractor's quote or proposal that best meets the needs of the
City.
(2) For contracts and procurements greater than $30,000.00, but not to exceed $100,000, or not to
exceed $50,000 in the case of contracts for transportation projects, formal bidding procedures shall be
used for competitive quotes or proposals. The Contract Review Board shall make the award to the
contractor whose quotation or proposal best meets the needs of the City, with a written record
maintained of all quotations and proposals, including related communications.
(3) For contracts and procurements in excess of $100,000, and $50,000 for transportation projects,
competitive bidding procedures will be used in accordance with the provisions of ORS 279C.360, 365,
and 370.
C. Sole Source Procurement. In accordance with the provisions of ORS 279B.075 and when authorized
by the Contract Review Board, the Contracting Agency may award a contract for goods and services
without competition when a determination, in writing, is made that the goods or services, or class of
goods or services are available from only one source. To the extent reasonably practical, the
Contracting Agency shall negotiate with the sole source to obtain contract terms advantageous to the
City. The determination of sole source must be based on written findings that may include:
(I) That the efficient utilization of existing goods requires the acquisition of compatible goods or
services;
City Policies
51
(2) That the goods or services required for the exchange of software or data with other public or private
agencies are available from only one source;
(3) That the goods or services are for use in a pilot or an experimental project;
(4) Or other findings that support the conclusion that the goods or services are available from only one
source.
D. Emergency Procurements. Public improvement contracts, contracts for goods and services and
contracts for personal services may be exempted from competitive bidding if the Contracting Agency
head, or designee, or Contract Review Board authorizes a defined "emergency" procurement, with
certain documentation in accordance with ORS 279B.080. Should an emergency procurement be
required and conditions require prompt execution of a contract, documentation will be made of all
transactions, including but not limited to, the nature of the emergency, method used to select the
contractor, and scope and price of the contract.
E. Special Procurement Contracts. Special procurements may be made without competitive solicitation
as provided in the ORS 279B.085.
F. Partial Listing of Procurement Options. The City reserves the right to:
(1) cancel, reject, or delay all invitations for bids or requests for proposal in accordance with ORS
279B.l00.
(2) prequalify prospective bidders and proposers in accordance with ORS 279B.120, and
(3) enter into Contract Negotiations in the event all responsive bids exceed the contracting agency's
cost estimate with the lowest apparent bidder in accordance with ORS 279C.340.
G. Prevailing Wage. Contracts for public improvements for $50,000.00 or less are not subject to
Prevailing Wage Rates. In such cases, ORS279C.800-870 does not apply.
H. Contract Amendments. The Contracting Agency is authorized to amend the original contract amount
up to but not to exceed 15 percent of the original contracting price. Prior approval of the Contract
Review Board is required for amendments greater than 15 percent. However, if the original contract
was awarded through the competitive bidding process and a fixed unit price was established, the
contract amount can only be amended by a negotiated change in contract scope or other previously
unforeseen requirements.
I. Conflict of Interest. Employees, officers, or agents of the City shall not participate in the selection,
negotiation, administration or award of any contract of the City if a conflict of interest, real or apparent,
would be involved. Included in this prohibition are: immediate family members, his or her partner, an
organization which employs or is about to employ any of aforementioned, or anyone who has a
financial or other interest in the firm selected for award. City officers, employees, or agents are
prohibited from soliciting, accepting gratuities, favors, or anything of monetary value from contractors,
potential contractors, or parties to sub-agreements.
Tillamook - Administration
52
SECTION II:
PERSONAL SERVICE CONTRACTING POLICY FOR THE CITY OF TILLAMOOK
A. Personal services contract means a contract with an independent contractor predominantly for
services that require special training or certification, skill, technical, creative, professional or
communication skills or talents, unique and specialized knowledge, or the exercise of judgment skills,
and for which the quality of the service depends on attributes that are unique to the service provider.
Such services include, but are not limited to, the services of architects, engineers, land surveyors,
attorneys, auditors and other licensed professionals, artists, designers, computer programmers,
performers, consultants and property managers. The Contracting Agency shall have discretion to
determine whether additional types of services not specifically mentioned in this paragraph fit within
the definition of personal services.
(1) The following criteria shall be considered in the evaluation and selection of a personal service
contractor:
a. Specialized experience in the type of work to be performed.
b. Capacity and capability to perform the work, including any specialized services within the time
limitations for the work.
c. Educational and professional record, including past record of performance on contracts with
governmental agencies and private parties with respect to cost control, quality of work, ability to meet
schedules, and contract administration, where applicable; and
d. Availability to perform the assignment and familiarity with the area in which the specific work is
located, including knowledge of design or techniques peculiar to it, where applicable.
e. Any other factors relevant to the particular contract.
f. The City reserves the right to enter into direct contracts for services for architects, engineers and land
surveyors in accordance with ORS 279C.115 (2).
g. On contracts where the construction value is greater than $900,000 and 10% or more of the funding
is coming from State sources, Qualification Based (QBS) selection of architectural, engineering or land
surveyor services in accordance with ORS 279C.1l 0 will apply.
(2) The selection procedures described in this section may be waived by the Contracting Agency, at his
or her discretion where an emergency exists that could not have been reasonably foreseen and requires
such prompt execution of a contract to remedy the situation that there is not sufficient time to permit
utilization of the selection procedures.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the City from complying with provisions of Federal
or State law that require the city to utilize a different selection or contracting procedure.
(4) Personal service contracts are those exclusively for the rendering of services where the particular
skill or experience of the contractor is of the essence, or which involves a relation of special trust and
confidence between the City and the contractor.
(5) Personal service contracts shall not be used to engage persons who would be deemed City
employees, rather than independent contractors.
City Policies
53
(6) All personal service contracts shall require the contractor to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless
the City, its officers, agents and employees against and from any and all claims or demands for
damages of any kind arising out of or connected in any way with the contractor's performance.
(7) Prior to selection of a contractor, the City Recorder shall verify that the insurance requirements for
particular services protect the City's interests.
B. The Contracting Agency may arrange for any or all interested prospective contractors to be
interviewed for the assignment by an appropriate City employee, or by an interview committee.
Following a review of the qualifications and interviews, where conducted, of the interested prospective
contractor, the Tillamook Local Contract Review Board shall select the prospective contractor, and the
Contracting Agency shall prepare a personal service contract based upon model contract provisions.
' 34.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed
shall be subject to ' 10.99.
(B) Enforcement and compliance with the provisions of '' 34.01 through 34.14 shall be by one of
the following two methods:
(1) Suit in equity brought in the Circuit Court for this county by the city or by a duly elected
bargaining representative against any person or party who it is claimed has violated this subchapter; or
(2) A person violating any of the provisions of this subchapter shall, upon conviction in the
Municipal Court, pay a fine of $500 and pay the costs of the proceedings. Each day’s violation of a
provision of this subchapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(1977 Code, ' 1-13) (Ord. 849, passed 5-15-1976)
55
CHAPTER 35: FINANCES; TAXES AND FEES
Section
Fees
35.001 Franchise fees on water/sewer utilities
Transient Room Tax
35.015 Definitions
35.016 Tax imposed
35.017 Collection of tax by operator; rules for collection
35.018 Operator’s duties
35.019 Exemptions
35.020 Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certification of authority
35.021 Due date; returns and payments
35.022 Penalties and interest
35.023 Deficiency determinations; evasion; operator delay
35.024 Redeterminations
35.025 Security for collection of tax
35.026 Lien
35.027 Refunds
35.028 Collection fee
35.029 Administration
35.030 Appeals to City Council
35.031 Violations
35.032 Effective date
Motor Vehicle Fuel Tax
35.045 Title
35.046 Definitions
35.047 Tax imposed
35.048 Amount and payment
35.049 License requirements
35.050 License applications and issuance
35.051 Failure to secure license
35.052 Revocation of license
35.053 Cancellation of license
35.054 Remedies cumulative
Tillamook - Administration
56
35.055 Payment of tax and delinquency
35.056 Monthly statement of dealer
35.057 Failure to file monthly statement
35.058 Billing; purchases
35.059 Failure to provide invoice or delivery tag
35.060 Exemption of export fuel
35.061 Fuel in vehicles coming into the city not taxed
35.062 Refunds
35.063 Limitation on applications for refunds
35.064 Seller to give invoice for each purchase made by person entitled to refund
35.065 Claim of refunds
35.066 Refund of tax on fuel used in operation of vehicles over certain roads or private property
35.067 Refunds to purchasers of fuel for aircraft
35.068 Refund of tax on fuel used in transportation of rural free delivery or special delivery mail
35.069 Examinations and investigations
35.070 Limitation on credit for or refund of overpayment and on assessment of additional tax
35.071 Records to be kept by dealers
35.072 Records to be kept three years
35.073 Use of tax revenues
35.074 Attorney fees
35.075 Effective date
Public Improvements; Assessments
35.090 Powers of Council
35.091 Definitions
35.092 Report of estimated costs and preliminary engineering design
35.093 Notice and public hearing
35.094 Remonstrances
35.095 Jurisdiction
35.096 Method of assessment; notice of proposed assessment
35.097 Hearing of remonstrances; docketing of liens
35.098 Notice of assessment
35.099 Benefited property
35.100 Errors not to defeat assessment; reassessment
35.101 Record of mailing; mistake in mailing
35.102 Proceedings presumed regular
35.103 Docketing of liens; priority of liens
35.104 Payment of assessments
35.105 Application for installment payments
35.106 Records of installment payments
35.107 Docketing of assessment liens; manner of payment
35.108 Docket of entries of payments due and payments made
35.109 Disposition of payments on assessments
35.110 Enforcement of liens
35.111 Segregation of assessments
Finances; Taxes and Fees
57
35.112 Consistency with state law
35.113 Construction and interpretation
Improvement Procedures Generally; Requirements for Developer
35.130 Agreement for improvements
35.131 Bond
35.132 Improvement procedure
35.133 Improvement requirements
35.134 Appeals
Reimbursement Districts
35.150 Definitions
35.151 Application for a reimbursement district
35.152 Reimbursement agreement report
35.153 Amount to be reimbursed
35.154 Public hearing
35.155 City Council action
35.156 Notice of adoption of resolution
35.157 Recording the resolution
35.158 Contesting the reimbursement district
35.159 Obligation to pay reimbursement fee
35.160 Public improvements
35.161 Administration; collection and payment
35.162 Consistency with state law
35.163 Construction and interpretation
Marijuana Tax
35.200 Definitions
35.201 Purpose of the tax
35.202 Levy of tax
35.203 Deductions
35.204 Seller responsible for payment of tax
35.205 Penalties and interest for non-payment
35.206 Failure to report and remit tax-determination of tax by City Manager
35.207 Appeal
35.208 Refunds
35.209 Actions to collect
35.210 Confidentiality
35.211 Audit of books, records or persons
35.212 Penalties for non-compliance of code
35.213 Forms and Regulations
Tillamook - Administration
58
35.999 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Special assessments and local improvement districts, see TSO IV
FEES
' 35.001 FRANCHISE FEES ON WATER/SEWER UTILITIES.
This section provides the process to be used to administer and collect a franchise fee on cityowned
water and sanitary sewer utilities.
(A) Fee established. There is hereby established a franchise fee upon municipally owned and
operated water and sanitary sewer utilities operating within the public rights-of-way in and outside the
city.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
GROSS REVENUE. Includes any revenue earned within and without the city (after
adjustment for the write-off of uncollectable accounts) from the sale of water and sanitary sewer
disposal and/or treatment services. The term does not include proceeds from the sale of bonds or other
evidence of indebtedness, interest earnings, system development charges and connection fees, and
other related fund activities.
MUNICIPAL UTILITY. Includes only municipally owned and operated water and sanitary
sewer facilities operating within and without the city.
(C) Fees and payment.
(1) Basis for fee calculation. Those city departments charged with the responsibility of
operating a Amunicipal utility@ as defined herein shall pay a fee of 2% of gross revenues received by
the utility to the city General Fund for the privilege of operating within city-owned rights-of-way.
(2) Calculation fee. The municipal utility shall compute the fee by multiplying the applicable
percentage by the gross revenues received during the reporting period.
(3) Payment of fees. Fees payable by City Water and Sanitary Sewer Departments shall be
paid monthly, at the end of each calendar month of operations. The fee shall be paid to the City
Treasurer.
(D) Report of gross revenues. Concurrent with payment of the fee, the municipal utility shall file
with the City Treasurer a report of the gross revenues of the utility setting forth the revenues according
to their accounting subdivisions and any deductions claimed for the period upon which the fee is
Finances; Taxes and Fees
59
computed.
(E) Effective date. This is section retroactive to July 1, 2004.
(Ord. 1174, passed 5-6-2002; Ord. 1195, passed 9-20-2004)
TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
' 35.015 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ACCRUAL ACCOUNTING. The operator enters the rent due from a transient on his or her
records when the rent is earned, whether or not it is paid.
CASH ACCOUNTING. The operator does not enter the rent due from a transient on his or her
records until rent is paid.
CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of this city.
CONFERENCE CENTER. A facility that is owned or partially owned by a unit of local
government, a governmental agency or a nonprofit organization; and meets current membership criteria
of the International Association of Conference Centers.
CONVENTION CENTER. A new or improved facility that is capable of attracting and
accommodating conventions and trade shows from international, national and regional markets
requiring exhibition space, ballroom space, meeting rooms and any other associated space, including
but not limited to banquet facilities, loading areas and lobby and registration areas; has a total meeting
room and ballroom space between one-third and one-half of the total size of the center’s exhibition
space; generates a majority of its business income from tourists; has a room-block relationship with the
local lodging industry; and is owned by a unit of local government, a governmental agency or a
nonprofit organization.
HOTEL. Any structure or any portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed
for transient occupancy for 30 days or less for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any
hotel, motel, inn, condominium, tourist home or house, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house,
rooming house, apartment house, public or private dormitory, fraternity, sorority, public or private
club, and also means space in mobile home or trailer parks, or similar structure or space or portions
thereof so occupied; provided the occupancy is for less than a 30-day period.
LIEN. A charge upon real or personal property for the satisfaction of some debt or duty ordinarily
arising by operation of law.
OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, for lodging or
Tillamook - Administration
60
sleeping purposes, of any room or rooms in a hotel or space in a mobile home or trailer park or portion
thereof.
OPERATOR. The person who is the proprietor of the hotel in any capacity. Where the
OPERATOR performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other
than an employee, local site manager, and/or managing agent shall also be deemed an OPERATOR for
the purposes of this subchapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal.
Compliance with the provisions of this subchapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall
be considered to be compliance by both.
PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal
organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private dormitory, joint stock company, corporation, estate,
trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
RENT. The consideration charged, whether or not received by the operator, for the occupancy of
space in a hotel, valued in money, goods, labor, credits, property or other consideration valued in
money, without any deduction.
RENT PACKAGE PLAN. The consideration charged for both food and rent where a single rate is
made for the total of both. The amount applicable to rent for determination of transient room tax under
this subchapter shall be the same charge made for rent when consideration is not a part of a package
plan. The amount applicable to rent for determination of transient room tax under this subchapter shall
be that amount allocated to space rent, taking into consideration a reasonable value of other items in the
rent package and taking into consideration the charge for rent when the space is rented separately and
not included in a package plan.
TAX. Either the tax payable by the transient or the aggregate amount of taxes due from an
operator during the period for which he or she is required to report his or her collections.
TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The City Manager of this city.
TOURISM. Economic activity resulting from tourists.
TOURISM PROMOTION. Any of the following activities: advertising, publicizing or
distributing information for the purpose of attracting and welcoming tourists; conducting strategic
planning and research necessary to stimulate future tourism development; operating tourism promotion
agencies; and marketing special events and festivals designed to attract tourists.
TOURISM PROMOTION AGENCY. Includes an incorporated nonprofit organization or
governmental unit that is responsible for the tourism promotion of a destination on a year-round basis.
A nonprofit entity that manages tourism-related economic development plans, programs and projects.
A regional or statewide association that represents entities that rely on tourism-related business for
more than 50% of their total income.
TOURIST. A person who, for business, pleasure recreation or participation in events related to
the arts, heritage or culture, travels from the community in which that person is a resident to a different
Finances; Taxes and Fees
61
community that is separate, distinct from and unrelated to the person’s community of residence, and
that trip requires the person to travel more than 50 miles from the community of residence, or includes
an overnight stay.
TRANSIENT. Any individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a hotel for a
period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. The
day a TRANSIENT checks out of the hotel shall not be included in determining the 30-day period if
the TRANSIENT is not charged rent for that day by the operator. Any individual so occupying space
in a hotel shall be deemed to be a TRANSIENT until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is
an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of
occupancy, or the tenancy actually extends more than 30 consecutive days. In determining whether a
person is a TRANSIENT, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the
effective date of this subchapter may be considered. A person who pays for lodging on a monthly
basis, irrespective of the number of days in the month, shall not be deemed a TRANSIENT.
VISITOR INFORMATION CENTER. A building, or portion of a building, the main purpose of
which is to distribute or disseminate information to tourists.
(1977 Code, ' 6-13) (Ord. 893, passed 5-23-1977; Ord. 1196, passed 10-4-2004; Ord. 1289, passed 5-
5-2014)
' 35.016 TAX IMPOSED.
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, on or after August 1, 2010, each transient shall pay a
tax in the amount of 10% of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the
transient to the city, which is extinguished only by payment by the operator to the city. The transient
shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. The operator shall collect the
tax for each transient and shall enter the tax on his or her records when rent is collected if the operator
keeps his or her records on the cash accounting basis, and when earned if the operator keeps his or her
records on the accrual accounting basis. If rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax
shall be paid by the transient to the operator with each installment. In all cases, the rent paid or
charged for occupancy shall exclude the sale of any goods, services and commodities, other than the
furnishings of rooms, accommodations and space occupancy in mobile home parks or trailer parks.
(1977 Code, ' 6-13) (Ord. 893, passed 5-23-1977; Ord. 1117, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 1196, passed
10-4-2004; Ord. 1250, passed 6-21-2010)
' 35.017 COLLECTION OF TAX BY OPERATOR; RULES FOR COLLECTION.
(A) Every operator renting rooms or space for lodging or sleeping purposes in this city, the
occupancy of which is not exempted under the terms of this subchapter, shall collect a tax from the
occupant. The tax collected or accrued by the operator constitutes a debt owed by the operator to the
city.
(B) In all cases of credit or deferred payment of rent, the payment of tax to the operator may be
deferred until the rent is paid, and the operator shall not be liable for the tax until credits are paid or
deferred payments are made. Adjustments may be made for uncollectibles.
Tillamook - Administration
62
(C) The Tax Administrator shall enforce provisions of this subchapter and shall have the power to
adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with this subchapter as may be necessary to aid in the
enforcement.
(D) For rent collected on portions of a dollar, fractions of a penny shall not be remitted.
(1977 Code, ' 6-13) (Ord. 893, passed 5-23-1977)
' 35.018 OPERATOR’S DUTIES.
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this subchapter at the same time as the rent is
collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated upon the operator’s records
and any receipt rendered by the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise that the tax or any part
of the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, that it will not be added to the rent or that, when
added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided by this subchapter.
(1977 Code, ' 6-13) (Ord. 893, passed 5-23-1977)
' 35.019 EXEMPTIONS.
No tax imposed under this subchapter shall be imposed upon:
(A) Any occupant for more than 30 successive calendar days (a person who pays for lodging on a
monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in the month, shall not be deemed a transient).
(B) Any occupant whose rent is of a value less than $2 per day.
(C) Any occupant whose rent is paid for hospital room or to a medical clinic, convalescent
home/or home for aged people, or to a public institution owned and operated by a unit of government.
(1977 Code, ' 6-13) (Ord. 893, passed 5-23-1977)
' 35.020 REGISTRATION OF OPERATOR; FORM AND CONTENTS; EXECUTION;
CERTIFICATION OF AUTHORITY.
(A) Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city
shall register with the Tax Administrator on a form provided by him or her. Operators engaged in
business at the time this subchapter is adopted must register not later than 30 calendar days after
passage of this subchapter. Operators starting business after this subchapter is adopted must register
within 15 days after commencing business. The privilege of registration after the date of imposition of
the tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax, regardless of
registration. Registration sets forth the name under which the operator transacts or intends to transact
business, the location of his or her place or places of business, and any other information to facilitate
the collection of the tax as the Tax Administrator may require. The registration shall be signed by the
operator. The Tax Administrator shall, within ten days after registration, issue without charge a
certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant, together with a duplicate
Finances; Taxes and Fees
63
thereof for each additional place of business or each registrant. Certificates shall be non-assignable and
nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the Tax Administrator upon the cessation of
business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the
place of business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed so as to be seen and come
to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy.
(B) This certificate shall, among other things, state the following:
(1) The name of the operator;
(2) The address of the hotel;
(3) The date upon which the certificate was issued; and
(4) The following: AThis Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the
person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Transient Lodgings Tax
Ordinance of the city by registration with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from
transients the lodgings tax imposed by the city and remitting the tax to the Tax Administrator. This
certificate does not authorize any person to conduct an unlawful business in an unlawful manner, or to
operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to
those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of the city. This certificate
does not constitute a permit.@
(1977 Code, ' 6-13) (Ord. 893, passed 5-23-1977)
' 35.021 DUE DATE; RETURNS AND PAYMENTS.
(A) The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be paid by the transient to the operator at the time
that rent is paid. All amounts of taxes collected by any operator are due and payable to the Tax
Administrator on a quarterly basis on the fifteenth day of the following month for the preceding three
months and are delinquent on the last day of the month in which they are due. The Tax Administrator
has authority to classify and/or district the operators for determination of applicable tax periods and
shall notify each operator of the due and delinquent dates for the operator’s returns. The initial return
under this subchapter may be for less than the three months preceding the due date; thereafter, returns
shall be made for the applicable quarterly period.
(B) On or before the fifteenth day of the month following each quarter of collection, a return for
the preceding quarter’s tax collections shall be filed with the Tax Administrator. The return shall be
filed, in a form as the Tax Administrator may prescribe, by every operator liable for payment of tax.
(C) Returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period. The
Tax Administrator may require returns to show the total rentals upon which tax was collected or
otherwise due, gross receipts of operator for that period, and an explanation in detail of any
discrepancy between the amounts and the amount of rents exempt, if any.
(D) The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of
Tillamook - Administration
64
the amount of the tax due, to the Tax Administrator at his or her office either by personal delivery or by
mail. If the return is mailed, the postmark shall be considered the date of delivery for determining
delinquencies.
(E) For good cause, the Tax Administrator may extend for not to exceed one month the time for
making any return or payment of tax. No further extension shall be granted except by the City Council.
Any operator to whom an extension is granted shall pay interest at the rate of 0.5% per month on the
amount of tax due without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed, and the tax and
interest due is not paid by the end of the extension granted, then the interest shall become a part of the
tax for computation of penalties described elsewhere in this subchapter.
(F) The Tax Administrator, if he or she deems it necessary in order to ensure payment or facilitate
collection by the city of the amount of taxes in any individual case, may require returns and payment of
the amount of taxes for other than quarterly periods.
(1977 Code, ' 6-13) (Ord. 893, passed 5-23-1977)
' 35.022 PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
(A) Original delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for
remittance of tax due, and who fails to remit any tax imposed by this subchapter prior to delinquency,
shall pay 10% of the amount of tax due in addition to the amount of the tax.
(B) Continued delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for
remittance of tax due, and who failed to pay any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days
following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, shall pay a second delinquency
penalty of 15% of the amount of the tax due plus the amount of the tax and the 10% penalty first
imposed. After the first 30 days of delinquency, in addition to other remedies, fines, and fees, the
operator may be cited into Municipal Court. Each day subsequent to the 31 days shall be considered a
separate violation. Penalties to be set by resolution. Failure to pay any tax, fine, or fee after 91 days
may result in the revocation of business licences in addition to all other tax, fees, fines, and penalties.
(C) Fraud. If the Tax Administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under
this subchapter is due to fraud or intent to evade the provisions thereof, a penalty of 25% of the amount
of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in divisions (A) and (B) of this
section.
(D) Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed
by this subchapter shall pay interest at the rate of 1% per month or fraction thereof without proration
for portions of a month on the amount of the tax due, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the
remittance first became delinquent until paid.
(E) Penalties merged with tax. Every penalty imposed and any interest as accrues under the
provisions of this section shall be merged with and become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.
Finances; Taxes and Fees
65
(F) Petition for waiver. Any operator who fails to remit the tax herein levied within the time
herein stated shall pay the penalties herein stated; provided, however, the operator may petition the
City Council for waiver and refund of the penalty or any portion thereof; and the City Council may, if a
good and sufficient reason is shown, waive and direct a refund of the penalty or any portion thereof.
(1977 Code, ' 6-13) (Ord. 893, passed 5-23-1977; Ord. 1289, passed 5-5-2014)
' 35.023 DEFICIENCY DETERMINATIONS; EVASION; OPERATOR DELAY.
(A) Deficiency determinations. If the Tax Administrator determines that the returns are incorrect,
he or she may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the facts
contained in the return or returns, or upon the basis of any information within his or her possession or
that may come into his or her possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the
amount due for one or more than one period, and the amount so determined shall be due and payable
immediately upon service of notice as herein provided, after which the amount determined is
delinquent. Penalties on deficiencies shall be applied as set forth in ' 35.022.
(1) In making a determination, the Tax Administrator may offset overpayments, if any, which
may have been previously made for a period or periods against any underpayment for a subsequent
period or periods, or against penalties and interest on the underpayments. The interest on
underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in ' 35.022.
(2) The Tax Administrator shall give to the operator or occupant a written notice of his or her
determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail, the notice shall be
addressed to the operator at his or her address as it appears on the records of the Tax Administrator. In
case of service by mail of any notice required by this subchapter, it shall be served by mailing the
notice by registered mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested.
(3) Except in the case of fraud or intent to evade this subchapter or authorized rules and
regulations, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice thereof mailed within three years
after the last day of the month following the close of the quarterly period for which the amount is
proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires the
later.
(4) Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and
shall become final within 20 days after the Tax Administrator has given notice thereof; provided,
however, the operator may petition redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the
determination becomes final as herein provided.
(B) Fraud; refusal to collect; evasion. If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax or to
make within the time provided in this subchapter any report or remittance of the tax or any portion
thereof required by this subchapter, or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise willfully attempts to
evade this subchapter, the Tax Administrator shall proceed in a manner as he or she may deem best to
obtain the facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Tax
Administrator has determined the tax due that is imposed by this subchapter from any operator who has
failed or refused to collect the same and to report and remit the tax, he or she shall proceed to
Tillamook - Administration
66
determine and assess against the operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this subchapter.
In case this determination is made, the Tax Administrator shall give a notice in the manner aforesaid of
the amount so assessed. The determination and notice shall be made and mailed within three years of
the discovery by the Tax Administrator of any fraud, intent to evade or failure or refusal to collect the
tax, or failure to file the return. Any determination shall become due and payable upon receipt of notice
and shall become final within 20 days after the Tax Administrator has given notice thereof; provided,
however, the operator may petition for redemption refund if the petition is filed before the
determination becomes final as herein provided.
(C) Operator delay. If the Tax Administrator believes that the collection of any tax or any amount
of tax required to be collected and paid to the city will be jeopardized by delay, or if any determination
will be jeopardized by delay, he or she shall thereupon make a determination of the tax, or amount of
tax required to be collected, noting the fact upon the determination. The amount so determined as
herein provided shall be immediately due and payable, and the operator shall immediately pay the
determination to the Tax Administrator after service of notice thereof; provided, however, the operator
may petition, after payment has been made, for redemption and refund of the determination, if the
petition is filed within 20 days from the date of service of notice by the Tax Administrator.
(1977 Code, ' 6-13) (Ord. 893, passed 5-23-1977)
' 35.024 REDETERMINATIONS.
(A) Any person against whom a determination is made under ' 35.023, or any person directly
interested, may petition for a redetermination and redemption and refund within the time required in
' 35.023. If a petition for redetermination and refund is not filed within the time required in ' 35.023,
the determination becomes final at the expiration of the allowable time.
(B) If a petition for redetermination and refund is filed within the allowable period, the Tax
Administrator shall reconsider the determination and, if the person has so requested in his or her
petition, shall grant the person an oral hearing and shall give him or her 20 days’ notice of the time and
place of the hearing. The Tax Administrator may continue the hearing from time to time as may be
necessary.
(C) The Tax Administrator may decrease or increase the amount of the determination as a result of
the hearing; if an increase is determined, the increase shall be payable immediately after the hearing.
(D) The order or decision of the Tax Administrator upon a petition for redetermination and refund
becomes final 20 days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof, unless appeal of the order or
decision is filed with the City Council within 20 days after the service of the notice.
(E) No petition for redetermination of redemption and refund or appeal therefrom shall be
effective for any purpose unless the operator has first complied with the payment provisions hereof.
(1977 Code, ' 6-13) (Ord. 893, passed 5-23-1977)
' 35.025 SECURITY FOR COLLECTION OF TAX.
Finances; Taxes and Fees
67
(A) The Tax Administrator, whenever he or she deems it necessary to ensure the compliance with
this subchapter, may require the operator subject thereto to deposit with him or her that security in the
form of cash, bond or other security as the Tax Administrator may determine. The amount of the
security shall be fixed by the Tax Administrator but shall not be greater than twice the operator’s
estimated average quarterly liability for the period for which he or she files returns, determined in a
manner as the Tax Administrator deems proper, or $5,000, whichever amount is lesser. The amount of
security may be increased or decreased by the Tax Administrator subject to limitations herein provided.
The operator has a right to appeal to the City Council any decision of the Tax Administrator made
pursuant to this section. The operator’s right to appeal is pursuant to ' 35.030.
(B) At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected
becomes due and payable, or at any time within three years after any determination becomes final, the
Tax Administrator may bring any action in the courts of this state, any other state or of the United
States, in the name of the city, to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest.
(1977 Code, ' 6-13) (Ord. 893, passed 5-23-1977)
' 35.026 LIEN.
The tax imposed by this subchapter, together with the interest and penalties herein provided and
the filing fees paid to the County Clerk of this county, attorneys’ fees and advertising costs which may
be incurred when same becomes delinquent as set forth in this subchapter, shall be and, until paid,
remain a lien from the date of its recording with the County Clerk of this county, and superior to all
subsequent recorded liens on all real and/or tangible personal property used in the hotel of an operator
within the city and may be foreclosed on and sold as may be necessary to discharge the lien if the lien
has been recorded with the County Clerk. Notice of the lien may be issued by the Tax Administrator or
his or her deputy whenever the operator is in default in the payment of the tax, interest and penalty and
shall be recorded with the County Clerk and a copy sent to the delinquent operator. The personal
property subject to the lien seized by any deputy or employee of the Tax Administrator may be sold by
the department seizing same at public auction after ten days’ notice, which means one publication in a
newspaper published in the city. Any lien for taxes shown on the records of the proper county official
shall, upon payment of all taxes, penalties and interest thereon, be released by the Tax Administrator
when the full amount determined to be due has been paid to the city, and shall have a receipt and
interest thereof have been paid and that the lien is hereby released, and the record of lien is satisfied.
(1977 Code, ' 6-13) (Ord. 893, passed 5-23-1977; Ord. 1173A, passed 4-15-2002)
' 35.027 REFUNDS.
(A) Refunds by the city to the operator. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has
been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax
Administrator under this subchapter, it may be refunded; provided, a verified claim in writing therefor,
stating the specific reason upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Tax Administrator within
one year from the date of payment. The claim shall be made on forms provided by the Tax
Administrator. If the claim is approved by the Tax Administrator, the excess amount collected or paid
Tillamook - Administration
68
may be refunded or may be credited on any amount then due and payable from the operator from
whom it was collected or by whom paid, and the balance may be refunded to the operator, his or her
administrators, executors or assignees.
(B) Refunds by city to transient. Whenever the tax required by this subchapter has been collected
by an operator and deposited by operator with the Tax Administrator, and it is later determined that the
tax was erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Administrator, it may be refunded by
the Tax Administrator to the transient, provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific
reason on which the claim is founded, is filed with the Tax Administrator within one year from the date
of payment.
(C) Refunds by operator to tenant. Whenever the tax required by this subchapter has been
collected by the operator and it is later determined that the tenant occupies the hotel for a period
exceeding 30 days without interruption, the operator shall refund to the tenant the tax previously
collected by the operator from that tenant as a transient. The operator shall account for the collection
and refund to the Tax Administrator. If the operator has remitted the tax prior to the refund or credit to
the tenant, he or she shall be entitled to a corresponding refund under this section.
(1977 Code, ' 6-13) (Ord. 893, passed 5-23-1977)
' 35.028 COLLECTION FEE.
Every operator liable for collection and remittance of the tax imposed by this subchapter may
withhold 5% of the net tax herein collected, to cover the operator’s expense in collection and
remittance of the tax.
(1977 Code, ' 6-13) (Ord. 901, passed 8-1-1977)
' 35.029 ADMINISTRATION.
(A) Special fund. The Tax Administrator shall deposit all money collected pursuant to this
subchapter within the Transient Hotel/Motel Tax Fund. One-half of the revenue received shall be a
General Fund resource. In times of emergency or significant economic downturn, the City Council
may modify, i.e., increase this resource amount to support General Fund activities in the current fiscal
year. Furthermore, the City Council may cause the temporary suspension of funds, except for public
police protection, allocated to the following activities in the current fiscal year as well. Absent
modification/suspension by the City Council, the remaining one-half is to be used for the following
activities within the city:
(1) Operation/maintenance of public parking;
(2) Parking lot purchase/construction;
(3) Tourism promotion advertising;
(4) Economic development;
Finances; Taxes and Fees
69
(5) Public police protection; and
(6) Beautification.
(B) Two percent tax increase. House Bill 2267, passed by the 2003 State Legislature, changed the
law regarding transient room effective July 2, 2003, establishing a set formula for the allocation of new
or increased local lodging taxes. As of November 4, 2004, the transient room tax shall be increased by
2% thus increasing it from 7% to 9%. The additional 2% increase shall be utilized in the following
manner:
(1) Seventy percent of the increased transient room tax shall be used for tourism promotion
or tourism-related facilities. A TOURISM-RELATED FACILITY means real property that has a
useful life of ten or more years and that is used to support tourism and to accommodate tourist
activities. Tourism-related facility includes a conference center, convention center and visitor
information center.
(2) Thirty percent of the increased transient room tax is unrestricted and may be used to fund
city services, and/or it may be used to fund the maintenance and repair of tourism-related facilities.
(C) One percent tax increase. As of August 1, 2010, the transient room tax shall be increased an
additional 1% thus increasing it from 9% to 10%. This additional 1% increase shall be utilized in the
following manner: 100% of the increase in transient room tax shall be used to solely support the
Tillamook Area Chamber of Commerce.
(1977 Code, ' 6-13) (Ord. 893, passed 5-23-1977; Ord. 1118, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 1190, passed
4-19-2004; Ord. 1196, passed 10-4-2004; Ord. 1250, passed 6-21-2010)
' 35.030 APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator may appeal to the City Council by
filing notice of appeal with the Tax Administrator within 20 days of the serving or the mailing of the
notice of the decision given by the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator shall transmit the notice
of appeal together with the file of the appealed matter, to the Council, who shall fix a time and place
for hearing the appeal from the decision of the Tax Administrator. The Council shall give the appellant
not less than 20 days’ written notice of the time and place of hearing of the appealed matter. Action by
the Council on appeals shall be decided by a majority of the members of the Council present at the
meeting where the appeal is considered.
(1977 Code, ' 6-13) (Ord. 893, passed 5-23-1977)
' 35.031 VIOLATIONS.
It is unlawful for any operator or other person so required to fail or refuse to register as required
herein; to furnish any return required to be made; fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other
data required by the Tax Administrator; or to render a false or fraudulent return. No person required to
make, render, sign or verify any report shall make any false or fraudulent report with intent to defeat or
Tillamook - Administration
70
evade the determination of any amount due required by this subchapter.
(1977 Code, ' 6-13) (Ord. 893, passed 5-23-1977) Penalty, see ' 35.999
' 35.032 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This subchapter shall become effective at 12:01 a.m. June 23, 1977.
(1977 Code, ' 6-13) (Ord. 893, passed 5-23-1977)
MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL TAX
' 35.045 TITLE.
This subchapter shall be known as the ACity Motor Vehicle Fuel Tax Ordinance.@
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.046 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
AIRCRAFT FUEL. Any gasoline and any other inflammable or combustible gas or liquid by
whatever name the gasoline, gas or liquid is known or sold, usable as fuel for the operation of aircraft,
except gas or liquid, the chief use of which, as determined by the city, is for purposes other than the
propulsion of aircraft.
CITY. Tillamook City, a political subdivision of this state.
DEALER. Any person who:
(1) Imports, or causes to be imported, motor vehicle fuel for sale, use or distribution in an
after the same reaches the city. DEALER does not include any person who imports into the city motor
vehicle fuel in quantities of 200 gallons or less purchased from a supplier who is licensed as a dealer
hereunder, and who assumes liability for the payment of the applicable license tax to the city;
(2) Produces, refines, manufactures or compounds motor vehicle fuels in the city for use,
distribution or sale in the city; or
(3) Acquires in the city for sale, use or distribution in the city, motor vehicle fuels with
respect to which there has been no license tax previously incurred.
DISTRIBUTION. In addition to its ordinary meaning, the delivery of motor vehicle fuel by a
Finances; Taxes and Fees
71
dealer or subdealer to any service station or into any tank, storage facility or series of tanks or storage
facilities connected by pipelines, from which motor vehicle fuel is withdrawn directly for sale, or for
delivery into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles whether or not the service station, tank or storage facility
is owned, operated or controlled by the dealer or subdealer.
HIGHWAY. Every way, thoroughfare and place of whatever nature, open for use of the public for
the purpose of vehicular travel within city limits.
MOTOR VEHICLE. All vehicles, engines or machines, movable or immovable, operated or
propelled by the use of motor vehicle fuel.
MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL. Includes gasoline and any other flammable or combustible gas or
liquid, by whatever name such as gasoline, gas, diesel or liquid is sold, usable as fuel for the operation
of motor vehicles, except gas or liquid, the chief use of which, as determined by the city, is for
purposes other than the propulsion of motor vehicles upon the highways.
PERSON. Includes every natural person, association, firm, partnership, corporation or the United
States.
SERVICE STATION. Includes any place operated for the purpose of retailing and delivering
motor vehicle fuel into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles.
SUBDEALER. Includes every person other than a dealer engaging in the business of handling
motor vehicle fuel for sale and distribution within the city, when the fuel is delivered by dealers with
business addresses outside city limits.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.047 TAX IMPOSED.
A business license tax is hereby imposed on every dealer and subdealer. The tax imposed shall be
paid monthly to the city. The city may delegate to any department of the city enforcement of any
portion or all of this subchapter.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.048 AMOUNT AND PAYMENT.
(A) Subject to divisions (B) and (C) of this section, in addition to any fees or taxes otherwise
provided for by law, every dealer and subdealer engaging in his or her own name, or in the name of
others, or in the name of his or her representatives or agents in the city, in the sale, use or distribution
of motor vehicle fuel or withdrawal of motor vehicle fuel for sale, use or distribution within areas in the
city, in the sale of motor vehicle fuel or gasoline as the case may be, shall:
(1) Not later than the twenty-fifth day of each calendar month, render a statement to the city
of all motor vehicle fuel sold, used, distributed or so withdrawn by him or her in the city; and
72 Tillamook - Administration
(2) Pay a license tax computed on the basis of $0.015 per gallon of the motor vehicle fuel
so sold, used, distributed or withdrawn as shown by the statement in the manner and within the
time provided in this subchapter.
(B) In lieu of claiming refund of the tax paid as to motor vehicle fuel consumed by the dealer or
subdealer in non-highway uses as provided in this chapter, or of any prior erroneous payment of license
tax made to the city by the dealer or subdealer, the dealer or subdealer may show the motor vehicle fuel
as a credit or deduction on the monthly statement and payment of tax.
(C) The license tax shall not be imposed wherever it is prohibited by the Constitution or laws of
the United States.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.049 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
No dealer or subdealer shall sell, use or distribute any motor vehicle fuel until he or she has
secured a dealer’s license as required herein.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.050 LICENSE APPLICATIONS AND ISSUANCE.
(A) Every person, before becoming a dealer or subdealer in motor vehicle fuel in this city, shall
make an application to the city for a license authorizing the person to engage in business as a dealer or
subdealer.
(B) Applications for the license must be made on forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the
city.
(C) The applications shall be accompanied by a duly acknowledged certificate containing:
(1) The business name under which the dealer or subdealer is transacting business within the
city;
(2) The place of business and location of distributing stations in the city; and
(3) The name and address of the managing agent, the names and addresses of the several
persons constituting the firm or partnership and, if a corporation, the corporate name under which it is
authorized to transact business, and the names and addresses of its principal officers and registered
agent.
(D) The application for a motor vehicle fuel dealer’s or subdealer’s license having been accepted
for filing, the city shall issue to the dealer or subdealer a license in a form as the city may prescribe to
transact business in the city. The license so issued is not assignable, and is valid only for the dealer or
Finances; Taxes and Fees
73
subdealer in whose name issued.
(E) The city shall keep and file all applications with an alphabetical index thereof, together with a
record of all licensed dealers and subdealers.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.051 FAILURE TO SECURE LICENSE.
(A) If any dealer or subdealer sells, distributes or uses any motor vehicle fuel without first filing
the certificate and securing the license required by ' 35.050, the license tax shall immediately be due
and payable on account of all motor vehicle fuel so sold, distributed or used. Each day of operation
without a license shall be deemed a separate offense.
(B) The city shall proceed forthwith to determine from the best available sources the amount of
the tax, and it shall assess the tax in the amount found due, together with a penalty of 100% of the tax,
and shall make its certificate of the assessment and penalty. In any suit or proceeding to collect the tax
or penalty or both, the certificate is prima facie evidence that the dealer or subdealer therein named is
indebted to the city in the amount of the tax and penalty therein stated.
(C) Any tax or penalty so assessed may be collected in the manner prescribed in ' 35.055 with
reference to delinquency in payment of the tax or by action at law.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982) Penalty, see ' 35.999
' 35.052 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
The city shall revoke the license of any dealer or subdealer refusing or neglecting to comply with
any provision of this subchapter. The city shall mail by registered mail, addressed to the dealer or
subdealer at his or her last known address appearing in the files of the city, a notice of intention to
cancel. The notice shall give the reason for the cancellation. The cancellation shall become effective
without further notice if, within ten days from the mailing of the notice, the dealer or subdealer has not
made good his, her or its default or delinquency.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.053 CANCELLATION OF LICENSE.
(A) The city may, upon written request of a dealer or subdealer, cancel any license issued to the
dealer or subdealer, the cancellation to become effective 30 days from the date of receipt of the written
request.
(B) If the city ascertains and finds that the person to whom a license has been issued is no longer
engaged in the business of a dealer or subdealer, the city may cancel the license of the dealer or
subdealer upon investigation after 30 days’ notice has been mailed to the last known address of the
Tillamook - Administration
74
dealer or subdealer.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.054 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
Except as otherwise provided in '' 35.055 and 35.057, the remedies provided in '' 35.051,
35.052 and 35.053 are cumulative. No action taken pursuant to those sections shall relieve any person
from the penalty provisions of this subchapter.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.055 PAYMENT OF TAX AND DELINQUENCY.
(A) The license tax imposed by '' 35.047 and 35.048 shall be paid on or before the twenty-fifth
day of each month to the city, which upon request, shall receipt the dealer or subdealer therefor.
(B) Except as provided in division (D) of this section, to any license tax not paid as required by
division (A) of this section, there shall be added a penalty of 1% of the license tax.
(C) Except as provided in division (D) of this section, if the tax and penalty required by division
(B) of this section are not received on or before the close of business on the last day of the month in
which the payment is due, a further penalty of 10% shall be paid in addition to the penalty provided for
in division (B) of this section.
(D) If the city determines that the delinquency was due to reasonable cause and without any intent
to avoid payment, the penalties provided by divisions (B) and (C) of this section shall be waived.
Penalties imposed by this section shall not apply when the penalty provided in ' 35.051 has been
assessed.
(E) If any person fails to pay the license tax or any penalty provided for by this subchapter, the
amount thereof shall be collected from the person for the use of the city. The city shall commence and
prosecute to final determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect the
same.
(F) No dealer who collects from any person the tax provided for herein shall knowingly and
willfully fail to report and pay the same to the city as required herein.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.056 MONTHLY STATEMENT OF DEALER.
Every dealer or subdealer in motor vehicle fuel shall render to the city on or before the twenty-fifth
day of each month, on a form prescribed, prepared and furnished by the city, a signed statement of the
number of gallons of motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by him, her or them during the
Finances; Taxes and Fees
75
preceding calendar month. The statement shall be signed by one of the principal officers, or by an
authorized agent in the case of a corporation; or by the managing agent or owner in the case of a firm
or association.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.057 FAILURE TO FILE MONTHLY STATEMENT.
If any dealer or subdealer, except one subject to ' 35.051, fails to file the report required by
' 35.056, the city shall proceed forthwith to determine from the best available source the amount of
motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by the dealer or subdealer for the period unreported, and
that determination shall be prima facie evidence of the amount of the fuel sold, distributed or used.
The city immediately shall assess the license tax in the amount so determined, adding thereto a penalty
of 10% for failure to report. The penalty shall be cumulative to other penalties provided in this
subchapter. In any suit brought to enforce the rights of the city under this section, the certificate of the
city showing the amount of tax, penalties and costs unpaid by any dealer or subdealer, and that the
same are due and unpaid to the city is prima facie evidence of the facts as shown.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.058 BILLING; PURCHASES.
Bills shall be rendered to all purchasers of motor vehicle fuel by dealers or subdealers in motor
vehicle fuel. The bills shall separately state and describe to the satisfaction of the city the different
products shipped thereunder, and shall be serially numbered except where other sales invoice controls
acceptable to the city are maintained. The bills required hereunder may be the same as, or incorporated
in, those required under O.R.S. 319.210.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.059 FAILURE TO PROVIDE INVOICE OR DELIVERY TAG.
No person shall receive and accept any shipment of motor vehicle fuel from any dealer or
subdealer, or pay for the same, or sell or offer the shipment for sale, unless the shipment is
accompanied by an invoice or delivery tag showing the date upon which shipment was delivered, and
the name of the dealer or subdealer in motor vehicle fuel.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.060 EXEMPTION OF EXPORT FUEL.
(A) The license tax imposed by '' 35.047 and 35.048 shall not be imposed on motor vehicle fuel:
(1) Exported from the city by a dealer or subdealer; or
(2) Any publicly owned body that is tax exempt B PUD, state highway, armed forces and
police agencies.
Tillamook - Administration
76
(B) In support of any exemption from license taxes claimed under this section other than in the
case of stock transfers or deliveries in his or her own equipment, every dealer or subdealer must
execute and file with the city an export certificate in a form as shall be prescribed, prepared and
furnished by the city, containing a statement made by some person having actual knowledge of the fact
of the exportation, that the motor vehicle fuel has been exported from the city, and giving any details
with reference to the shipment as the city may require. The city may demand of any dealer or
subdealer any additional data as is deemed necessary in support of the certificate, and failure to supply
the data will constitute a waiver of all right to exemption claimed by virtue of the certificate. The city
may, in a case where it believes no useful purpose would be served by filing of an export certificate,
waive the certificate.
(C) Any motor vehicle fuel carried from the city in the fuel tank or a motor vehicle shall not be
considered as exported from the city, except that a refund of the tax may be paid on the fuel as
provided in ' 35.062(A)(4).
(D) No person shall, through false statement, trick or device, or otherwise, obtain motor vehicle
fuel for export as to which the city tax has not been paid and fail to export the same, or any portion
thereof, or cause the motor vehicle fuel or any portion thereof not to be exported, or divert or cause to
be diverted the motor vehicle fuel or any portion thereof to be used, distributed or sold in the city and
fail to notify the city and the dealer or subdealer from whom the motor vehicle fuel was originally
purchased, of his or her act.
(E) No dealer, subdealer or other person, shall conspire with any person to withhold from export,
or divert from export, or to return motor vehicle fuel to the city or use as to avoid any of the fees
imposed herein.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.061 FUEL IN VEHICLES COMING INTO THE CITY NOT TAXED.
Any person coming into the city in a motor vehicle may transport in the fuel tank of the vehicle
motor vehicle fuel for his or her own use only and for the purpose of operating the motor vehicle
without securing a license or paying the tax provided in '' 35.047 and 35.048, or complying with any
of the provisions imposed upon dealers herein; but if the motor vehicle fuel so brought into the city is
removed from the fuel tank of the vehicle or used for any purpose other than the propulsion of the
vehicle, the persons so importing the fuel into the city shall be subject to all the provisions herein
applying to dealers.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.062 REFUNDS.
(A) Any person who has paid any taxes on motor vehicle fuel imposed or directed to be paid
hereunder either directly by the collection of the tax by the vendor from the consumer, or indirectly by
adding the amount of the tax to the price of the fuel and paid by the consumer, shall be reimbursed and
Finances; Taxes and Fees
77
repaid the amount of the tax paid by him or her, except as provided in '' 35.064 to 35.067, if the
person has:
(1) Purchased and used the fuel for the purpose of operating or propelling stationary engines,
tractors or motor boats;
(2) Purchased and used fuel for cleaning or dyeing or other commercial use, except when
used in motor vehicles operated upon any highway;
(3) Purchased and exported the fuel from the city in containers other than fuel supply tanks of
motor vehicles; or
(4) Purchased and exported the fuel in the fuel supply tank of a motor vehicle and has used
the fuel to operate the vehicle upon the highways of another state, if the user has paid to the other state
a similar motor vehicle fuel fee or tax on the same fuel, or has paid any other highway use tax the rate
for which is increased because the fuel was not purchased in, and the fee or tax thereon paid, to that
state; or
(5) All publicly owned bodies.
(B) When a motor vehicle with auxiliary equipment uses fuel and there is no auxiliary motor for
the equipment or separate tank for the motor, a refund may be claimed and allowed as provided by
division (D) of this section, except as otherwise provided by this division (B), without the necessity of
furnishing proof of the amount of fuel used in the operation of the auxiliary equipment. The person
claiming the refund may present to the city a statement of his or her claim and be allowed a refund as
follows:
(1) For fuel used in pumping aircraft fuel, motor vehicle fuel, fuel or heating oils or other
petroleum products by a power take-off unit on a delivery truck, refund shall be allowed the claimant
for the tax paid on fuel purchased at the rate of three-fourths of one gallon for each 1,000 gallons of
petroleum products delivered; and
(2) For fuel used in operating a power take-off unit on a cement mixer truck or on a garbage
truck, the claimant shall be allowed a refund of 25% of the tax paid on all fuel used in the truck.
(C) When a person purchases and uses motor vehicle fuel in a vehicle equipped with a power
take-off unit, a refund may be claimed for fuel used to operate the power take-off unit, provided the
vehicle is equipped with a metering device approved by the city and designed to operate only while the
vehicle is stationary and the parking brake is engaged; the quantity of fuel measured by the metering
device shall be presumed to be the quantity of fuel consumed by the operation of the power take-off
unit.
Tillamook - Administration
78
(D) Before any refund may be granted, the person claiming the refund must present to the city a
statement, accompanied by copies of the original invoices showing the purchases; provided that in lieu
of the invoices, refunds submitted under division (A)(4) of this section shall be accompanied by
information showing source of fuel used and evidence of payment of fee or tax to the state in which the
fuel was used. The statement shall be made over the signature of the claimant, and shall state the total
amount of the fuel for which he or she is entitled to be reimbursed under division (A) of this section.
The city, upon the presentation of the statement and invoices or other required documents, shall cause
to be repaid to the claimant from the taxes collected on motor vehicle fuel the taxes so paid by the
claimant.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.063 LIMITATION ON APPLICATIONS FOR REFUNDS.
Applications for refunds made under '' 35.062, 35.066, 35.067 and 35.068 must be filed with the
city before the expiration of 15 months from the date of purchase or invoice, except that unused fuel
reported as an ending inventory on any claim may be included in a subsequent claim if presented not
later than 15 months from the filing date of the claim which established the inventory. All applications
for refunds based upon exportation of motor vehicle fuel from the city in the fuel supply tank of a
motor vehicle must be filed with the city before the expiration of 15 months from the last day of the
month in which the fuel was used, or before the expiration of 15 months from the date of an assessment
for unpaid fee or tax by the state in which the fuel was used.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.064 SELLER TO GIVE INVOICE FOR EACH PURCHASE MADE BY PERSON
ENTITLED TO REFUND.
(A) When motor vehicle fuel is sold to a person who claims to be entitled to a refund of the tax
imposed, the seller of the motor vehicle fuel shall make and deliver at the time of the sale separate
invoices for each purchase in a form and containing any information prescribed by the city.
(B) The invoices shall be legibly written and shall be void if any corrections or erasures appear on
the face thereof. Any person who alters any part of any invoice that will tend to give to the claimant an
illegal gain shall have the entire claim invalidated. The seller shall for a period of at least 18 months
retain copies of all invoices and make them available to the city upon request.
(C) The invoices required hereinunder may be the same as or incorporated in those required under
O.R.S. 319.300.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.065 CLAIM OF REFUNDS.
(A) The city may require any person who makes claim for refund of tax on motor vehicle fuel to
furnish a statement, under oath, giving his or her occupation, description of the machines or equipment
Finances; Taxes and Fees
79
in which the motor vehicle fuel was used, the place where used and any other information as the city
may require.
(B) The city may investigate claims and gather and compile any information in regard to the
claims as it considers necessary to safeguard the city and prevent fraudulent practices in connection
with tax refunds and evasions. The city may, in order to establish the validity of any claim, examine
the books and records of the claimant for those purposes. The records shall be sufficient to substantiate
the accuracy of the claim and shall be in a form and contain any information as the city may require.
Failure of the claimant to maintain the records or to accede to the demand for the examination
constitutes a waiver of all rights to the refund claimed on account of the transaction requested.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.066 REFUND OF TAX ON FUEL USED IN OPERATION OF VEHICLES OVER
CERTAIN ROADS OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
(A) Except where a refund is authorized by this chapter, upon compliance with divisions (B) and
(C) of this section, the city shall refund in the manner provided in division (B) or (C) of this section the
tax on motor vehicle fuel that is used in the operation of a motor vehicle:
(1) By any person on any road, thoroughfare or property in private ownership;
(2) By any person on any road, thoroughfare or property, other than a state highway, county
road or city street, for the removal of forest products, as defined in O.R.S. 321.005, or the products of
forest products converted to a form other than logs at or near the harvesting site, or for the construction
or maintenance of the road, thoroughfare or property, pursuant to a written agreement or permit
authorizing the use, construction or maintenance of the road, thoroughfare or property, with or by:
(a) An agency of the United States;
(b) The State Board of Forestry;
(c) The State Forester; or
(d) A license of any agency named in the above divisions (A)(2)(a), (b) or (c).
(3) By an agency of the United States or of this state, or of any county, city or port of the
state on any road, thoroughfare or property, other than a state highway, county road or city street.
(B) Except for a farmer subject to division (C) of this section, the person or agency, as the case
may be, who has paid any tax on the motor vehicle fuels imposed or directed to be paid, as provided
herein, is entitled to claim a refund of the tax so paid on the fuels or for the proportionate part of the tax
paid on fuels used in the operation of the vehicles, when part of the operations are over the road,
thoroughfares or property. The proportionate part shall be based upon the number of miles traveled by
the vehicle over the roads, thoroughfares or property as compared with the total number of miles
traveled by the vehicle. To be eligible to claim this refund, the person or agency, as the case may be,
Tillamook - Administration
80
shall first establish and maintain a complete record of the operations, miles traveled, gallons of fuel
used and other information, in a form and in any detail as the city may prescribe and require, the source
of supply of all fuels purchased or used, and the particular vehicles or equipment in which used.
Whenever any claim is received and approved by the city, it shall cause the refund or tax to be paid to
the claimant in like manner as provided for paying of other refund claims.
(C) A farmer who has paid any tax on motor vehicle fuels imposed or directed to be paid, as
provided herein, is entitled to claim a refund of the tax paid on the fuels used in farming operations in
the operation of any motor vehicle on any road, thoroughfare or property in private ownership. To be
eligible to claim the refund, a farmer shall maintain in a form and in any detail as the city may
prescribe or require, a record, supported by purchase invoices of all motor vehicle fuel purchased
(including fuel purchased to operate any motor vehicle on the highway) and, for each and every motor
vehicle operated on the highway, a record of all fuel used and of all miles traveled on the highway.
Whenever any claim is received and approved by the city, it shall cause the refund of tax to be paid to
the claimant in like manner as provided for paying of other refund claims.
(D) As used in divisions (B) and (C) of this section, FARMER includes any person who manages
or conducts a farm for the production of livestock or crops, but does not include a person who manages
or conducts a farm for the production of forest products, as defined in O.R.S. 321.005, or the products
of the forest products converted to a form other than logs at or near the harvesting site, or of forest
trees, unless the production of the forest products or forest trees is only incidental to the primary
purpose of the farming operation.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.067 REFUNDS TO PURCHASERS OF FUEL FOR AIRCRAFT.
Whenever any statement and invoices are presented to the city showing that motor vehicle fuel has
been purchased and used in operating aircraft engines and upon which the tax on motor vehicle fuel has
been paid, the city shall refund the tax paid.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.068 REFUND OF TAX ON FUEL USED IN TRANSPORTATION OF RURAL FREE
DELIVERY OR SPECIAL DELIVERY MAIL.
(A) All taxes collected by the city on the sale, use or distribution of any motor vehicle fuel used
exclusively in the transportation of rural free delivery mail or special delivery mail of the United States
shall be refunded to the person paying the tax if the person is engaged solely and exclusively in the
transportation of rural free delivery mail or special delivery mail of the United States.
Finances; Taxes and Fees
81
(B) Any person engaged solely and exclusively in the transportation of rural free delivery or
special delivery mail of the United States, who buys any motor vehicle fuel and uses it exclusively in
the transportation of rural free delivery mail or special delivery mail of the United States, and who has
paid any tax on motor vehicle fuel, either directly by the collection of the tax by the vendor from the
consumer or indirectly by adding the amount of the tax to the price of the fuel and paid by the
consumer, shall be reimbursed and repaid the amount of the tax paid by him or her upon presenting to
the city a statement accompanied by the original invoice showing the purchase. The statement shall be
made over the signature of the claimant and shall state the total amount of fuel so purchased and used
by the consumer for the transportation of rural free delivery mail or special delivery mail of the United
States. The city, upon the presentation of the statement and the voucher, shall cause to be repaid to the
consumer from the taxes collected on motor vehicle fuels, the taxes so paid by the consumer on motor
vehicle fuels so used.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.069 EXAMINATIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
The city, or its duly authorized agents, may make any examination of the accounts, records, stocks,
facilities and equipment of dealers, subdealers, service stations and other persons engaged in storing,
selling or distributing motor vehicle fuel or other petroleum product or products within this city, and
any other investigations as it considers necessary in carrying out the provisions of this subchapter, if
the examinations or investigation disclose that any reports of dealers, subdealers or other person
theretofore filed with the city pursuant to the requirements herein have shown incorrectly the amount of
gallonage of motor vehicle fuel distributed or the tax accruing thereon, the city may make changes in
subsequent reports and payments to the dealers, subdealers or other persons, or may make any refunds
as may be necessary to correct the errors disclosed by its examinations or investigations.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.070 LIMITATION ON CREDIT FOR OR REFUND OF OVERPAYMENT AND ON
ASSESSMENT OF ADDITIONAL TAX.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, any credit for erroneous overpayment of tax
made by a dealer or subdealer taken on a subsequent return or any claim for refund of tax erroneously
overpaid filed by a dealer or subdealer, must be so taken or filed within three years after the date on
which the overpayment was made to the city.
(B) Except in the case of fraudulent report or neglect to make a report, every notice of additional
tax proposed to be assessed under this subchapter shall be served on dealers and subdealers within
three years from the date upon which the additional taxes become due.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.071 RECORDS TO BE KEPT BY DEALERS.
Tillamook - Administration
82
Every dealer or subdealer in motor vehicle fuel shall keep a record in a form as may be prescribed
by the city of all purchases, receipts, sales and distribution of motor fuel. The records shall include
copies of all invoices or bills of all these sales, and shall at all times during the business hours of the
day be subject to inspection by the city or its deputies or other officers duly authorized by the city.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.072 RECORDS TO BE KEPT THREE YEARS.
Every dealer and subdealer shall maintain and keep, for the period of three years, all records of
motor vehicle fuel used, sold and distributed within the city by the dealer or subdealer, together with
stock records, invoices, bills of lading and other pertinent papers as may be required by the city. In the
event the records are not kept within this state, the dealer or subdealer shall reimburse the city for all
travel, lodging and related expenses incurred by the city in examining the records. The amount of these
expenses shall be additional tax imposed hereunder.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.073 USE OF TAX REVENUES.
Revenues from the tax imposed by this subchapter remaining after providing for the cost of
refunds and credits authorized herein, shall be used for the construction, reconstruction, improvement,
repair, maintenance and lighting of city streets proportionally as shown:
$0.0099 for street lighting and miscellaneous road repair
33% total revenues
$0.0201 for major road improvements
67% total revenues
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982; Ord. 1177, passed 8-5-2002; Ord. 1223, passed
9-17-2007; Ord. 1234, passed 7-21-2008)
' 35.074 ATTORNEY FEES.
In the event the city is the prevailing party in any action brought to enforce any provision of this
subchapter, the city shall be entitled to recover in addition to all other relief granted a reasonable
attorney fee from the opposing party.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
' 35.075 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This subchapter shall become effective on the thirtieth day following its adoption.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21) (Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
Finances; Taxes and Fees
83
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS; ASSESSMENTS
' 35.090 POWERS OF COUNCIL.
Whenever the City Council shall decide it is in the general health, safety and/or welfare of its
citizens, upon its own motion or upon the signed petition of the owners of more than one-half of the
property to benefit from the public improvement, the Council may construct any public improvement
and repair or otherwise maintain or relay the same whenever it may deem that the public health, safety
and/or welfare interest may require. The Council may then assess all or part of the cost thereof on the
property benefited directly by the improvement or repair, ordering the improvement or repair of the
same in the manner herein provided.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.091 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning, and in addition to their usual meanings.
BENEFITED PROPERTY. The real property within the boundaries of the survey.
CITY. The City of Tillamook, its City Council, employees, agents and/or assigns.
CONSTRUCT. Construct, lay, maintain, reconstruct and/or otherwise repair a public
improvement.
COUNCIL. The City Council of the city composed of its elected or appointed Councilors.
DAY. Calendar day, unless otherwise specified.
IMPROVEMENT or PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any street, sidewalk, sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, water system, street lights, curbs, gutters or other infrastructure system of any kind constructed
by or on behalf of city, including but not limited to the acquisition of machinery and or structures of
any kind with an expected useful life of one year or more.
OWNER. OWNER, owner’s agent and/or assign, including any contract purchaser or tenant, and
in that priority order.
RECORDER or CITY RECORDER. City Recorder as defined in the City Charter.
REMONSTRANCE. A written petition of any kind by an individual or group, timely presented by
the date and time of public hearing, to the Council urging the contemplated action not be adopted or
passed.
Tillamook - Administration
84
STRUCTURE. As defined by O.R.S. 310.140.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.092 REPORT OF ESTIMATED COSTS AND PRELIMINARY ENGINEERING DESIGN.
(A) Whenever the Council decides to construct a public improvement where the cost of which is
to be assessed to the benefited property, a written report and survey shall be prepared by an engineer,
surveyor and/or other similarly skilled person describing the improvement and benefited property.
(B) The report shall contain the following information:
(1) A detailed map or plat showing the location, size, shape, topography and other relevant
physical characteristics of the proposed improvement and benefited property;
(2) The estimated cost of the improvement, including any legal, administrative and
preliminary engineering design costs attributable thereto; however, where the proposed project is to be
carried out in cooperation with any other governmental agency, the City Council may adopt the plans,
specifications and estimates of that agency;
(3) An estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the specially benefited properties;
(4) A recommended method of assessment to arrive at a fair apportionment of the whole, or
any portion thereof, cost of the improvement to the property specially benefited;
(5) The common and legal descriptions and assessed value of each lot, parcel of land or
portion thereof, to be specially benefited by the improvement, with the names of the record owners
thereof, and, when readily available, the names of the contract purchasers thereof (addition, lot, block
and tax lot); and
(6) A statement of outstanding assessments against property to be assessed. The survey and
report shall be filed and kept on file in the office of the City Recorder. The Council may approve the
survey and report or resubmit the same to the person and/or engineer for modification or change. If the
Council shall find the report and estimates to be satisfactory either as originally submitted or as
modified, it may approve the same, or it may abandon the public improvement. The City Council,
thereupon, by resolution, shall declare its purpose or intention to construct, lay, maintain, reconstruct or
repair the public improvement according to the survey and report.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.093 NOTICE AND PUBLIC HEARING.
(A) The City Recorder shall cause advanced actual and/or constructive notice of the proposed
improvement to occur upon benefited property owners by posting, mailing, personal service and/or
publication.
Finances; Taxes and Fees
85
(B) Notice shall occur not less than ten days prior to the first public hearing on the improvement.
The notice shall:
(1) Specify the date, time and place of the public hearing;
(2) Specify the public purpose, location and estimated cost of the improvement;
(3) Refer to the improvement’s survey and report; and
(4) Specify the deadline by which written objections and/or remonstrances, if any, must be
filed with the city. This deadline shall not be less than ten days following notice nor longer than the
date of the last public hearing, unless Council directs otherwise at the hearing.
(C) OWNER for purposes of notice by mail are those persons identified on county and/or city
assessment rolls on the date of mailing the notice.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.094 REMONSTRANCES.
At any time after notice and before the deadline in ' 35.093(B)(4), the owner of any benefited
property may file a remonstrance. The Council upon considering all remonstrances may in its
discretion discontinue the proceedings on the improvement. There shall only be one remonstrance per
individual, benefited-property parcel for purposes of any numeric calculation under this subchapter.
However, if owners of two-thirds of the benefited property remonstrate, then the city shall discontinue
current proceedings on the improvement and the city shall not raise the same proceedings within six
months following the decision to discontinue. If owners of less than two-thirds of benefited property
remonstrate, the city may then decide whether to construct the improvement.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.095 JURISDICTION.
Upon the city’s decision to construct the improvement, all benefited property shall be liable for a
proportionate share of improvement costs as prescribed by this subchapter and the Council, unless
otherwise exempted by the Council or law.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.096 METHOD OF ASSESSMENT; NOTICE OF PROPOSED ASSESSMENT.
(A) When the City Council shall have determined the whole cost of the construction of the public
improvement, the City Recorder shall apportion the cost thereof upon the lots, parts of the lots and
parcels of land in the areas where the improvements have been constructed in accordance with the
benefit derived by each lot, part of lot or parcel of land. The City Recorder shall apportion the cost in
Tillamook - Administration
86
direct proportion to the front footage of the property and/or the area of the lot or parcel affected, or
combination of both, in relation to the total cost of the improvement, including engineering,
superintending, construction of the improvement, the cost of advertising and all other costs connected
therewith. The City Recorder shall give notice of the same by publishing at least once in a newspaper
of general circulation in the city for a period of not less than seven days, and by mailing a copy of the
notice to the owner, agent of the owner, or person in possession of the property proposed to be
assessed, addressed to the mailing address of the owner, all as disclosed by the tax assessment rolls of
this county, at the time of the mailing of the notice.
(B) Notice shall specify the whole cost of the improvement; the share so apportioned to each lot,
parts of lots or parcels of land; the date the final assessment decision will come before the City Council
for a public hearing; and the date, not less than 20 days from the date of mailing of the notice, within
which written objections to any proposed apportionment and assessment may be made to the City
Council and filed with the City Recorder.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.097 HEARING OF REMONSTRANCES; DOCKETING OF LIENS.
At the time specified in the notice, or at any other subsequent time as the City Council may fix, the
Council shall hear any and all objections and remonstrances to the proposed assessment, and thereafter
may modify the proposed assessment as the Council may deem necessary to secure a just
apportionment of benefit to the lots, parts of lots and parcels of benefited property. Thereafter, the City
Council shall then declare the assessments by resolution, order or ordinance directing the City Recorder
to enter the assessments in a docket called Adocket of city public works liens.@
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.098 NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT.
Thereupon, the City Recorder shall mail notices of assessment in the same manner as provided
herein for notices of proposed assessments.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.099 BENEFITED PROPERTY.
Each lot, part of lot or parcel of land shall be deemed to be benefited by the public improvement to
the full amount of the assessment levied thereon.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.100 ERRORS NOT TO DEFEAT ASSESSMENT; REASSESSMENT.
No assessment shall be deemed invalid by reason of failure to enter the names of the owner of any
lot, part of lot or parcel of land so assessed, or by a mistake in the name of the owner or the entry of a
Finances; Taxes and Fees
87
name other than the name of the owner in the assessment, or in any acts or proceedings connected
therewith. No delays, mistakes, errors or irregularities in any act or proceedings in the construction of
a public improvement shall prejudice or invalidate any final assessment; but the same may be remedied
by subsequent and amended acts or proceedings or, if found by decree of any court to be invalid, the
Council may proceed by ordinances to reassess the property benefited by reason of the construction of
the public improvement in a manner provided by O.R.S. 223.405 to 223.485, inclusive.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.101 RECORD OF MAILING; MISTAKE IN MAILING.
A record may be kept of the mailing of any notice prescribed to be mailed in connection with any
of the proceedings in relation to the proceedings assessing the costs of construction of the public
improvement. Failure to mail, any mistake in mailing of or a mistake in the notice, shall not be fatal
when notice is posted as herein required.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.102 PROCEEDINGS PRESUMED REGULAR.
In any action, suit or proceeding in any court concerning any assessment of property or for the
collection of the assessment, all proceedings connected therewith shall be presumed to be regular and
to have been done in accordance with the methods and provisions herein set forth.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.103 DOCKETING OF LIENS; PRIORITY OF LIENS.
The docket of the city public improvements liens shall contain the date of entry, the number or
letter of each lot assessed and the number or letter of the block, the name of the addition or additions of
which it is a part, and a description of each unplatted tract or parcel of land, and the name of the owner,
or the entry of a name other than that of the true owner in the lien docket, shall not render void any
assessment, nor in any way affect the lien of the city on the property described in the docket. The
docket of city public improvements liens is a public writing, and the original or certified copies of any
matter authorized to be entered therein are entitled to the force and effect thereof, and from the date of
entry therein of any assessment upon a lot or part thereof, the sum so entered is to be deemed a lien
thereon, which lien shall have priority over all other liens or encumbrances thereon whatsoever to the
extent allowed by law.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.104 PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS.
Tillamook - Administration
88
All assessments shall be due and payable on and after 20 days from the date of the mailing of
notice of assessment. Any owner of any property so assessed, at any time within 20 days after notice
of the assessment is given, may file with the City Recorder a written application to pay the assessment
in installments. Interest on installments shall commence 20 days from the date of mailing of the notice
of assessment.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.105 APPLICATION FOR INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS.
The written application shall state that the applicant and property owner does thereby waive all
irregularities or defects, jurisdictional or otherwise, in the proceedings to make the public improvement
for which the assessment is levied and in the apportionment of the costs thereof. The application shall
provide that the applicant and property owner agrees to pay the assessment in 20 semiannual
installments (or any other number of installment payments as the Council by resolution may prescribe),
with interest at the current rate of interest for commercial loans or the rate of a bond sale, whichever
the City Council deems appropriate on all of the assessment which has not been paid, plus 0.5% as an
installment application fee. The application shall also contain a statement by lot or block, or other
convenient description of the property of the applicant assessed for the improvement. No assessment
shall be deemed invalid, nor shall any application be refused, for installment payment of assessment in
the event the assessment shall be greater than the amount of assessed valuation as disclosed on the tax
records of the county, at the time of assessment. Also, an application under ' 35.111(C) shall be
considered a separate application here for each lot or parcel such that a separate installment fee
described here shall be charged.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.106 RECORDS OF INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS.
The City Recorder shall prepare records for installment payment of the public improvement
assessments, and the applications received for each assessment shall be kept separate. The City
Recorder shall further enter under separate heads for each public improvement the date of filing of each
application, the name of the applicant, the description of the property and the amount of assessment
shown in the application.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.107 DOCKETING OF ASSESSMENT LIENS; MANNER OF PAYMENT.
(A) After expiration of the time for filing the application for installment payment of assessment,
the City Recorder shall enter in a docket kept for that purpose a description of each lot or part of lot or
parcel of land, or other property against which the assessment is made, bears or is chargeable, for the
cost of the improvement, with the name of the owner and the amount of the unpaid assessment. This
docket shall stand thereafter as a lien docket for costs assessed and levied in favor of the city on the
unpaid assessments at the current rate of interest for commercial loans or the rate of bond sale,
whichever is deemed appropriate by the City Council against each lot or parcel of land or other
property, until the assessment and interest are paid.
Finances; Taxes and Fees
89
(B) All unpaid assessments and interest are a lien on each lot or parcel of land or other property,
respectively, in favor of the city and shall have priority over all other liens, to the extent allowed by
law, and encumbrances whatsoever, and shall be payable semiannually for ten successive years, unless
otherwise prescribed by the Council, to the city by the owner of each lot, part of lot or parcel of land
assessed for the public improvement whose application to pay the assessments of the improvement has
been filed as herein provided. The first payment shall be due and payable at the expiration of six
months from the date of the assessment in the public works lien docket, and subsequent payments and
like amounts at the expiration of each semi-annual period thereafter.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.108 DOCKET OF ENTRIES OF PAYMENTS DUE AND PAYMENTS MADE.
The City Recorder shall, when installments and interest thereon are due, make the proper entry of
the installment and interest, and notify the property owner that the installment and interest are due.
However, failure of any owner to receive the notification shall not prevent collection of the
installments. The City Recorder or other authorized city officer shall issue a receipt to the person
paying the installment and interest and shall file duplicates of the receipts with the City Recorder or
other city officer designated by the City Council; and proper entries shall be made on the city public
improvement lien docket showing all payments made thereon. It is further provided that any time after
application for installment payments shall have been made, any owner of any property against which
the assessment is made and lien docketed may pay to the City Recorder the whole amount of the
assessment for which the lien is docketed, together with the full amount of interest and costs accrued
thereon to date of payment, and upon payment thereof the City Recorder shall enter upon the public
improvement lien docket the fact and date of the payment and that the lien is discharged.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.109 DISPOSITION OF PAYMENTS ON ASSESSMENTS.
The City Recorder, upon receiving any funds for the public improvement assessments, shall
deposit the funds per the public improvement resolution.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.110 ENFORCEMENT OF LIENS.
In addition to any other remedy available and all methods in this subchapter for the enforcement
and collection of assessments made, payment shall be enforced in the manner in O.R.S. 223.505 to
223.650, inclusive.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
Tillamook - Administration
90
' 35.111 SEGREGATION OF ASSESSMENTS.
(A) Whenever property which has been assessed as an entire tract or parcel is subsequently
divided into two or more lots or parcels, any person having an ownership interest in any portion of the
property divided may make application to the City Council for a segregation of the assessment lien. In
cases where the City Council deems a segregation to be appropriate, fair and equitable to the city and
all other property owners, it shall make the final determination as to the amounts of the assessment lien
to be segregated and placed upon each parcel involved in each segregation procedure.
(B) Applications for the segregation of assessment liens shall be on forms provided by the city.
The form shall contain, among other items, the following:
(1) A legal description of the original tract, either by lot and block or metes and bounds, as
the case may be;
(2) Legal descriptions of each parcel or tract after the original tract is divided;
(3) The square foot area of each parcel or tract;
(4) Registered surveyor’s map which shows the location of each tract with legal descriptions
and square footage of each tract;
(5) Names, addresses and telephone numbers of all persons, firms and corporations having an
interest, legal or equitable, as owners, lessee, mortgagee, beneficiary under trust deed, or otherwise, as
to each parcel or tract;
(6) Copies of contracts, deeds and other documents and instruments executed to effect a
division of the original parcel;
(7) Competent appraisals or other evidence satisfactory to the City Council disclosing the fair
cash market value of each tract;
(8) Every person, firm and corporation having an interest, legal or equitable in all tracts
which comprise the original tract shall join in the application for segregation;
(9) A waiver of any irregularity in any part of the proceedings resulting in the assessment
lien, including the manner, form, procedure and amount of lien, and the amount of the lien is
acknowledged as a valid and subsisting lien against the property;
Finances; Taxes and Fees
91
(10) Acknowledgment that even though the full amount of the prorated portion of an
assessment lien is paid with respect to the parcel or tract divided and segregated from the original tract,
the property which is the subject of the application for segregation is still subject to the obligations of
the bond issue in existence for the financing of the project which gave rise to the assessment lien,
including but not limited to the city’s obligation to cause to be levied taxes on all property, including
the applicants’ segregated property, to pay the principal and interest on the existing bond indebtedness;
and
(11) Agreement that the entire amount of the portion of the assessment lien found under
division (A) above to be segregated and placed upon the parcel divided from the original tract, will be
paid by applicants upon the final determination’s being made by the City Council.
(C) (1) An application under this section shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $250.
The amount of the fee may be subsequently or later revised by resolution of the City Council.
(2) An application under this section shall be also considered a separate application under
' 35.105 for each lot or parcel. A separate installment payment application fee of 0.5% of the original
assessment shall be charged for each additional parcel or lot created.
(D) No application for segregation of an assessment lien shall be considered or approved by the
City Council if any of the following exist:
(1) The assessment lien on the original parcel or tract is in default in payment of principal or
interest, or the property or the owners or possessors thereof are in violation of any zoning, land use or
building laws, ordinances or regulations;
(2) The existence of, or threatened raising of, a question of the validity of an assessment lien
by anyone having an interest in the tract or parcel on which the lien is sought to be segregated;
(3) The existence of litigation pertaining either directly or indirectly to the validity of the
assessment lien;
(4) Failure of the applicant to waive any irregularity in any part of the proceedings which
resulted in the assessment lien, including the manner, form, procedure and amount of lien, and/or
failure to acknowledge as valid and subsisting the assessment lien against the original parcel or tract;
(5) Failure of the applicant to acknowledge and agree that, even though the full amount of the
prorated portion of the assessment lien is paid with respect to the tract divided from the original parcel,
the property which is the subject of the application for segregation of an assessment lien is still subject
to the obligations of the bond issue in existence for the financing of the project which gave rise to the
assessment lien, including but not limited to the city’s obligation to cause to be levied taxes on all
property, including the applicants’ property, to pay the principal and interest on the bond issue;
(6) Any division or partition of the original parcel of property which would be contrary to or
in violation of any zoning, land use or building laws, ordinances, rules or regulations;
Tillamook - Administration
92
(7) Any division which would leave a splinter or unbuildable lot, or which may prejudice the
city’s security for payment of principal or interest on the bond issue;
(8) Failure of applicants to furnish the required information or to execute the application in
the form required; or
(9) Any fact or condition which the City Council finds may prejudice the interest of the city.
(E) Upon consideration of an application, the City Council, upon finding that divisions (E)(1)
through (E)(3) apply, shall by resolution order the City Recorder to discharge the portion of the
assessment lien apportioned to the subject property upon receipt of payment to the city of the amount
determined and set forth in the resolution by the City Council:
(1) The application meets the requirements of this section;
(2) The application may be granted as requested, or as may be amended, without prejudice to
the rights and security of the city; and
(3) The segregation portion of the assessment lien apportioned to the property which is the
subject of the application is determined to be in a specified amount.
(F) In the event the City Council determines that an application for segregation should be denied
because the interests of the city may be prejudiced, appropriate notation thereof shall be made in the
minutes.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.112 CONSISTENCY WITH STATE LAW.
Insofar as possible, this subchapter shall be construed to be consistent with O.R.S. 310.140 et seq.
and State Constitution, Article XI, Section 11b.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
' 35.113 CONSTRUCTION AND INTERPRETATION.
The headings of the sections or divisions of this subchapter are intended for information only and
shall not be used to interpret section or division contents. The city shall be the sole interpreter of this
subchapter. The city expressly does not adopt any prior interpretation of any definitions, phrases or
words used in this subchapter.
(Ord. 1157, passed 9-7-1999)
Finances; Taxes and Fees
93
IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES GENERALLY; REQUIREMENTS FOR DEVELOPER
' 35.130 AGREEMENT FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
Before a land divider or other developer can receive approval for the improvement of land, he or
she shall execute and file with the City Recorder an agreement between himself or herself and the city
specifying the period B following approval B within which he or she or his or her agent or contractor
shall complete all improvement work required by or pursuant to the applicable city plans, policies and
laws, and providing that, if he or she shall fail to complete the work within the period, the city may
complete the work and recover the full cost and expense thereof from the developer. The agreement
shall also provide for reimbursement of the city by the developer for the cost of inspection by the City
Engineer. The agreement may also provide for an extension of time under conditions therein specified.
(1977 Code, ' 2-6) (Ord. 911, passed 12-5-1977)
' 35.131 BOND.
(A) The land divider or other developer shall file with the agreement, to assure his or her full and
faithful performance thereof, one of the following:
(1) A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state;
(2) A person bond cosigned by at least one additional person who shall not be related to the
developer by blood or affinity. The developer and cosigner shall submit evidence of financial
responsibility, and the financial resources of those signing the bond shall provide reasonable assurances
of the ability of the developer to proceed in accordance with the agreement; or
(3) Cash.
(B) The assurance of full and faithful performance shall be in a form approved by the City
Attorney and for a sum approved by the City Manager as sufficient to cover the cost of the
improvements, engineering, inspection and incidental expenses, and to cover replacement and repair of
existing streets and other public improvements damaged in the development of the land. This shall not
be construed to include normal wear and tear on existing public facilities which occurs from any lawful
use of vehicles and equipment. Notification to the developer of the city of the damage shall be within
210 days from the completion of the project. Completion of improvement work will not be assumed
until inspected and accepted by the city. A bond agreement for a development may terminate after one
year from the inspection or acceptance of the project. Acceptance of a particular portion of the project
for a declining bond agreement may be authorized by the city.
(C) If the developer fails to complete the improvement work in accordance with the provisions of
this subchapter and other requirements of the city and the city has completed the work, or if the
developer shall fail to reimburse the city for the cost of inspection, engineering and incidental expenses
and to cover cost of replacement and repair of existing streets or other improvements damaged in the
development of the land, the city shall call on the surety for reimbursement, or shall appropriate from
Tillamook - Administration
94
any cash deposits funds for reimbursement. In any case, if the amount of surety bond or cash deposit
exceeds the cost and expense incurred by the city, it shall release the remainder; and if the amount of
the surety bond or cash deposit is less than the cost and expense incurred by the city, the developer
shall be liable to the city for the difference.
(1977 Code, ' 2-6) (Ord. 911, passed 12-5-1977)
' 35.132 IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURE.
(A) In addition to other requirements, improvements installed in the city by a developer either as a
requirement of the city or at his or her own option shall conform to the requirements of this subchapter,
the Superintendent of Streets and applicable city plans, policies and laws. In the event of a conflict
between this subchapter and the APWA Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction. This
subchapter shall take precedence.
(B) The improvements shall be installed in accordance with the following procedure:
(1) Work shall not begin until plans have been checked for adequacy and approved by the
City Manager and Street Superintendent. To the extent necessary for evaluation of the land
development proposal, the plans may be required before approval of the plan of development, such as
the tentative plan of a subdivision;
(2) Work shall not begin until the city has been notified at least 24 hours in advance; and if
work is discontinued for two weeks or more without reasonable cause and/or explanation by the
developer, it shall not be resumed until the city has been notified;
(3) Improvements shall be constructed under the inspection and to the satisfaction of the city.
The city may require changes in typical sections and details in the public interest if unusual conditions
arise during construction to warrant the change;
(4) Underground utilities, sanitary sewers and storm drains installed in streets shall be
constructed prior to the surfacing of the streets or as specifically set forth in the plans. Stubs for
service connections for underground utilities and sanitary sewers shall be placed to a length obviating
the necessity for disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made; and
(5) A map showing public improvements as built shall be filed with the City Manager upon
completion of the improvements.
(1977 Code, ' 2-6) (Ord. 911, passed 12-5-1977)
' 35.133 IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
Improvements to be installed as part of a land development at the expense of a land developer are
as follows.
(A) Streets. Streets shall conform to the specifications of applicable plans, policies and laws of
Finances; Taxes and Fees
95
the city. These specifications include location, grading, width, paving, curbs, gutters and drainage.
The subdivider or other land developer shall improve the extension of all streets within his or her
development to the centerline of existing streets. This includes any necessary arterial extension to the
development.
(B) Drainage. Drainage of surface water shall be provided as required by applicable plans,
policies and laws.
(C) Structures. Structures specified as necessary by the city for drainage, access and public safety
shall be installed.
(D) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed as required by the City Planning Commission.
(E) Sewers. Sanitary sewer facilities connecting with the existing city sewer system shall be
installed to each building site. When the existing sewage collection lines are inadequate to serve the
proposed development, the expense of improving the lines shall be shared by the developer. The
developer’s share in the improvements shall be determined by the Planning Commission on the basis of
percentage of use by the development in question. No septic tanks or cesspools shall be permitted
within the city except in compliance with state standards as enforced by the Council and where the
Planning Commission finds subsurface sewage disposal acceptable and sewer connection impractical.
(F) Water. Water mains and fire hydrants of design, layout and locations approved by the Water
Superintendent as conforming to the City Water Commission standards shall be installed and connected
with the existing city water system. When the existing water distribution lines are inadequate to serve
the proposed development, the expense of improving the lines shall be shared by the developer. The
developer’s share in the improvements shall be determined by the Water Commission. If the Planning
Commission is advised by the Water Commission that providing hookups to the city water system is
not feasible due to extreme distance or soil conditions, approval may be given for a substitute system.
(G) Street trees. Street trees may be required by the Planning Commission independently or upon
recommendation of the Tree Committee upon its adoption.
(H) Monuments. Monuments shall be placed at all lot and block corners, angle points of curves in
streets, at intermediate points and shall be of material, size and length as required by state law for
subdivisions. Monuments that are disturbed before improvements are completed by the developer shall
be replaced to conform to the requirements of state law for subdivisions.
(I) Underground utility and service facilities. The placement of all utility lines, including but not
limited to those required for electric, communication, lighting and cable television services and related
facilities, shall be the responsibility of the developer and may be placed underground if he or she so
wishes.
(J) Street light standards. Street lights shall be installed in locations recommended by the
Planning Commission in accordance with applicable city plans, policies and laws.
(K) Street signs. Street name signs shall be installed at street intersections. Other signs may be
Tillamook - Administration
96
required upon the recommendation of the city staff or Planning Commission. Streets shall be dedicated
and named in accordance with appropriate state laws.
(1977 Code, ' 2-6) (Ord. 911, passed 12-5-1977)
' 35.134 APPEALS.
A developer or any interested person may appeal a determination made in the enforcement of this
subchapter by the following procedure: a determination made by a member of the staff of the city or an
agent or designee of the city may be appealed to the City Manager, who then will rule on the matter. If
the appellant does not concur with the ruling of the City Manager or if the City Manager fails to rule
within 30 days after the matter is brought to his or her attention, the appellant may make written appeal
to the City Council of the city. The written appeal must be made within ten days following the ruling
by the City Manager or following expiration of the 30 days.
(1977 Code, ' 2-6) (Ord. 911, passed 12-5-1977)
REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICTS
' 35.150 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning, and in addition to their usual meanings.
APPLICANT. A person, as defined in this section, who is required or chooses to finance some or
all of the cost of street, water or sewer improvement that is available to provide service to property,
other than property owned by the person, and who applies to the city for reimbursement for the expense
of the improvement. The APPLICANT may be the city.
CITY. The City of Tillamook, its City Council, employees, agents and/or assigns.
CITY ENGINEER. The person holding the position of City Engineer or any individual
designated or providing the necessary engineering services by the Council or City Manager to perform
the duties set out within this subchapter.
COUNCIL. The City Council of the city, composed of its elected or appointed Councilors.
PERSON. A natural person, the person’s heirs, executors, administrators or assigns; a firm,
partnership, corporation, association or legal entity, its or their successors or assigns; and any agent,
employee or any representative thereof.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT and PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. Any construction, reconstruction
or upgrading of water, sanitary sewer or stormwater line; public street (including bicycle lane) or
sidewalk or under-grounding of public utilities.
Finances; Taxes and Fees
97
REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT. The agreement between an applicant and the city that is
authorized by the Council and executed by the City Manager, providing for the installation of and
payment for reimbursement district public improvements.
REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICT. The area that is determined by the Council to derive a benefit
from the construction of public improvements, financed in whole or in part by the applicant, and
includes property that has the opportunity to utilize the improvements.
REIMBURSEMENT FEE. The fee required to be paid by a resolution of the Council and the
reimbursement agreement. The Council resolution and reimbursement agreement shall determine the
boundaries of the reimbursement district and shall determine the methodology for imposing a fee that
considers the cost of reimbursing the applicant for financing the construction of public improvements
within the reimbursement district. The term REIMBURSEMENT FEE does not include any local
improvement district assessment or any system development charge established by state law or
established by the city.
SEWER IMPROVEMENT. A sewer, a sewer pump station or sewer line improvement
conforming with city standards and including but not limited to extending sewer line to property, other
than property owned by the applicant, so that sewer service can be provided for the other property
without further extension of the line.
STORMWATER IMPROVEMENT. A stormwater or stormwater line improvement conforming
with city standards and including but not limited to extending a stormwater line to property, other than
property owned by the applicant, so that stormwater disposal for the property can be provided without
further extension of the line.
STREET IMPROVEMENT. A street or street improvement conforming with city standards and
including but not limited to street, storm drain, curb, gutter, sidewalk, bike path, traffic control device,
street tree, light and sign and public right-of-way.
UTILIZE. To use or benefit from a public improvement, to apply for a building or other permit
that will allow for the use or increase in the use of a public improvement or to connect to a public
improvement.
WATER IMPROVEMENT. A water or water line improvement conforming with city standards
and including but not limited to extending water line to property, other than properly owned by the
applicant, so that water service can be provided for the other property without further extension of the
line.
(Ord. 1241, passed 4-20-2009; Ord. 1254, passed 1-3-2011)
' 35.151 APPLICATION FOR A REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICT.
(A) Any applicant who finances some or all of the cost of a public improvement available to
provide service or benefit to property other than property owned by that person may, by written
application filed with the City Manager, request the city establish a reimbursement district. The
Tillamook - Administration
98
improvement must be in a size greater than that which would otherwise ordinarily be required or must
be available to provide service to property other than that owned by the applicant. Examples include
but shall not be limited to:
(1) Full-street improvements instead of half-street improvements;
(2) Off-site sidewalks;
(3) Connection of street sections for continuity;
(4) Extension of water lines;
(5) Extension of sewer lines;
(6) Sewer pump station;
(7) Parks; and
(8) Under-grounding of public utilities.
(B) The application may be submitted to the city prior to the installation of the public
improvement.
(C) The application shall include the following:
(1) A description of the location, type, size and cost of the public improvements to be eligible
for reimbursement;
(2) A map showing the properties to be included in the proposed reimbursement district; the
zoning district for the properties; the front footage and/or square footage of the properties, or similar
data necessary for calculating the apportionment of the cost; and a listing of the property or properties
owned by the applicant;
(3) The actual or estimated cost of the improvements as evidenced by bid, projection of the
cost of labor and materials, or other evidence satisfactory to the City Engineer;
(4) The estimated date of completion of the public improvements;
(5) The applicant may request a discretionary annual fee adjustment, which, if granted, will
be administered pursuant to ' 35.155(E);
(6) An acknowledgment by the applicant that the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and
hold harmless the city, its elected officials, appointed officials, employees and agents from any and all
claims that may arise from the creation or administration of the district. This acknowledgment shall
release the city, its elected officials, appointed officials, employees and agents from any and all claims
that reimbursement fees were improperly collected, collected in the wrong amount, or not collected at
Finances; Taxes and Fees
99
all, for any reason, including negligence on the part of the city, its elected officials, appointed officials,
employees and agents. The applicant shall acknowledge that the applicant accepts all risk that
reimbursement will not occur, or will not occur in the amount or within the time expected by the
applicant; and
(7) The applicant shall provide proof of ownership in the form of a description of the type of
company (corporation, LLC, partnership and the like) as well as the designation of the authorized
signatories.
(D) All applications must be accompanied by a fee in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of
administrative review and notice required by this subchapter as set by the Council resolution.
(E) If an application is submitted after the construction of the public improvements, the
application must also include the date the city accepted the public improvements and evidence of the
actual cost of the improvements shown by receipt, invoice or other documents. An application will not
be complete until all the information is submitted to the city. Following the construction, the applicant
shall provide the following information for review and approval by the city: letter of donated capital
showing the cost of the installation, a warranty deed releasing all interest in the improvements, a lien
release from the contractor and applicant stating that all contractors, subcontractors and suppliers have
been paid, an acceptance letter from the Engineer or city stating the improvements are in accordance
with city standards. The applicant shall provide lien releases from all contractors, subcontractors and
suppliers as a strict condition precedent to city acceptance of a reimbursement district.
(F) If an application is submitted prior to the construction of the improvements, the application
must be accompanied by an estimate of the cost of the improvements as evidenced by bid, projection or
other data. The application must also include the estimated date of completion of the public
improvements. An application will not be complete until all the information is submitted to the city.
The applicant shall provide a bond for 200% of the cost for any improvement located within an
easement or on private property.
(Ord. 1241, passed 4-20-2009; Ord. 1254, passed 1-3-2011)
' 35.152 REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT REPORT.
(A) The City Engineer or designee shall review the application for the establishment of a
reimbursement district and evaluate whether a district should be established. The City Engineer or
designee may require the submittal of other relevant information from the applicant in order to assist in
the evaluation.
(B) The City Engineer or designee shall prepare a written report for the Council, considering and
making recommendations concerning the following factors:
(1) Whether the applicant will finance some or all of the cost of a public improvement,
thereby making service available to property, other than property owned by the applicant;
(2) The boundary, size and area proposed to be included in the reimbursement district;
Tillamook - Administration
100
(3) The actual or estimated cost of the public improvements within the area of the proposed
reimbursement district and the portion of the cost for which the applicant should be reimbursed;
(4) A methodology for spreading the cost among the properties within the reimbursement
district and, where appropriate, defining a unit for applying the reimbursement fee to property that
may, with city approval, be partitioned, altered, modified or subdivided at some future date. The
methodology should include consideration of the cost of the improvements, prior contributions by
property owners, the value of the unused capacity, rate-making principles employed to finance public
improvements and other factors deemed relevant by the City Engineer or designee. Prior contributions
by property owners will only be considered if the contribution was for the same type of improvement
and at the same location (example: a sewer-related contribution in the same location as a sewer
improvement would be considered; a water-related contribution in the same location as a sewer
improvement would not be considered);
(5) The amount to be charged by the city for administration of the district by the city. The
administration fee shall be fixed by the Council and will be included in the resolution approving and
forming the reimbursement district. If the applicant is other than the city, the administration fee is due
and payable to the city at the time the reimbursement agreement in ' 35.155(B) is signed. If the city is
the applicant, the administration fee shall be included in the reimbursement fee and is due and payable
at the time there is an obligation to pay the reimbursement fee as required by ' 35.159;
(6) The period of time for the right to reimbursement of not greater than ten years. At the
end of the ten-year reimbursement period, the reimbursement agreement will terminate;
(7) Whether the public improvements will or have met city standards; and
(8) Whether it is fair and in the public interest to create a reimbursement district.
(Ord. 1241, passed 4-20-2009; Ord. 1254, passed 1-3-2011)
' 35.153 AMOUNT TO BE REIMBURSED.
(A) A reimbursement fee shall be computed by the city for all properties within the reimbursement
district, excluding property owned by or dedicated to the city or the state, that have the opportunity to
utilize the public improvements, including the property of the applicant for formation of a
reimbursement district. The fee shall be calculated separately for each public improvement. The
applicant for formation of the reimbursement district shall not be reimbursed for the portion of the
reimbursement fee computed for the property owned by the applicant.
(B) The cost to be reimbursed to the applicant, if other than the city, shall be limited to the cost of
construction, engineering and off-site easement and right-of-way acquisition as previously approved by
the city. If the applicant is the city, the costs to be reimbursed shall also include an administration cost
and all costs associated with the acquisition of easements and rights-of-way. Engineering shall include
surveying and inspection and shall not exceed 15% of eligible construction costs. If the applicant is
other than the city, the costs to be reimbursed for right-of-way acquisition shall be limited to a value
Finances; Taxes and Fees
101
approved by the city and in reasonable conformance with the value calculated by an appraisal for an
easement but no greater than one-third of the land value/square foot as determined by the taxing
district.
(C) No reimbursement shall be allowed for financing costs, permits or fees required for
construction permits, land or easements dedicated by the applicant, costs that are eligible for systems
development charge credits, project management fees or any costs that cannot be clearly documented.
(D) Reimbursement for legal expenses shall be allowed only to the extent that the expenses relate
to the acquisition of off-site right-of-way or to the preparation and filing of an application for
reimbursement, and to working with the city through the Engineer’s report and formation public
hearing stages of an application.
(Ord. 1241, passed 4-20-2009; Ord. 1254, passed 1-3-2011)
' 35.154 PUBLIC HEARING.
(A) Within a reasonable time after the City Engineer has completed the report required in '
35.152, the Council shall hold an informational public hearing in which any person shall be given the
opportunity to comment on the proposed reimbursement district. Because formation of the
reimbursement district does not result in an assessment against property or lien against property, the
public hearing is for informational purposes only and is not subject to mandatory termination because
of remonstrances. The Council has the sole discretion after the public hearing to decide whether a
resolution approving and forming the reimbursement district shall be adopted.
(B) Not less than ten or more than 30 days prior to any public hearing held pursuant to this
subchapter, the applicant and all owners of property within the proposed district shall be notified of the
hearing and the purpose thereof. This notification shall be accomplished by either regular mail or
personal service. If notification is accomplished by mail, notice shall be mailed not less than 13 days
prior to the hearing. Notice shall be deemed effective on the date that the letter of notification is
mailed. Failure of the applicant or any affected property owner to be so notified shall not invalidate or
otherwise affect any reimbursement district resolution or the Council’s action to approve the same.
(C) If a reimbursement district is formed prior to construction of the improvements, a second
public hearing, subject to the same notification requirements, shall be held after the improvements have
been accepted by the city. At that time, the Council at its discretion may modify the resolution to
reflect the actual cost of the improvements.
(Ord. 1241, passed 4-20-2009; Ord. 1254, passed 1-3-2011)
' 35.155 CITY COUNCIL ACTION.
(A) After the first public hearing held pursuant to ' 35.154, the Council shall approve, reject or
modify the recommendations contained in the City Engineer’s report. The Council’s decision shall be
embodied in a resolution. If a reimbursement district is established, the resolution shall include the
City Engineer’s report as approved or modified, and specify that payment of the reimbursement fee, as
Tillamook - Administration
102
determined for each property, is a precondition to receipt of any city permit applicable to development
of that property.
(B) When the applicant is other than the city, the resolution shall instruct the City Manager to
enter into an agreement with the applicant pertaining to the reimbursement district improvements. The
agreement shall be contingent upon the improvements being accepted by the city. The agreement, at a
minimum, shall contain the following provision:
(1) The public improvements shall meet all applicable city standards;
(2) The amount of the potential reimbursement the applicant may receive along with an
acknowledgment that the total amount of any reimbursement will not exceed the actual cost of the
public improvements;
(3) The annual fee adjustment;
(4) The applicant shall guarantee, with a surety bond, the public improvements for a period of
12 months after the date of city acceptance;
(5) The applicant shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all losses,
claims, damage, judgments or other costs or expense arising as a result of or related to the city’s
establishment of the district. The applicant shall acknowledge that the city is not obligated to collect
the reimbursement fee from affected property owners, and that the applicant assumes all risk of every
kind that the amount reimbursed may not be as much as anticipated, or that any particular
reimbursement fee may not be collected by the city. The applicant has a private cause of action for
collection of a reimbursement fee against any person obligated to pay a reimbursement fee, and the
applicant shall bear the entire cost of an action to collect the reimbursement fee, without any right to
contribution by the city; and
(6) Other provisions as the Council determines necessary and proper to carry out the
provisions of this subchapter.
(C) If a reimbursement district is established by the Council, the date of the formation of the
district shall be the date that the Council adopts the resolution forming the district.
(D) The Council resolution and reimbursement agreement shall determine the boundaries of the
reimbursement district and shall determine the methodology for imposing a fee that considers the cost
of reimbursing the applicant for financing the construction of a public improvement within the
reimbursement district.
(E) Where the city is the applicant, City Council by resolution shall address and decide the
elements in this section.
(Ord. 1241, passed 4-20-2009; Ord. 1254, passed 1-3-2011)
' 35.156 NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF RESOLUTION.
Finances; Taxes and Fees
103
The city shall notify all property owners within the district and the applicant of the adoption of a
reimbursement district resolution. The notice shall include a copy of the resolution, the date it was
adopted and a short explanation of when the property owner is obligated to pay the reimbursement fee
and the amount of the fee, and if there will be any annual adjustments to that fee.
(Ord. 1241, passed 4-20-2009; Ord. 1254, passed 1-3-2011)
' 35.157 RECORDING THE RESOLUTION.
The City Recorder shall cause notice of the formation and nature of the reimbursement district to
be filed in the office of the County Clerk so as to provide notice to potential purchasers of property
within the district. The city shall also record the obligation of each benefited property to pay a
reimbursement fee in the city’s lien docket. The recording shall not create a lien. Failure to make this
recording shall not affect the legality of the resolution or the obligation to pay the reimbursement fee.
(Ord. 1241, passed 4-20-2009; Ord. 1254, passed 1-3-2011)
' 35.158 CONTESTING THE REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICT.
Any legal action intended to contest the formation of a reimbursement district or the
reimbursement fee shall be filed within 60 days of the Council adoption of a resolution relating to the
application. Legal challenge shall only be by writ of review pursuant to O.R.S. 34.010 through 34.100.
A decision by the city to create a reimbursement district is a quasi judicial decision.
(Ord. 1241, passed 4-20-2009; Ord. 1254, passed 1-3-2011)
' 35.159 OBLIGATION TO PAY REIMBURSEMENT FEE.
(A) The applicant for a permit related to property within any reimbursement district shall pay the
city, in addition to any other applicable fees and charges, the reimbursement fee established by the
Council if, within the time specified in the resolution establishing the district, the person applies for
and receives approval from the city for any of the following activities:
(1) A building permit for a new building;
(2) Building permit, for any addition, modification, repair or alteration of a building, which
exceeds 25% of the value of the building within any 12-month period. The value of the building shall
be the amount shown on the most current records of the County Department of Assessment and
Taxation for the building’s real market value. This division (A)(2) shall not apply to repairs made
necessary due to damage or destruction by fire or other natural disaster;
(3) Any alteration, modification or change in the use of real property, that increases the
number of parking spaces required under city standards in effect at the time of permit application;
(4) Connection to or use of water, sanitary sewer, stormwater or street improvements, if the
Tillamook - Administration
104
reimbursement district is based on that improvement; and
(5) Approval of a land partition or final subdivision plat.
(B) The city’s determination of who shall pay the reimbursement fee is final. Neither the city nor
any elected official, appointed official, agent or employee of the city shall be liable for payment of any
reimbursement fee or portion thereof as a result of this determination, or as a result of failure, for any
reason, of the city to collect a reimbursement fee.
(C) A permit applicant whose property is subject to payment of a reimbursement fee receives a
benefit from the construction of street improvements, regardless of whether access is taken or provided
directly onto the street at any time. Nothing in this subchapter is intended to modify or limit the
authority of the city to provide or require access management.
(D) No person shall be required to pay the reimbursement fee on an application or upon property
for which the reimbursement fee has been previously paid, unless the payment was for a different type
of improvement. The reimbursement fee must be paid in full when a permit or land division approval,
including a final subdivision plat, is issued or approved. Where approval is given as specified in
division (A) above, but no permit is requested or issued, then the requirement to pay the reimbursement
fee lapses if the underlying approval lapses.
(E) Neither the city, the county, this state nor the United States shall be required to pay a
reimbursement fee without the consent of the governmental agency.
(F) The right of reimbursement shall not extend beyond ten years from the district formation date.
The applicant solely and exclusively bears the risk that the city may not collect from benefited property
owners their respective share of the cost of the improvements, and that the total amount collected may
be less than anticipated. Further, the applicant acknowledges that by utilizing the procedures of this
subchapter that the city shall be under no obligation to institute legal proceedings to collect unpaid
amounts that may be due to the applicant. The applicant must institute and pay for the legal
proceedings, and the city will not be obligated to share or pay the litigation costs associated with the
proceedings.
(Ord. 1241, passed 4-20-2009; Ord. 1254, passed 1-3-2011)
' 35.160 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
Public improvements installed pursuant to reimbursement district agreements shall become and
remain the sole property of the city. More than one public improvement may be the subject of a
reimbursement district. A property may be subject to more than one reimbursement district for distinct
public improvements.
(Ord. 1241, passed 4-20-2009; Ord. 1254, passed 1-3-2011)
' 35.161 ADMINISTRATION; COLLECTION AND PAYMENT.
Finances; Taxes and Fees
105
(A) The applicant shall receive all reimbursement collected by the city for reimbursement district
public improvements. The reimbursement shall be delivered to the applicant for as long as the
reimbursement district agreement is in effect.
(B) The right of reimbursement is assignable and transferable after written notice is delivered to
the city, advising the city to whom future payments are to be made, and after approval of assignment
by the city.
(C) The city shall charge an administrative fee to cover the cost of managing the reimbursement
district. This fee shall be updated periodically by the Council but shall be established at $75.
(D) The city shall establish separate accounts for each reimbursement district. Upon receipt of a
reimbursement fee, the city shall cause a record to be made of that property’s payment and remit the
fee to the person who requested establishment of the reimbursement district or their assignee within 60
days of receipt of the reimbursements minus a $75 administration fee.
(E) The reimbursement fee is in lieu of a local improvement district charge for the improvements
installed pursuant to the reimbursement district agreement. The reimbursement fee is not intended to
replace or limit any other fee or charge collected by the city.
(F) The applicant shall provide and update applicant’s current address to which reimbursement
payments are to be sent.
(Ord. 1241, passed 4-20-2009; Ord. 1254, passed 1-3-2011)
' 35.162 CONSISTENCY WITH STATE LAW.
Insofar as possible, this subchapter shall be construed to be consistent with O.R.S. 310.140 et seq.
and State Constitution, Article XI, Section 11b.
(Ord. 1241, passed 4-20-2009; Ord. 1254, passed 1-3-2011)
' 35.163 CONSTRUCTION AND INTERPRETATION.
The headings of the section or divisions of this subchapter are intended for information only and
shall not be used to interpret paragraph contents. The city shall be the sole interpreter of this
subchapter. The city expressly does not adopt any prior interpretation of any definitions, phrases or
words used in this subchapter.
(Ord. 1241, passed 4-20-2009; Ord. 1254, passed 1-3-2011)
Tillamook - Administration
106
MARIJUANA TAX
35.200 DEFINITIONS
MANAGER means the City Manager of the City of Tillamook or his/her designee.
GROSS TAXABLE SALES means the total amount received in money, credits, property or
other consideration from sales of marijuana, medical marijuana and marijuana-infused products that is
subject to the tax imposed by this Ordinance.
MARIJUANA means all parts of the plant of the Cannabis family Moracceae, whether growing
or not; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its resin, as may be defined by the Oregon Revised
Statutes as they currently exist or may from time to time be amended. It does not include the mature
stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any
other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the
resin extracted there from), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination.
OREGON MEDICAL MARIJUANA PROGRAM means the office within the Oregon Health
authority that administers the provisions of ORS 475.300 through 475.346, the Oregon Medical
Marijuana Act, and all policies and procedures pertaining thereto.
PERSON means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association,
club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or any group or combination acting as a unit
including the United States of America, the State of Oregon and any political subdivision thereof, or
the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.
PURCHASER means any person who acquires marijuana from a retail seller for any valuable
consideration.
PURCHASE OR SALE means the retail acquisition or furnishing for consideration by any
person of marijuana within the City. This definition does not include the acquisition or furnishing of
marijuana by a grower or processor to a seller.
REGISTRY IDENTIFICATION CARDHOLDER means a person who has been diagnosed by
an attending physician with a debilitating medical condition and for whom the use of medical
marijuana may mitigate the symptoms or effects of the person’s debilitating medical condition, and
who has been issued a registry identification card by the Oregon Health Authority.
RETAIL SALE means the transfer of goods or services for any valuable consideration. This
definition does not include the transfer or exchange of goods or services between a grower or processor
and a seller.
SELLER means any person who is required to be licensed or has been licensed by the State of
Oregon to provide marijuana or marijuana-infused products to purchasers for money, credit, property
Finances; Taxes and Fees
107
or other consideration.
TAX means either the tax payable by the seller or the aggregate amount of taxes due from a
seller during the period for which the seller is required to report collections under this ordinance
TAXPAYER means any person obligated to account to the City Manager for taxes collected or
to be collected, or from whom a tax is due, under the terms of this ordinance.
35.201 PURPOSE OF THE TAX
For the purpose of the Ordinance, every person who sells marijuana, medical marijuana or
marijuana-infused products in the City of Tillamook is exercising a taxable privilege. The purpose of
the Ordinance is to impose a tax upon the retail sale of marijuana, medical marijuana and marijuanainfused
products.
35.202 LEVY OF TAX
(A) There is hereby levied and shall be paid a tax by every seller exercising the taxable privilege
of selling marijuana and marijuana-infused products as defined in this ordinance.
(B) The amount of tax levied is as follows:
1) Five percent (5%) of the gross sale amount paid to the seller by a registry identification
cardholder.
2) Ten percent (10%) of the gross sale amount paid to the seller of marijuana and marijuanainfused
products by individuals who are not purchasing marijuana under the Oregon
Medical Marijuana Program
3) Upon City Council resolution, the amount of the tax levied may be increased up to twentyfive
percent (25%) of the gross sale amount paid to the seller by a registry identification
cardholder.
4) Upon City Council resolution, the amount of the tax levied may be increased up to twentyfive
percent (25%) of the gross sale amount paid to the seller by individuals who are not
purchasing marijuana under the Oregon Medical Marijuana Program.
(C) The purchaser shall pay the tax to the seller at the time of the purchase or sale of marijuana.
' 35.203 DEDUCTIONS
The following deductions shall be allowed against sales received by the seller providing marijuana:
(A) Refunds of sales actually returned to any purchaser.
Tillamook - Administration
108
(B) Any adjustments in sales which amount to a refund to a purchaser, providing such adjustment
pertains to the actual sale of marijuana or marijuana-infused products and does not include any
adjustments for other services furnished by a seller.
' 35.204 SELLER RESPONSIBLE FOR PAYMENT OF TAX
(A) Every seller shall, on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the month following the end of each
calendar quarter (in the months of April, July, October and January) make a return to the City
Manager on forms provided by the City, specifying the total sales subject to this ordinance and
the amount of tax collected under this ordinance. The seller may request or the City Manager
may establish shorter reporting periods for any seller if the seller or the City Manager deems it
necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax and the City Manager may require further
information in the return relevant to payment of the tax. A return shall not be considered filed
until it is actually received by the City Manager. The quarters are:
First quarter: January, February, March
Second quarter: April, May, June
Third quarter: July, August, September
Fourth quarter: October, November, December
(B) At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the City
Manager. Payments received by the City Manager for application against existing liabilities
will be credited toward the period designated by the taxpayer under conditions that are not
prejudicial to the interest of the City. A condition considered prejudicial is the imminent
expiration of the statute of limitations for a period or periods.
(C) Non-designated payments shall be applied in the order of the oldest liability first, with the
payment credited first toward any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying tax
until the payment is exhausted. Crediting of a payment toward a specific reporting period will
be first applied against any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying tax. If the
City Manager, in her or his sole discretion, determines that an alternative order of payment
application would be in the best interest of the City in a particular tax or factual situation, the
City Manager may order such a change. The City Manager may establish shorter reporting
periods for any seller if the City Manager deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the
tax. The City Manager also may require additional information in the return relevant to
payment of the liability. When a shorter return period is required, penalties and interest shall be
computed according to the shorter return period. Returns and payments are due immediately
upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by sellers pursuant to this
ordinance shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment is made to the City
Manager. A separate trust bank account is not required in order to comply with this provision.
(D) For good cause, the City Manager may extend the time for filing a return or paying the tax for
not more than one month. Further extension may be granted only by the City Council. A seller
to whom an extension is granted shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month on the
amount of tax due, without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed and if the
tax and interest due are not paid by the end of the extension granted, the interest shall become a
part of the tax for computation of penalties prescribed in Section 7.
Finances; Taxes and Fees
109
(E) Every seller required to remit the tax imposed in this ordinance shall be entitled to retain five
percent (5%) of all taxes due to defray the costs of bookkeeping and remittance.
(F) Every seller must keep and preserve in an accounting format established by the City Manager
records of all sales made by the dispensary and such other books or accounts as may be required
by the City Manager. Every seller must keep and preserve for a period of three (3) years all
such books, invoices and other records. The City Manager shall have the right to inspect all
such records at all reasonable times.
' 35.205 PENALTIES AND INTEREST FOR NON-PAYMENT
(A) Any seller who fails to remit any portion of any tax imposed by this ordinance within the time
required shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax.
(B) Any seller who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 60 days
following the date, on which the remittance first became delinquent, shall pay a second
delinquency penalty of fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount
of the tax and the penalty first imposed.
(C) If the City Manager determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is
due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added
thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subparagraphs A and B of this section.
(D) In addition to the penalties imposed, any seller who fails to remit any tax imposed by this
ordinance shall pay interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month or fraction thereof on the
amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became
delinquent until paid.
(E) Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall
become a part of the tax required to be paid.
(F) A seller who fails to remit the tax within the required time may petition the City council for
waiver and refund of the penalty or a portion of it. The Council may, if good cause is shown,
direct a refund of the penalty or a portion of it. Any such hearing will be conducted under the
procedures described in Section 9.
' 35.206 FAILURE TO REPORT AND REMIT TAX-DETERMINATION OF TAX BY '
CITY MANAGER
If any seller should fail to make, within the time provided in this ordinance, any report of the
tax required by this ordinance, the City Manager shall proceed in such manner as deemed best to obtain
facts and information on which to base the estimate of tax due. As soon as the City Manager shall
procure such facts and information as is able to be obtained, upon which to base the assessment of any
Tillamook - Administration
110
tax imposed by this ordinance and payable by any seller, the City Manager shall proceed to determine
and assess against such seller the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this ordinance. In case
such determination is made, the City Manager shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by having
it served personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
seller so assessed at the last known place of address. Such seller may appeal such determination as
provided in Section 9. If no appeal is filed, the City Manager’s determination is final and the amount
thereby is immediately due and payable.
' 35.207 APPEAL
(A) Any seller aggrieved by any decision of the City Manager with respect to the amount of such
tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal
with the City Manager within fifteen (15) days of mailing of the notice of a decision. The City
Manager shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal, as prescribed by the City Council,
and shall give the appellant fifteen (15) days written notice of the time and place of the hearing
before the City Council.
(B) The appellant shall pay a nonrefundable appeal fee to facilitate the appeal. Appeal fees shall be
set at $150 for each decision appealed, and may be adjusted by Resolution of the City Council.
(C) The parties shall be entitled to appear personally and by counsel and to present such facts,
evidence and arguments as may tend to support the respective positions on appeal.
(D) The City Council shall afford the parties an opportunity to be heard at an appeal hearing after
reasonable notice. The City Council shall take such action upon the appeal it sees fit. The City
Council shall at a minimum:
1) At the commencement of the hearing, explain the relevant issues involved in the
hearing, applicable procedures and the burden of proof.
2) At the commencement of the hearing place on the record the substance of any written or
oral ex parte communications concerning any relevant and material fact in issue at the
hearing which was made outside the official proceedings during the pendency of the
proceeding. The parties shall be notified of the substance of the communication and the
right to rebut the communication. Notwithstanding the above, the parties are prohibited
from engaging in ex parte communications with the members of the City Council.
3) Testimony shall be taken upon oath or affirmation of the witnesses.
4) The City Council shall ensure that the record developed at the hearing shows a full and
fair inquiry into the relevant and material facts for consideration for the issues properly
before the City Manager.
5) Written testimony may be submitted under penalty of false swearing for entry into the
record. All written evidence shall be filed with the Assistant City Recorder no less than
five (5) working days before the date of the hearing.
Finances; Taxes and Fees
111
6) The City Council shall hear and consider any records and evidence presented bearing
upon the City Manager’s determination of amount due, and makes findings affirming,
reversing or modifying the determination.
7) Informal disposition may be made of any case by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent
order or default.
(E) The action of the City Manager shall be stayed pending the outcome of an appeal properly filed
pursuant to this section.
(F) Failure to strictly comply with the applicable appeal requirements, including but not limited to
the required elements for the written notice of appeal, time for filing of the notice of appeal, and
payment of the applicable appeal fee, shall constitute jurisdictional defects resulting in the
summary dismissal of the appeal.
(G) The finding of the City Council shall be final and conclusive, and shall be served upon the
appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to
be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice.
' 35.208 REFUNDS
(A) Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once,
or has been erroneously collected or received by the City under this ordinance, it may be
refunded as provided in subparagraph 1. Of this section, provided a claim in writing, stating
under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the
City Manager within one year of the date of the payment. The claim shall be on forms
furnished by the City Manager.
1. The City Manager shall have twenty (20) calendar days from the date of receipt of a
claim to review the claim and make a determination in writing as to the validity of the
claim. The City Manager shall notify the claimant in writing of the City Manager’s
determination. Such notice shall be mailed to the address provided by the claimant on
the claim form. In the event a claim is determined by the City Manager to be a valid
claim, in a manner prescribed by the City Manager a seller may claim a refund, or take
as credit against taxes collected and remitted, the amount overpaid, paid more than once
or erroneously collected or received. The seller shall notify the City Manager of
claimant’s choice no later than fifteen (15) days following the date City Manager mailed
the determination. In the event claimant has not notified the City Manager of claimant’s
choice within the fifteen (15) day period and the seller is still in business, a credit will
be granted against the tax liability for the next reporting period. If the seller is no longer
in business, a refund check will be mailed to claimant at the address provided in the
claim form.
Tillamook - Administration
112
2. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant
established the right by written records showing entitlement to such refund and the City
Manager acknowledged the validity of the claim.
' 35.209 ACTIONS TO COLLECT
Any tax required to be paid by any seller under the provisions of the ordinance shall be deemed
a debt owed by the seller to the City. Any such tax collected by a seller which has not been paid to the
City shall be deemed a debt owed by the seller to the City. Within three years after the tax becomes
payable or within three years after a determination becomes final, the City may bring an action in the
name of the City in the courts of this state, another state or the United States to collect the amount
delinquent and penalties and interest. In lieu of filing an action for the recovery, the City, when taxes
due are more than 30 days delinquent, can submit any outstanding tax to a collection agency. So long
as the City has complied with the provisions set forth in ORS 697.105 (as hereafter amended), in the
event the City turns over a delinquent tax account to a collection agency, it may add to the amount
owing an amount equal to the collection agency fees, not to exceed the greater of fifty dollars ($50.00)
or fifty percent (50%) of the outstanding tax, penalties and interest owing.
' 35.210 CONFIDENTIALITY
Except as otherwise required by law, it shall be unlawful for the City, any officer, employee or
agent to divulge, release or make known in any manner any financial information submitted or
disclosed to the City under the terms of this ordinance. Nothing is this section shall prohibit:
(A) The disclosure of the names and addresses of any person who is operating a licensed
establishment from which marijuana is sold or provided; or
(B) The disclosure of general statistics in a form which would not reveal an individual seller’s
financial information; or
(C) Presentation of evidence to the court, or other tribunal having jurisdiction in the prosecution of
any criminal or civil claim by the City Manager or an appeal from the City Manager for amount
due the City under this ordinance; or
(D) The disclosure of information when such disclosure of conditionally exempt information is
order under public records law procedures; or
(E) The disclosures of records related to a business’ failure to report and remit the tax when the
report or tax is in arrears for over six months or the tax exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000).
The City Council expressly finds and determines that the public interest in disclosure of such
records clearly outweighs the interest in confidentiality under ORS 192.501(5).
Finances; Taxes and Fees
113
' 35.211 AUDIT OF BOOKS, RECORDS OR PERSONS
(A) It shall be the duty of every seller liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax
imposed by this ordinance to keep and preserve, for a period of three years and six months, all
records, books, reports, income tax reports and other matters required by this ordinance as may
be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as the seller may have been liable for the
collection of and payment to the City, which records the City Manager shall have the right to
inspect at all reasonable times as set forth below. Every operator shall maintain records of
marijuana purchase and sales, accounting books and records of income. Sellers must, at a
minimum include a cash receipt and deposit journal and a cash disbursements journal/check
register for all authorized deductions. These records and books shall reconcile to the tax reports
and be auditable. They shall also reconcile to the seller’s income tax reports. If the City
Manager finds the books and records of the seller are deficient in that they do not provide
adequate support for tax reports filed, or the seller’s accounting system is not auditable, it shall
be the responsibility of the seller to improve its accounting system to the satisfaction of the City
Manager.
(B) The City, for the purpose of determining the correctness of any tax return, or for the purpose of
an estimate of taxes due, may examine or may cause to be examined by an agent or
representative designated by the City for that purpose, any books, papers, records, or
memoranda, including copies of seller’s state and federal income tax return, bearing upon the
matter of the seller’s tax return. All books, invoices, accounts and other records shall be made
available within the City limits and be open at any time during regular business hours for
examination by the City Manager or authorized agent of the City Manager. If any taxpayer
refuses to voluntarily furnish any of the foregoing information when requested, the City
Manager may immediately seek a subpoena from the Manzanita Municipal Court to require that
the taxpayer or a representative of the taxpayer attend a hearing or produce any such books,
accounts and records for examination.
' 35.212 PENALTIES FOR NON-COMPLIANCE OF CODE
(A) It is unlawful for any seller or any other person so required to fail or refuse to furnish any return
required to be made, or fail or refuse to furnish the supplementary return or other data required
by the City Manager or to enter a false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the
determination of any amount due required by this ordinance.
(B) Violation of any provision of the ordinance shall be punishable by the general penalty. Every
day in which the violation is caused or permitted to exist constitutes a separate infraction, and
the punishment therefore shall be in addition to any other penalty, interest, sum or charge
imposed by this ordinance. Delinquent taxes and fees, penalty and interest imposed by this
ordinance may be collected in a civil action.
(C) In addition to the remedies provided by this section, the City Manager may, when deemed
appropriate, revoke the seller’s business license until taxes, penalties, and fines are paid.
Tillamook - Administration
114
(D) The remedies provided by this section are not exclusive and shall not prevent the City from
exercising any other remedy available under the law, nor shall the provisions of this ordinance
prohibit or restrict the City or other appropriate prosecutor from pursuing criminal charges
under state law or City ordinance.
' 35.213 FORMS AND REGULATIONS
(A) The City Manager is hereby authorized to prescribe forms and promulgate rules and regulations
to aid in the making of returns, the ascertainment, assessment and collection of said medical
marijuana tax and in particular and without limiting the general language of this chapter, to
provide for:
1) A form or report on sales and purchases to be supplied to all vendors;
2) The records which sellers providing marijuana and marijuana-infused products are to
keep concerning the tax imposed by this ordinance.
' 35.999 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed
shall be subject to ' 10.99.
(B) Any person willfully violating any of the provisions of '' 35.015 through 35.032 shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than $500, or by
imprisonment in jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both the fine and imprisonment.
(1977 Code, ' 6-13)
(C) Any person who operates or conducts himself or herself contrary to the terms of '' 35.045
through 35.075 shall be guilty of an offense and, in addition to the other penalties herein provided may,
upon conviction in Municipal Court, be assessed a fine not to exceed $300 for each offense.
(1977 Code, ' 6-21)
(Ord. 893, passed 5-23-1977; Ord. 1014, passed 7-19-1982)
115
CHAPTER 36: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Section
Procedures for the Creation of an Economic Improvement District
36.01 Definitions
36.02 Petition
36.03 Public hearing
36.04 Establishing a district; assessment of fee; hearing
36.05 Assessment ordinance
36.06 Levying assessments
36.07 Advisory committee
36.08 Uses for assessment monies
Districts Established
36.20 Economic improvement district established in downtown area
Cross-reference:
Local improvements districts, see TSO IV
Special assessments, see Ch. 36 and TSO IV
PROCEDURES FOR THE CREATION OF AN ECONOMIC IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
' 36.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ECONOMIC IMPROVEMENT.
(1) The planning or management of development or improvement activities;
(2) Landscaping, maintenance and provision of security for public areas;
(3) The promotion of commercial activity or public events;
(4) The conduct of activities in support of business recruitment and development;
Tillamook - Administration
116
(5) The provision of improvements in parking systems or parking enforcement; and
(6) Any other economic improvement activity that specially benefits property.
ECONOMIC IMPROVEMENT PLAN. A plan prepared by the property owners or tenants within
the proposed district or their designees setting out:
(1) A description of economic improvements proposed to be carried out;
(2) The number of years, to a maximum of five, in which assessments are proposed to be
levied;
(3) A preliminary estimate of annual cost of the proposed economic improvements;
(4) The proposed boundaries designated by map or perimeter description of an economic
improvement district within which subject properties would be assessed to finance the cost of the
economic improvement;
(5) The proposed formula for assessing the cost of economic improvements against subject
properties, which formula may be:
(a) A fee paid by property owners;
(b) An assessment based on the assessed value of the property involved;
(c) A fee based on the amount of square footage of the parcel;
(d) A business license fee on any business, trade, occupation or profession carried on or
practiced in the economic improvement district; or
(e) A combination of the fees and assessments.
(6) A statement whether the property assessment will be a voluntary assessment or
mandatory assessment, and:
(a) If voluntary, that the scope and level of improvements could be reduced depending
on the amount of money collected; or
(b) If mandatory, that the assessment will be considered a tax under the State
Constitution, Article XI, Section 11(b) and may be reduced to fit within the property tax limitation,
thereby affecting the level and scope of services described.
EXEMPT PROPERTY. Residential real property and any portion of a structure used for
residential purposes and, in addition, those properties exempt from general property taxation under
state law.
Economic Development
117
OWNER. The owner of the title to real property or the contract purchaser of record as shown on
the last available complete assessment roll in the office of the County Assessor.
SUBJECT PROPERTY. The real property within the economic improvement district except for
exempt property.
(Ord. 1161, passed 3-20-2000)
' 36.02 PETITION.
The City Council shall consider creation of an economic improvement district whenever owners of
the properties file with the City Recorder a petition for the establishment of a district containing the
signatures of the owners of 33% or more of the area of the assessed value of subject properties within
the proposed district, or when the City Council, on its own motion, decides to undertake the
consideration of the district. Any petition filed by the owners as set forth above shall contain a
proposed economic improvement plan. If the Council, on its own motion, decides to consider such a
district, it shall instruct the city staff to prepare the economic improvement plan.
(Ord. 1161, passed 3-20-2000)
' 36.03 PUBLIC HEARING.
After filing of the aforementioned petition or motion of the Council to consider an economic
improvement district, the City Council shall schedule a public hearing to be held on the question of
establishment of a district. Notices of the proposed hearing shall be mailed or delivered personally to
affected property owners and business owners, and shall announce the intention of the Council to
construct or undertake the economic improvement project and to assess benefited properties or impose
a business license fee for a part or all of the cost. The notice shall state the time and the place of the
public hearing. This hearing shall be set not sooner than 30 days after the mailing or delivery of the
notices to the affected property owners.
(Ord. 1161, passed 3-20-2000)
' 36.04 ESTABLISHING A DISTRICT; ASSESSMENT OF FEE; HEARING.
Tillamook - Administration
118
If, after the hearing held pursuant to ' 36.03, the City Council determines that the economic
improvements would afford special and peculiar benefit to subject parcels within the economic
improvement district different in kind or degree from that afforded to the general public, and that the
economic improvement district should be established, then the City Council may adopt an ordinance
stating those findings and establishing the district. The Council shall then determine whether the
property benefited shall bear all or a portion of the cost, and shall require notice of the proposed
assessment or business license fee to be mailed or personally delivered to the owner of each lot to be
assessed or business to be charged, which notice shall state the amount of the assessment proposed on
the property of the owner receiving the notice, or the charge to the owner of the business receiving the
notice. The notice shall state the time and place of a second public hearing at which affected property
owners or business owners may appear to support or object to the proposed charge. The second
hearing shall not be held sooner than 30 days after the mailing or personal delivery of the notices. At
the hearing, the Council may consider objections and may adopt, correct, modify or revise the proposed
assessments or charges. The ordinance will also provide that the assessments will not be made and the
economic improvement project will be terminated when written objections are received at the second
public hearing from owners of property upon which more than 33% of the total amount of assessments
is levied, or if a business license fee is charged, from more than 33% of persons conducting business
within the economic improvement district who will be subject to the proposed license fee.
(Ord. 1161, passed 3-20-2000)
' 36.05 ASSESSMENT ORDINANCE.
Pursuant to the requirement as set forth above, an assessment ordinance may, at the discretion of
the Council, provide that:
(A) When the Council receives written objections at the second public hearing only from owners
of property upon which less than 33% of the total amount of assessments is levied, the economic
improvement project may be undertaken or constructed, but that assessment shall not be levied on any
lot or parcel of property if the owner of that property submitted written objection at the public hearing.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an owner of property who fails to submit written
objections at the public hearing as provided for in this subchapter shall be deemed to have made a
specific request for the economic improvement services to be provided during the period of time
specified in the assessment ordinance; and
(B) The Council, after excluding from assessment property belonging to the owners, shall
determine the amount of the assessment on each of the remaining lots or parcels in the district.
(Ord. 1161, passed 3-20-2000)
' 36.06 LEVYING ASSESSMENTS.
If written objections in the requisite 33% are not received as provided above, the City Council may
adopt a final ordinance levying the appropriate assessments or business license charge. Upon adoption
of the final ordinance, the City Recorder shall enter each assessment in the docket of city liens. All
assessments shall be collected in the same manner as local improvement assessments. Failure to pay
Economic Development
119
may result in foreclosure in the same manner as provided for other assessments.
(Ord. 1161, passed 3-20-2000)
' 36.07 ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
Any assessment ordinance adopted as herein provided may require creation, for each economic
improvement district, of an advisory committee to allocate expenditure of monies for economic
improvement activities within the scope of this subchapter. If an advisory committee is created, the
Council shall strongly consider appointment of owners of property within the economic improvement
district to the advisory committee. An existing association of property owners or tenants may enter
into agreement with the city to provide the proposed economic improvement.
(Ord. 1161, passed 3-20-2000)
' 36.08 USES FOR ASSESSMENT MONIES.
Money derived from assessments of fees levied under the procedures set forth in this subchapter
shall be spent only for the economic improvements set forth in the economic improvement plan and for
the cost of city administration of the economic improvement district.
(Ord. 1161, passed 3-20-2000)
DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
' 36.20 ECONOMIC IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT ESTABLISHED IN DOWNTOWN AREA.
The Downtown Economic Improvement District should be established. The City Council hereby
declares the area shown on Exhibit A attached to Ordinance 1167, which is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in full herein, to be the boundaries of the Downtown Economic Improvement
District.
(Ord. 1167, passed 5-21-2001; Ord. 1168, passed 8-20-2001; Ord. 1194, passed 9-20-2004)
1
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
50. SOLID WASTE
51. WATER
52. SEWERS
53. DESIGN STANDARDS
Tillamook - Public Works
2
3
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
Solid Waste Management and Franchises
50.01 Short title and authority
50.02 Purpose, policy and scope
50.03 General definitions
50.04 Franchises
50.05 Franchisee responsibility/duties
50.06 Termination of service by franchisee
50.07 Rates and fees
50.08 Agreement required
50.09 Exclusive franchise
50.10 Termination, modification, suspension, revocation or refusal to
renew a franchise
50.11 Annexation
50.12 Remedies
50.13 General provisions
Garbage Collection
50.30 Definitions
50.31 Garbage containers
50.32 Bundles; weight limit
50.33 Construction waste; permit
50.34 Service schedule; container sanitation
50.35 Collection vehicles; leaking loads
50.36 Hours of collection
50.99 Penalty
Tillamook - Public Works
4
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND FRANCHISES
CCT 50.01 SHORT TITLE AND AUTHORITY.
This subchapter shall be known as the ASolid Waste Management and Franchise Ordinance@
(hereafter Athis subchapter@). Authority pursuant to this subchapter is adopted. The subchapter is
adopted under O.R.S. 459A.085 and the municipal authority of the city. This action carries out O.R.S.
459.015 and the State Solid Waste Management Plan.
(Ord. 1155, passed 6-1-1998)
CCT 50.02 PURPOSE, POLICY AND SCOPE.
(A) Purpose and policy. In order to protect the health, safety, welfare and environment and to
conserve energy and natural resources within the city; to provide for the opportunity to recycle; and to
otherwise provide for solid waste management, it is declared to be the public policy of the city to regulate
solid waste management to:
(1) Carry out policies in O.R.S. 459.015 and to provide for the opportunity to recycle taking
advantage of a coordinated area-wide recycling collection service and promotion, education and
marketing program;
(2) Ensure safety accumulations, storage, collection, transportation and disposal of or resource
recovery of solid wastes;
(3) Ensure maintenance of economical solid waste collection service;
(4) Ensure rates that are just, fair, reasonable and adequate to provide necessary service to the
public; and
(5) Prohibit rate preferences and other discrimination practices which benefit one of a few
users at the expense to other users of the service or the public.
(B) Scope. No persons shall accumulate, store, collect, transport or dispose of, or resource-recover
solid wastes or provide service, except in compliance with this subchapter with O.R.S. Chapter 459 or
459A dealing with solid wastes, and with regulations of the Environmental Quality Commission
promulgated thereunder. Unless as otherwise provided, no person shall provide or offer to provide solid
waste collection service for profit within the city franchise area.
(Ord. 1155, passed 6-1-1998) Penalty, see CCT 50.99
Solid Waste
5
CCT 50.03 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, words used in the present tense shall include the future tense, the
singular includes the plural, the word Ashall@ is mandatory, the words Awill@ or Amay@ are permissive,
and masculine shall include the feminine. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CITY. The City of Tillamook.
CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of Tillamook, Oregon.
COLLECTION FRANCHISE. A franchise granting exclusive rights to provide solid waste
collection and transport services for compensation within a defined service area in accordance with this
subchapter.
FRANCHISEE. The holder under contract of any collection franchise under this subchapter.
GROSS REVENUE. The amount of money actually collected, less waste container rental, tipping
fees and revenues from recyclable materials, by the franchisee from his or her city customers by
franchisee during the quarter of time in question.
PERSON. Individuals, corporations, associations, firms, partnerships, joint stock companies,
estates, trusts or any other legal entity.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Any material or group of materials that can be collected and sold for
recycling at a net cost equal to or less than the cost of collection and disposal of the same material.
RECYCLABLE RECOVERY. The process of obtaining useful material or energy resources from
solid waste and includes energy recovery, material recovery, recycling and reuse.
RECYCLING. Any process by which solid waste materials are transformed into new products and
may lose their identity.
REUSE. The return of a commodity into the economic stream for use in the same kind of
application as before without change in its identity.
SERVICE. ACollection service@ as defined by O.R.S. 459.005, which SERVICE includes the
collection, transportation, recycling or other resource recovery of or from solid waste or recyclable
material, or both.
SOLID WASTE. All putrescible and non-putrescible wastes, including but not limited to garbage,
rubbish, refuse, ashes, waste paper, cardboard, sewage sludge, septic tank and cesspool pumpings or
other sludge; commercial, industrial, demolition and construction wastes; partially burned materials,
discarded materials, discarded or abandoned vehicles or parts thereof; discarded home and industrial
appliances; manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, dead animals, infectious waste as
defined in O.R.S. 459.386, and other wastes. SOLID WASTE does not include:
Tillamook - Public Works
6
(1) AHazardous wastes@ as defined in O.R.S. 466.005; and
(2) Materials used for fertilizer or for other productive purposes or which are salvageable as
these materials are used on land in agricultural operations and the growing or harvesting of crops and the
raising of animals.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT. The prevention or reduction of solid waste; management of
the storage, transfer, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization processing and final disposal of
solid waste; or the resource recovery from solid waste, and facilities used for those activities.
SOURCE SEPARATE. Recyclable materials that have been separated from the solid waste stream
by the person who last used the recyclable materials.
WASTE. Material that is no longer wanted or useable by the source generator or producer of the
material, and the material is to be disposed of or resource-recovered by another person, and includes both
source separated material and non-source separated materials.
(Ord. 1155, passed 6-1-1998)
CCT 50.04 FRANCHISES.
(A) Establishment.
(1) Application for franchise. Application for a franchise shall be in a format approved by
City Council resolution and shall contain relevant information required by state law and this subchapter.
(2) Award of franchise. Award of a franchise shall be by City Council resolution. AWARD
OF FRANCHISE is an offer to contract, subject to conditions subsequent of the franchisee’s acceptance
and execution of an agreement. If the franchisee does not accept the city’s offer within 14 days of that
offer, then the city may withdraw its offer at any time. A franchise is not perfect and binding on the city
until an agreement detailing the terms and conditions of the franchise is executed by the city and the
franchisee.
(B) Franchise area defined. The FRANCHISE AREA shall be the area within the city limits as
they now exist or hereafter exist through annexations to the city, subject to O.R.S. 459.085.
(C) Route selection. The City Council may designate the streets and roads to be used by the
franchisee in providing service and may reroute where traffic conditions, the public convenience or
public welfare so require.
Solid Waste
7
(D) Franchise fee. The franchisee shall pay quarterly to the city 4% of the franchisee’s gross
quarterly revenue received on an annual basis during the period beginning July 1, 2008 and ending June
30, 2010. Beginning July 1, 2010 the percentage will be 5% of the franchisee’s gross quarterly revenue
received on an annual basis and this percentage will be in effect until June 30, 2018. Payment of
franchise fees shall be made to the city on or before the fifteenth day of the month following the
preceding quarter. Quarter-year periods shall be July 1 through September 30, October 1 through
December 31, January 1 through March 31 and April 1 through June 30; all dates are inclusive. This fee
is subject to an annual review by the City Council. In addition, the franchisee shall supply and service
without additional charge to City Hall one commercial collection receptacle not exceeding customary
size or weight limits unless otherwise agreed in any franchise agreement.
(Ord. 1155, passed 6-1-1998; Ord. 1165, passed 4-2-2001; Ord. 1232, passed 5-5-2008)
CCT 50.05 FRANCHISEE RESPONSIBILITY/DUTIES.
(A) Duties. The franchisee shall:
(1) Dispose of wastes collected at a site approved by the local government unit having
jurisdiction or resource-recover the wastes, both in compliance with O.R.S. Chapters 459 and 459A and
regulations promulgated thereunder;
(2) Keep accurate books of account, and city shall have the right to inspect the same at all times
during business hours and from time to time audit the same for the purpose of determining the gross
revenues and solid waste ordinance compliance;
(3) Provide and keep in force public liability insurance in the amount of not less than $200,000
for injury to a single person, $500,000 to a group of persons and $50,000 property damage, which shall
be evidenced by a certificate of insurance filed with the City Recorder;
(4) Within 30 days after the effective date of any offers to franchise under this subchapter, file
with Recorder of the city a written acceptance of the collection franchise and the terms of this subchapter
which shall be evidenced by endorsement in the form prescribed by the City Council;
(5) Provide sufficient collection vehicles, containers, facilities, personnel and finances to
provide all types of necessary service, or subcontract with others to provide that service pursuant to this
subchapter;
(6) Respond promptly to any written complaint on service and send a copy to the city of the
complaint and the response; and
(7) Provide for the operation of the recycling depot at the franchisee’s business office which is
in the city to be open to the general public to drop off recycling materials on Monday through Friday
from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and on Saturdays from 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
Tillamook - Public Works
8
(B) Prohibitions. The franchisee shall not:
(1) Give any rate preferences to any person, locality or service. This division (B) shall not
prevent uniform classes of rates based upon length of haul, type or quantity of waste handled and location
of customers so long as the rates are reasonably based upon costs of the particular service and are
approved by the Council on the same manner as other rates, nor shall it prevent any person from
volunteering service at no charge for a charitable, community, civic or benevolent purpose; or
(2) Transfer this franchise or any portion thereof to other persons without the prior written
consent of the City Council, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. In addition, the City
Council shall approve the transfer if the transferee meets all applicable requirements met by the original
franchise holder. In addition, the City Council acting upon application to transfer the franchise may
attach whatever conditions it deems appropriate to guarantee maintenance of service and compliance
with this subchapter.
(C) Public responsibility. In addition to compliance with O.R.S. Chapters 459 and 459A and
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto:
(1) Each person in the city shall dispose of his or her putrescible wastes in an approved manner
at least every 14 days or at more frequent intervals where necessary, to prevent the creation of health
hazards, rodent harborage or sustenance, vector production or sustenance, or public nuisances;
(2) No person shall use any of the following garbage cans for collection by the franchisee:
(a) Cans exceeding 50 pounds per 32-gallon size and gross loaded weight;
(b) Cans exceeding 32 gallons in size, unless rented or purchased from the franchisee;
nor
(c) Any sunken can.
(3) Garbage cans and containers must be located where access and egress is possible without
hazard or risk to the person providing service or other persons, or risk to property, and shall be located
outside of any locked or latched gate or outside of any garage or other building;
(4) No stationary compactor or other container for commercial or industrial uses shall exceed
the safe loading design for collection vehicles providing the service. Stationary compacting devices for
handling solid wastes or recyclable materials shall comply with applicable federal and state safety
regulations;
(5) Any person who receives service shall be responsible for the payment for that service.
The landlord of the premises impliedly consents to the provision of service to the tenant thereof and shall
be responsible for payment for the service if the tenant does not pay; and
Solid Waste
9
(6) Containers within an enclosure will be subject to an additional charge unless the customer
moves them outside of the enclosure.
(D) Exemptions. Nothing in this subchapter shall:
(1) Prevent the officers of city from employing persons and using vehicles for the purpose of
collection and removal of solid wastes for an annual cleanup or cleaning the public right-of-way;
(2) Prevent any person from transporting wastes produced by himself or herself at home or
work, if the loading and operation of the vehicle containing the wastes prevents the contents from
dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping onto the public right-of-way or property adjacent
thereto, and if the wastes will be disposed of, or resource-recovered, pursuant to all applicable laws,
ordinances and regulations of federal, state or local government units having jurisdiction;
(3) Prevent another person from transporting hazardous wastes, excluded wastes or, with
permission of the franchisee, materials which by their size or weight cannot be handled in open trucks,
front-end loaders or roll-off box trucks supplied by the franchisee directly or through subcontract. Upon
notice by a customer within the city of unusual size or weight materials, if the franchisee cannot provide
the service, he or she shall waive the exclusive franchise with respect to these hazardous wastes and/or
materials only. This waiver requested by the customer shall be oral or written to the city and franchisee,
but a written notice shall be filed with the city and a copy going to the franchisee. The person in whose
favor the waiver is granted shall obtain a permit from the city for the hauling and shall pay the same
franchise fee to the city as would have been required of the franchisee under CCT 50.04(D);
(4) Prevent civic, benevolent or charitable organizations from providing recycling or reuse
services as a fund-raising drive or benefit; or
(5) Prevent the City Council from withdrawing other collection activities or practices upon
findings there is no need for regulation and no substantial impact on the purposes of this subchapter,
service to customers, consumer rates or service of, and financial stability of, the franchisee.
(Ord. 1155, passed 6-1-1998; Ord. 1232, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 1236, passed 7-21-2008) Penalty, see
CCT 50.99
CCT 50.06 TERMINATION OF SERVICE BY FRANCHISEE.
The franchisee shall not terminate services to all or a portion of the franchisee’s customers unless:
(A) The street or road access is blocked and there is no alternate route and provided that the city
shall not be liable for any blocking of access;
(B) Excessive weather conditions render providing service unduly hazardous to persons provided
service, or the termination is caused by accidents or casualties caused by an act of nature or a public
enemy; or
Tillamook - Public Works
10
(C) A customer has not paid for service provided after a regular billing and after a service of seven
days’ written notice to pay by mail or personal notice.
(Ord. 1155, passed 6-1-1998)
CCT 50.07 RATES AND FEES.
(A) Generally. Only rates and rate adjustments for service shall be established by the City Council
after not less than one public hearing by City Council. Rates and rate adjustments shall be by resolution.
No ordinance amendment is required. A copy of the current resolution marked Exhibit A attached to
Ordinance 1155 is incorporated here by this reference as if set out in full herein.
(B) Considerations. In determining the appropriate rate or rate adjustment to be charged by the
franchisee, the Council may consider any or all of the following:
(1) The cost of performing the service provided by the franchisee;
(2) The anticipated increase in the cost of providing this service;
(3) The need for equipment replacement and the need for additional equipment to meet service
needs; compliance with federal, state, local law, ordinances and regulations or technical change;
(4) The investment of the franchisee and the value of the business and the necessity that the
franchisee have a reasonable rate of return;
(5) The rates charged in other cities of similar size for similar service;
(6) The public interest in assuring reasonable rates to enable the franchisee to provide efficient
and beneficial service to the residents and other users of the service;
(7) The local wage scales, cost of management facilities and disposal fee or charges;
(8) Any revenues and/or expenses resulting from recycling; and
(9) Other factors which may, in the opinion of the City Council, necessarily affect the rates to
be charged.
(C) Periodic rate adjustment. The City Council may from time to time after a public hearing adjust
the rates charged by the franchisee by City Council resolution. Upon its adoption, that resolution
supersedes and rescinds those provisions of any prior Exhibit A (as adopted) in conflict therewith.
Solid Waste
11
(D) Billing; overdue accounts; collection and late fees. Franchisee may charge a collection charge
of a minimum of $1.00 on billings 30 days overdue, $1.50 on 60 days overdue and $2.50 on 90 days
overdue. Where the overdue billing exceeds $100.00, a collection charge of up to 1.5% of the overdue
amount may be charged in lieu of and not in addition to charges otherwise specified in the section.
These charges shall be in lieu of any interest to be charged for overdue accounts. Billing may be 60 days
in advance. However, any unearned balance shall be refunded to any customer for the days prepaid
following the date of any customer’s service termination notice to the franchisee.
(E) Investment. The investment of the franchisee and the value of the business and the necessity
that the franchisee have a reasonable rate of return between 12% and 17%.
(Ord. 1155, passed 6-1-1998; Ord. 1232, passed 5-5-2008)
CCT 50.08 AGREEMENT REQUIRED.
(A) Written agreement. The franchisee shall execute a written agreement with city within 30 days
of the franchisee’s acceptance of the city’s offer to franchise. If no agreement is executed within that
time, then the city’s offer shall expire without further notice required. The city shall proceed to extend
an offer to franchise with any other proposer or shall announce the availability of the franchise,
whichever in the city’s sole discretion the city decides.
(B) Subcontracts. The franchisee may subcontract with others to provide a portion of the service
where franchisee does not have the necessary equipment for service. A subcontract shall not relieve the
franchisee of a total responsibility for providing maintaining service and for compliance with this
subchapter. Except where emergency service is provided by a subcontractor, subcontracts shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be filed with the City Recorder for any service extending more than 90 days;
(3) Provide that the subcontractor shall have no claim or right of action whatsoever against the
city; and
(4) Be available upon request to the city and the public.
(Ord. 1155, passed 6-1-1998)
CCT 50.09 EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE.
Upon compliance with all conditions precedent with this subchapter and state law, franchise(s)
granted under this subchapter shall be exclusive, unless otherwise expressed.
(A) City findings. City shall comply with O.R.S. 459A.085 when awarding franchises under this
subchapter. Compliance with the statutes shall be determined relative to the permissive and mandatory
language there.
Tillamook - Public Works
12
(B) Terms and conditions.
(1) Franchise term. Nothing in this section shall interfere with the rights of the city and City
Council under this subchapter in the event the franchisee breaches, defaults or otherwise fails to perform
any obligations of the franchise or franchise agreement.
(2) Opportunity to recycle required. O.R.S. 459A.085(6)(a) applies to any franchise under
this subchapter.
(3) Franchise term and renewals. The term for any franchise agreement may be up to ten
consecutive years. Unless grounds exist for refusal to renew a franchise under this subchapter, any
franchise may be renewable.
(4) Third-party responsibility. The city is not a party to the contract between franchisee and
any person receiving collection services. The city by this subchapter expressly disclaims any suretyship
or any other type of payment guarantee for persons receiving collection services under this subchapter.
The franchisee solely determines rates and fees for services provided by the franchisee that are not
regulated by this subchapter. Services not regulated by this subchapter are not subject to the franchise
fee.
(Ord. 1155, passed 6-1-1998)
CCT 50.10 TERMINATION, MODIFICATION, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR
REFUSAL TO RENEW A FRANCHISE.
(A) One-year notice. City and/or franchisee shall notify the other in writing not less than one year
in advance of the date the respective party intends to terminate, refuse to renew or suspend collection
service under any contract under this subchapter. This provision is intended to allow city and franchisee
time to plan and adapt to the change in their contractual relationship.
(B) Opportunity to comply. Failure of franchisee to comply with a written notice to provide
necessary service or otherwise comply with the provisions of this subchapter after a reasonable
opportunity to comply shall be grounds for modification, revocation, suspension or refusal to renew the
collection franchise without further notice required.
(C) Thirty days to comply or request hearing. After written notice from the City Council that those
grounds exist, the franchisee shall have 30 days from the date of mailing of the notice in which to comply
or to request a public hearing before the City Council.
(D) Failure to comply. If the franchisee fails to comply within the specified time or fails to comply
with the order of the City Council entered upon the basis of findings at the public hearing, the City
Council may suspend, modify or revoke the franchise or refuse to renew it, or make the action contingent
upon continued noncompliance.
(E) Public hearing. At a public hearing, the franchisee and other interested persons shall have an
opportunity to present oral, written or documentary evidence to the City Council.
Solid Waste
13
(F) Emergency action. In the event that the City Council finds an immediate and serious danger to
the public, it may take action regarding any existing franchise under this subchapter without notice
and/or hearing. However, notice and/or public hearing shall be provided by the city as soon as
practicable following the emergency action.
(Ord. 1155, passed 6-1-1998)
CCT 50.11 ANNEXATION.
Subject to O.R.S. 459.085, the city reserves all rights to serve any and all annexations to the city.
(Ord. 1155, passed 6-1-1998)
CCT 50.12 REMEDIES.
(A) Remedies. The remedies available to the city under this subchapter, if any, are in addition to
and not in lieu of any other legal and/or equitable remedies otherwise available.
(B) Appeal. Any person having a legal issue concerning the application of this subchapter or any
contract executed hereunder shall first present the issue to City Council or its designee for resolution.
The aggrieved person shall at his or her own expense cause notice to be given to all other necessary
parties, if any, including without limitation the city and any relevant franchisee. Notice shall be actual
notice or notice by first-class United States mail, mailed at least 14 days in advance of the date the city is
scheduled to hear the issue.
(C) Decision. City Council, or its designee, shall decide the issue within 14 days of the date the
city heard the dispute. If the city fails to issue a decision within 14 days, and unless otherwise agreed
among the parties, then the city shall be presumed to have denied the applicant’s request. The applicant
may then proceed accordingly.
(D) Supervision and enforcement. Service provided under the collection franchise designated by
the City Council shall be under the supervision of the Council. The Council may make inspections of
equipment and service practices, investigate written complaints and take any further action as required.
(Ord. 1155, passed 6-1-1998)
CCT 50.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(A) Interpretation. The city expressly reserves the right to interpret the terms of its own
ordinances. The city’s adoption of law from other jurisdictions shall not imply the city’s adoption of
any prior, present or subsequent interpretation of that other jurisdiction’s law. These interpretations
may be instructive, but not binding on the city.
(B) Amendment. The city expressly reserves the right to amend this subchapter at any time.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to excuse the city or franchisee from complying with changes
in state law. An ordinance amendment shall not be effective upon any existing franchise agreement
Tillamook - Public Works
14
unless the franchisee consents in writing; this consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(C) Controls over franchise agreements. The City Council or its designee is the sole interpreter of
this subchapter. This subchapter shall control over any conflict with any franchise granted hereunder.
(D) Non-waiver; modification. Failure by city to enforce any provision of this subchapter does not
constitute city’s continuing waiver of that provision, any other provision or of the entire subchapter.
The rights and duties under this subchapter shall not be modified, delegated, transferred or assigned,
except upon written signed consent of city. The city’s waiver of any ordinance or contract provision
shall occur, if at all, only upon a written resolution or other appropriate Council action. Any waiver
shall be recorded in the minutes of the next available City Council meeting or subsequent meeting before
that waiver shall be effective.
(Ord. 1155, passed 6-1-1998)
GARBAGE COLLECTION
CCT 50.30 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
GARBAGE. Includes all animal and vegetable matter, refuse and household waste, or materials or
matter prepared or intended in whole or in part to be used for food; also all animal and vegetable refuse
from places where foodstuffs intended for human consumption are handled commercially.
RUBBISH. All solid waste, other than garbage.
(1977 Code, ' 4-1) (Ord. 603, passed 5-21-1945; Ord. 895, passed 5-23-1977)
CCT 50.31 GARBAGE CONTAINERS.
(A) An occupant or person in charge of premises where garbage accumulates shall keep or cause to
be kept on the premises one or more portable containers of a standard type suitable for deposit of garbage
and shall deposit or cause to be deposited in the containers all garbage that accumulates on the premises.
(B) Garbage containers shall be sturdy, watertight, not easily corrodible, rodent- and insect-proof,
and have handles at the sides and tightly fitting lids. When not being emptied or filled, the containers
shall be kept tightly closed. They shall be conveniently accessible to garbage haulers.
(C) Garbage containers shall conform in capacity and weight to limitations prescribed by the state.
(D) A portable garbage compactor-container designed for being loaded and unloaded with a frontor
rear-mount forklift, unless so constructed and wheeled that it can be towed to a solid waste disposal
site for emptying, may not, together with its contents, exceed 4,000 pounds in weight.
Solid Waste
15
(1977 Code, ' 4-1) (Ord. 603, passed 5-21-1945; Ord. 895, passed 5-23-1977)
CCT 50.32 BUNDLES; WEIGHT LIMIT.
Unless special service or special equipment is provided by the collector for handling unconfined
waste, materials such as rubbish and refuse, brush, leaves, tree cuttings and other debris for manual
pickup and collection shall be in securely tied bundles or in boxes, sacks or other receptacles; and solid
waste so bundled shall not exceed 60 pounds in weight. The above-described unconfined waste shall
not be mixed with garbage.
(1977 Code, ' 4-1) (Ord. 603, passed 5-21-1945; Ord. 895, passed 5-23-1977)
CCT 50.33 CONSTRUCTION WASTE; PERMIT.
In addition to a demolition building permit, a permit is required for the hauling of demolition and
construction wastes. The permit shall be issued in the City Recorder’s office, and the fee for the permit
shall be $25.
(1977 Code, ' 4-1) (Ord. 603, passed 5-21-1945; Ord. 895, passed 5-23-1977)
CCT 50.34 SERVICE SCHEDULE; CONTAINER SANITATION.
Garbage containers shall be removed from the premises where located and emptied at intervals of
not more than one week and shall not be permitted to leak or distribute garbage and shall be kept clean
and free of odor by the owner or person in charge of the garbage containers.
(1977 Code, ' 4-1) (Ord. 603, passed 5-21-1945; Ord. 895, passed 5-23-1977)
CCT 50.35 COLLECTION VEHICLES; LEAKING LOADS.
Any person who engages in the hauling of garbage and rubbish within the corporate limits of the city
shall provide trucks or other vehicles with steel bodies and leak-proof bottoms. No garbage or rubbish
may be hauled upon or over the streets of the city unless it is put in steel containers which are leak-proof
and hauled in trucks or other vehicles with steel bodies with a leak-proof bottom. No garbage or rubbish
may be permitted to leak from containers or vehicles or be strewn upon or scattered over the streets,
sidewalks or other public ways of the city.
(1977 Code, ' 4-1) (Ord. 723, passed 8-3-1959; Ord. 895, passed 5-23-1977)
CCT 50.36 HOURS OF COLLECTION.
Licensees who engage in garbage and rubbish collection shall collect the garbage and rubbish only
between the hours of 4:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on collection days.
(1977 Code, ' 4-1) (Ord. 723, passed 8-3-1959; Ord. 895, passed 5-23-1977)
Tillamook - Public Works
16
CCT 50.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed
shall be subject to CCT 10.99.
(B) Violation by any person of the provisions of CCT 50.01 through 50.13 shall be deemed to be a
violation and be punishable upon conviction of a fine up to $250.00 per offense or by imprisonment in
the county jail for not more than six months, or by both.
(C) Violation of any provision of CCT 50.30 through 50.36 is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$100, or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or by both the fine and imprisonment.
(D) Unless otherwise indicated, any offense under this chapter is classified as a violation punishable
by a fine set by resolution.
(1977 Code, ' 4-1) (Ord. 603, passed 5-21-1945; Ord. 895, passed 5-23-1977; Ord. 1155, passed
6-1-1998; Ord. 1315, passed 6-6-2016; Ord. 1334, passed 3-5-2018)
17
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
City Water Rules and Rates
51.01 Rules and regulations
51.02 Rate schedules
City Water Supply Protection
51.15 Definitions
51.16 Offenses against the purity of the water supply
51.17 Pollution prohibited
51.18 Placing substances on watershed prohibited
51.19 Defacing of signs prohibited
51.20 Special police officers
51.99 Penalty
CITY WATER RULES AND RATES
CCT 51.01 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
There is hereby adopted and incorporated in this subchapter by reference the terms and provisions of
the rules and regulations for the conduct and operation of the City Water Division and its services, as may
be amended by Council from time to time.
(1977 Code, ' 3-4) (Ord. 877, passed 4-11-1977)
CCT 51.02 RATE SCHEDULES.
The city shall establish water rate service schedules from time to time, which are adopted by
reference and shall be made available for public inspection.
(1977 Code, ' 3-4) (Ord. 877, passed 4-11-1977)
CITY WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION
Tillamook - Public Works
18
CCT 51.15 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this subchapter, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the
feminine. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CITY. Tillamook City, Oregon.
PERSON. An individual, firm or corporation.
WATERSHED. All property owned, acquired or occupied by the city’s waterworks, reservoirs
systems, springs, branches, pipes; and all lakes, rivers, springs, streams, creeks or tributaries acquired by
the city, or the right of use of water therefrom acquired by the city constituting sources of city water
supply and by means of which the city supplies water, or stores or conducts the water supply; and all
property acquired for the preservation and protection of the purity of the city water supply; and all
property owned or possessed by the city within the areas draining into lakes, rivers, springs, streams,
creeks or tributaries constituting those sources of water supply.
(1977 Code, ' 4-5) (Ord. 780, passed 3-20-1967)
CCT 51.16 OFFENSES AGAINST THE PURITY OF THE WATER SUPPLY.
No person shall corrupt, pollute, impair or endanger the purity of the city water supply by:
(A) Going or trespassing upon the area within the watershed;
(B) Permitting any animal owned, controlled or possessed by him or her to run at large or go upon
the area within the watershed;
(C) Leaving, keeping, placing or depositing any garbage, refuse, offensive material or personal
property of any kind within the watershed;
(D) Carrying or discharging a firearm or killing any animal or fowl within the watershed;
(E) Picnicking, hunting, smoking, lighting a fire or maintaining a fire within the watershed;
(F) Driving a motor vehicle in the watershed; or
(G) Bathing or swimming or placing any article or substance in or so near the water supply so as to
be apt to cause pollution or danger to the purity of the lakes, springs, streams, dams, creeks or tributaries
in the watershed.
(1977 Code, ' 4-5) (Ord. 780, passed 3-20-1967) Penalty, see CCT 51.99
' 51.17 POLLUTION PROHIBITED.
Water
19
No person shall establish or maintain a slaughter pen, stock feeding yard or hog pens, or deposit or
maintain any unclean or unwholesome substance, conduct any business or occupation, or allow any
condition upon or sufficiently near the sources from which the city water supply is obtained, or where
water is stored, on the property or means through which it may be conveyed or conducted, so that the
water should be polluted or its purity destroyed or endangered.
(1977 Code, ' 4-5) (Ord. 780, passed 3-20-1967) Penalty, see CCT 51.99
CCT 51.18 PLACING SUBSTANCES ON WATERSHED PROHIBITED.
No person shall place or cause to be placed within the watershed any substance which either by itself
or in connection with other matter will corrupt, pollute or impair the quality of the city water supply. No
owner of any dead animal shall knowingly leave or cause to be left the carcass or any portion thereof
within the watershed in a condition as to in any way corrupt or pollute the city water supply.
(1977 Code, ' 4-5) (Ord. 780, passed 3-20-1967) Penalty, see CCT 51.99
CCT 51.19 DEFACING OF SIGNS PROHIBITED.
No person shall alter, change, deface, destroy or remove any sign, warning or notice posted by the
city, or caused to be posted by the city or its duly authorized agents in the watershed.
(1977 Code, ' 4-5) (Ord. 780, passed 3-20-1967) Penalty, see CCT 51.99
CCT 51.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed
shall be subject to CCT 10.99.
(B) Any person found violating any of the provisions of CCT 51.15 through 51.20 shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine up to $250.00 per offense, or by imprisonment in jail for not more than
50 days, or by both the fine and imprisonment.
(C) Unless otherwise indicated, any offense under this chapter is classified as a violation punishable
by a fine set by resolution.
(1977 Code, ' 4-5) (Ord. 780, passed 3-20-1967; Ord. 1315, passed 6-6-2016; Ord. 1334, passed
3-5-2018)
20
CHAPTER 52: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
52.001 Wastewater facilities plan
Sewer Regulations
52.015 Necessary connections
52.016 Connection permit
52.017 Prohibited openings
52.018 Connections to the main sewer
52.019 Waste products
52.020 Grease traps
Regulations for Pressure Sewer Collection Systems
52.035 Definitions
52.036 Necessary conditions
52.037 Maintenance of system
52.038 Fees and related charges
52.039 Applicable ordinances
Sewer Charges
52.050 Establishing rates and charges
52.051 Collection of charges
52.052 Definition
52.053 Connection fee
52.054 Schedule of user rates
52.055 Enforcement of payment
52.056 Certification penalty
52.057 Sewer Fund revenue
52.058 Effective date
52.059 Review of rates
52.060 Appeals
Sewers
21
System Development Charge
52.075 Purpose
52.076 Scope
52.077 Definitions
52.078 System development charges established
52.079 Methodology
52.080 Authorized expenditures
52.081 Expenditure restrictions
52.082 Improvement plan
52.083 Collection of charge
52.084 Exemptions
52.085 Credits
52.086 Segregation and use of revenue
52.087 Appeal procedure
52.999 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CCT 52.001 WASTEWATER FACILITIES PLAN.
The Wastewater Facility Plan document prepared for the city by Kennedy/Jenks Consultants and
dated August 2005, along with any subsequent amendments, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein
by reference.
(Ord. 1202, passed 10-3-2005)
SEWER REGULATIONS
CCT 52.015 NECESSARY CONNECTIONS.
Within 30 days after notice from the city, the person in charge of any building or premises within the
city sewer district shall connect the building or premises with the city sanitary sewer. The connection
shall provide outlets for all water closets, wash stands, slop stands, sinks and any other equipment and
devices for the disposal of sewage and drainage from the building or premises. In certain instances, if
the buildings and premises are within the sewer district of the city, the owner, agent, occupant or other
person in charge of any building or premises shall, within 30 days after notice from the city so to do,
construct and place in operation a cesspool, septic tank or other device as shall be approved by the
Plumbing Inspector for the purpose of disposing of all sewage and drainage from the buildings and
premises.
(1977 Code, ' 3-6) (Ord. 926, passed 8-7-1978)
Tillamook - Public Works
22
CCT 52.016 CONNECTION PERMIT.
All persons desiring to connect to the city sewer system shall make application to the city for a
connection permit. The Ahook-up@ or connection fee provided for in CCT 52.053 shall accompany the
application.
(1977 Code, ' 3-6) (Ord. 926, passed 8-7-1978)
CCT 52.017 PROHIBITED OPENINGS.
No person except the Director of Public Works or a duly authorized assistant shall open or uncover
any manhole, air cooler, flush tank or private connection with the public sewers without the permission
of the city. Nor shall any person leave openings in sewers without ample protection against admission
of dirt, rubbish or other matter tending to block the flow of sewage.
(1977 Code, ' 3-6) (Ord. 926, passed 8-7-1978) Penalty, see CCT 52.999
CCT 52.018 CONNECTIONS TO THE MAIN SEWER.
(A) Connection to the main sewers or laterals must be made into a AY@ branch. Where no branch
is available within a reasonable distance, a AY@ branch shall be inserted in the sewer line. In no case
shall connection to any sewer of 12-inch diameter or less be made except into a ”Y” branch fitting.
Where a sewer is tapped, a commercial saddle type clamp shall be used. Sewers shall not be tapped
below the centerline of the pipe, and all tapes shall be inspected and meet with the approval of the City
Engineer. No connection of downspouts, roofs and foundation drains or other clean water sources shall
be allowed to any city sewer collection lines. Any such connections that are found to exist shall be
immediately disconnected from the sewer system at the owner’s expense.
(B) Service laterals from a structure to the main sewer line shall be maintained by the owner of the
structure. Maintenance shall be performed in such a manner as to prevent infiltration of groundwater
into the collection system.
(1977 Code, ' 3-6) (Ord. 926, passed 8-7-1978; Ord. 959, passed 7-16-1979; Ord. 1047, passed
4-2-1984, Ord. 1334, passed 3-5-2018)
(C) Infiltration and Inflow
1. All property owners identified by the City as contributors to excessive or improper
infiltration or inflow into the treatment works shall be advised of their infiltration and inflow
problems.
2. All such situation properties shall be provided a 60-day grace period in which to
correct the infiltration and inflow problems as identified, said 60-day grace period to extend
from the date of notification.
3. By the end of the 60-day grace period, each property owner shall notify the City that
corrective actions have been taken or are in progress, which action shall be specified in the
notification to the City.
4. A property owner failing to notify the City of corrective actions prior to the end of the
60-day grace period shall be subject to termination of service, without further notice, and water
service, if provided by the City, shall be immediately discontinued and shut off until the
Sewers
23
violation shall have been corrected in accordance with Federal, State and City regulations.
5. In the event any instance of excessive or improper infiltration or inflow into the treatment
works of the City shall continue beyond the 60-day grace period, it is hereby declared that such
continuing infiltration or inflow is a public nuisance that the City shall have the right to abate
such public nuisance, and to enter upon any private property within the City for such purpose
and shall assess the cost of such abatement as a lien against the property upon which such continuing
infiltration and inflow occurs and shall assess the cost of such abatement to the property upon or from
which infiltration and inflow occurs. Such assessment shall be levied by the filing of a statement of
such costs together with the description of the property or properties to be assessed, together with the
names of the owner(s) thereof with the City Recorder, whereupon the City Recorder shall forthwith enter
such assessment as a lien against such property in the City Lien Docket of the City. An administration
fee of $__ or __% of the cost, whichever is greater, shall be charged and collected by the City in addition
to all costs of abatement. (Note: If liens fall under Ballot Measure 5, assess penalty in some other form.)
CCT 52.019 WASTE PRODUCTS.
It shall be unlawful to dump or allow to enter into the sewage system of the city the following waste
products:
(A) Petroleum, coal, tar, oils and their derivatives and wastes;
(B) Fats, Oils, Grease and sludge from any property, business or service.
(C) Explosives or inflammable liquids and gases;
(D) Acids, alkalis or other corrosive liquids, gases or substances of sufficient strength to damage
sewers, manholes, pumping stations or treatment plant units; pH must be no less than 5.0 and no more
than 10, measured at the next measurable access point downstream from effected property lateral.
(E) Paints or waste products from paint manufacturers;
(F) Substances which will form deposits or obstructions in sewers or which when mixed with
sewage will precipitate materials and thus form deposits in sewers;
(G) Ashes, cinders, sand, earth, coal, rubbish or metals of any kind;
(H) Live steam, exhaust steam or water having a temperature above 120 degrees Fahrenheit.
(I) Ground or unground fruit peelings and cores, meat or bones from canneries, packing plants or
meat plants;
(J) Cull fruits and vegetables;
(K) Paunch, stable and barn manure;
Tillamook - Public Works
24
(L) Offal from slaughter houses; and
(M) Dead animals or parts thereof.
(N) Nothing shall be introduced into the sewer that can cause pass through.
(O) Nothing shall be introduced into the sewer that can cause interference of process at the sewer
plant.
(P) Fertilizers or fertilizer products.
(Q) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the City in
accordance with Section 4 of this Ordinance.
(R) Storm water, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, cooling water and unpolluted industrial
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Superintendent. (NOTE: Certain of these waters
may require an NPDES permit from DEQ if discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet.)
(1977 Code, ' 3-6) (Ord. 926, passed 8-7-1978, Ord. 1334, passed 3-5-2018) Penalty, see CCT
52.999
CCT 52.020 GREASE TRAPS.
Adequate grease traps shall be provided for all commercial and industrial establishments.
(A) Grease Removal Maintenance Requirements
Grease traps/interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic, and
complete, removal of all contents of the device, including wastewater, accumulated F.O.G.,
floating materials, sludge, and solids.
(1977 Code, ' 3-6) (Ord. 926, passed 8-7-1978; Ord. 1346, passed 5-20-2019)
Sewers
25
REGULATIONS FOR PRESSURE SEWER COLLECTION SYSTEMS
CCT 52.035 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
PROPERTIES. Any lot on which is situated an industrial, commercial, or residential structure.
PRESSURE SEWER SYSTEM. A privately owned, operated, and maintained sewer system that
feeds to a pressure main line owned and operated by the City. A pressure sewer system includes pumps,
tanks, valves, fittings, mainline connectors, lateral lines, pump stations, control panels, and any
associated sewer components located on public or private property. A pressure sewer system does not
include pressure main lines that the City owns and operates.
STEP SYSTEM (Septic Tank Effluent Pumping). Sewage that is conveyed by gravity to a septic
tank through a building service lateral. Liquid waste is pumped under pressure to the public sewer
system. Solid waste will remain in the tank.
(Ord. 1346, passed 5-20-2019)
PLANNED ANNUAL MAINTENANCE. All property owners or persons associated with the
property or business that obtain sewer service using a pressure sewer/STEP sewer system shall perform
each of the following maintenance activities on every system they operate, at least once every calendar
year:
• Cleaning the tank by pumping out the solids from inside the tank and hosing down the tank screen
and pump end area of the tank (basket area).
• Check tank for being water-tight so as to prevent sewage from leaking out or groundwater from
leaking in.
• Hosing down the pump and checking the pump for a plugged suction and debris in the impeller.
• Check float switches and confirm that they operate properly. Clean float switches by hosing
down as needed.
• Check the area around the tank and lateral line to the main line for wet spots or visible leaks.
• Check tank, pump, and control panel for visible damage, corrosion or conditions which could
lead to operational problems.
(Ord. 1291, passed 9-2-2014 , Ord. 1334, passed 3-5-2018; Ord. 1346, passed 5-20-2019)
CCT 52.036 NECESSARY CONDITIONS.
All owners of properties, or any persons associated with the property or business, that obtain sewer
service using a pressure sewer system or STEP sewer system must connect their sewer systems to a
public main line within thirty (30) days of service availability. For future developments that require
sewer service, a service easement shall be obtained from the property owner prior to issuance of a
building permit. In order to continue use of a pressure sewer/STEP sewer system, an easement for City
Tillamook - Public Works
26
personnel and vehicle access shall be provided upon request.
All owners of properties, or any persons associated with the property or business, that obtain sewer
services using a pressure sewer system or STEP sewer system shall post, at a minimum, the contact
information for themselves and the City of Tillamook on the pump station control panel in the event of an
overflow or emergency situation.
(Ord. 1346, passed 5-20-2019)
CCT 52.037 MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.
Property owners, or any persons associated with the property or business of a property that obtains sewer
service using a pressure sewer or STEP sewer shall have the sole responsibility of maintenance, repair,
and replacement of the following sewer system components:
(A) Connections to pressure main lines, but not the main line itself;
(B) Lateral lines;
(C) Valves and fittings;
(D) Pumps and pump stations;
(E) Pump station control panels;
(F) Tanks and tank screens;
(G) All other associated components of the pressure sewer system located between the tank and the
main line connection.
(Ord. 1346, passed 5-20-2019)
CCT 52.038 FEES AND RELATED CHARGES.
(A) User fees shall be charged as provided by CCT 52.050 through 52.060. On a monthly basis,
each account shall be charged an additional maintenance fee to cover ongoing supervision of the
pressure sewer/STEP sewer system. The amount of the charge shall be determined by the City
Council and may be revised by resolution as deemed appropriate by that body.
(B) The City shall be responsible for the pressure main line. However, if a private pressure sewer
system causes damage to the public pressure main line, the property owner, or any persons
associated with the property or business that the system serves, shall be responsible for all
maintenance, repair, and clean-up charges incurred to fix the damage.
(C) All owners of properties, or any persons associated with the property or business that obtain
sewer service using a pressure sewer/STEP sewer system shall keep all components of their
sewer system in compliance with all City, State, and Federal regulations at all times.
(Ord. 1346, passed 5-20-2019)
Sewers
27
CCT 52.039 APPLICABLE ORDINANCES.
All sections of CCT 52.015 through 52.020, 52.050 through 52.060, and 52.999 not in conflict with this
subchapter shall apply equally to a Pressure sewer/ STEP sewer system. The City reserves the right to
shut off water service to any Pressure sewer or STEP sewer system if the City of Tillamook reasonably
believes that doing so is necessary to prevent, control, or stop an overflow of the sanitary sewer for the
safety of public health and the protection of the environment.
(Ord. 1346, passed 5-20-2019)
(1977 Code, ' 3-7) (Ord. 969, passed 3-17-1980)
Tillamook - Public Works
28
SEWER CHARGES
CCT 52.050 ESTABLISHING RATES AND CHARGES.
The city hereby establishes the monthly rates and charges for the use of the sewage facilities of the
city in accordance with the schedule listed in CCT 52.058.
(1977 Code, ' 3-6) (Ord. 926, passed 8-7-1978)
CCT 52.051 COLLECTION OF CHARGES.
All charges shall be shown on the regular monthly water bill under the heading “sewer.”
(1977 Code, ' 3-6) (Ord. 926, passed 8-7-1978) (Ord. 1291, passed 9-2-2014)
CCT 52.052 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
USER. The property owner and/or occupant or tenant of the premises. The property owner is
liable for all charges, should any tenant or occupant not pay the charges when due. In any action which
may be instituted by the city to recover for any water or sewage service fees or charges, both the occupant
of the premises served and the owner of the premises shall be liable for all fees and charges.
(1977 Code, ' 3-6) (Ord. 926, passed 8-7-1978)
CCT 52.053 CONNECTION FEE.
All persons desiring to connect to the City sewer system shall make application to the City for a connection
permit. The connection fees provided for in City Code of Tillamook 52.078 (A) and in subsequent resolutions for
System Development Charges and for other connection fees shall accompany such application. Fees for
connecting to the city sanitary sewer are per CCT 52.082.
(1977 Code, ' 3-6) (Ord. 926, passed 8-7-1978; Ord. 1115, passed 6-3-1991; Ord. 1305, passed
10-19-2015)
CCT 52.054 SCHEDULE OF USER RATES.
User rates shall be established by Resolution.
(Ord. 1291, passed 9-2-2014)
Sewers
29
CCT 52.055 ENFORCEMENT OF PAYMENT.
The city may enforce the collection of rates and charges for the use of sewage facilities by turning
off the water of any delinquent sewer user until the charges are paid or by any other means that may be
provided by the laws of the state or permitted by the Charter and ordinances of the city; and any
delinquencies may be certified to the Tax Assessor of the county, for collection in the manner and as
provided by O.R.S. 454.225. In the event the city elects to institute an action to recover any charges, the
city shall be entitled to recover as part of its costs a reasonable attorney’s fee to be set by the court.
(1977 Code, ' 3-6) (Ord. 926, passed 8-7-1978) (Ord. 1291, passed 9-2-2014)
CCT 52.056 CERTIFICATION PENALTY.
In the event it becomes necessary to certify the service charges hereby established because of the
nonpayment thereof, there shall be added to the charges a penalty in the amount of 10% thereof and the
same shall bear, when certified, interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the date of the certification.
(1977 Code, ' 3-6) (Ord. 926, passed 8-7-1978)
CCT 52.057 SEWER FUND REVENUE.
The Recorder-Treasurer shall set aside and pay into the Sewer Fund all of the gross revenue received
from charges and rates collected for use of the sewer facilities.
(1977 Code, ' 3-6) (Ord. 926, passed 8-7-1978)
CCT 52.058 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This subchapter and CCT 52.015 through 52.039 shall become effective October 1, 1978.
(1977 Code, ' 3-6) (Ord. 926, passed 8-7-1978)
CCT 52.059 REVIEW OF RATES.
A semi-annual review of the rate structures herein provided for this subchapter shall be conducted by
the city to ensure adequate revenue for the coming year and continued equitableness of all fees. The
City Council may hereafter amend, repeal or modify any of the rates and charges as set forth in this
subchapter by resolution, and that resolution shall operate as an amendment to this chapter.
(1977 Code, ' 3-6) (Ord. 959, passed 7-16-1979; Ord. 977, passed 7-21-1980)
CCT 52.060 APPEALS.
Any person, business or agency that feels that the above rates are unnecessarily restrictive and
inequitable and would cause an undue hardship may appeal to the City Council for an adjustment of the
appropriate rate schedule. The appeal must be in writing and contain justification for the appeal.
(1977 Code, ' 3-6) (Ord. 926, passed 8-7-1978)
Tillamook - Public Works
30
SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE
CCT 52.075 PURPOSE.
The purpose of the system development charge is to impose an equitable share of the public cost of
capital improvements for water supply, treatment and distribution; sanitary sewer collection,
transmission, treatment and disposal; drainage and flood control; transportation; and parks and
recreation, upon those developments that create the need for or increase the demand on capital
improvements to be constructed, already constructed or under construction.
(Ord. 1272, passed 12-19-2012)
CCT 52.076 SCOPE.
The system development charge imposed by this subchapter is separate from and in addition to any
applicable tax, assessment, charge, fee in lieu of assessment, or fee otherwise provided by law or
imposed as a condition of development. A system development charge is to be considered in the nature of
a charge for service rendered, a service hookup charge or a charge for services to be rendered.
(Ord. 1272, passed 12-19-2012)
CCT 52.077 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS. Facilities or assets used for:
(1) Water supply, treatment and distribution;
(2) Sanitary sewer collection, transmission, treatment and disposal;
(3) Drainage and flood control;
(4) Transportation, including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, bike paths, street lights,
street trees, mass public transportation, vehicle parking and bridges; or
(5) Parks and recreation, including but not limited to mini-neighborhood parks, neighborhood
parks, community parks and other recreational facilities.
DEVELOPMENT. Constructing a building or a structure, conducting a mining operation, making
a physical change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, dividing land into two or more parcels
(including partitions and subdivisions), and creating or terminating a right of access.
IMPROVEMENT FEE. A fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed
Sewers
31
after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to CCT 52.078.
LAND AREA. The area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the parcel boundaries
upon a horizontal plane with the exception of a portion of the parcel within a recorded right-of-way or
easement subject to a servitude for a public street or scenic or preservation purpose.
PARCEL OF LAND. A lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that is occupied or may be occupied
by a structure or structures or other use, and that includes the yards and other open spaces required under
the zoning, subdivision or other development ordinances.
QUALIFIED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. A capital improvement that is required as a condition
of development approval, identified in the plan adopted pursuant to CCT 52.082, and either:
(1) Not located on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval; or
(2) Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development
approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular
development project to which the improvement fee is related.
REIMBURSEMENT FEE. A fee for costs associated with capital improvements constructed or
under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to CCT 52.078 and for which the City Council
determines capacity to exist.
SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE. A reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a
combination thereof along with a Acompliance fee@ that takes into account direct costs of complying
with the provisions of this subchapter, including the costs of developing system development charge
methodologies and providing an annual accounting of system development charge expenditures; which
are assessed or collected at any of the times specified in CCT 52.083. It shall also include that portion of
a water or sanitary sewer system connection charge that is greater than the amount necessary to
reimburse the city facilities. SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE does not include fees assessed or
collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in lieu of a local improvement district
assessment, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision.
(Ord. 1272, passed 12-19-2012)
CCT 52.078 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES ESTABLISHED.
(A) System development charges for each type of capital improvements may be proposed by the
City Manager and shall be established and may be revised by resolution of the City Council.
(B) Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this subchapter or other local or state laws, a
system development charge is hereby imposed upon all development within the city, and upon all
development outside the boundary of the city that connects to or otherwise uses the water, sanitary sewer,
drainage and flood control, transportation or parks and recreation facilities of the city.
(Ord. 1272, passed 12-19-2012)
Tillamook - Public Works
32
CCT 52.079 METHODOLOGY.
(A) The methodology used to establish the reimbursement fee shall, where applicable, be based on
ratemaking principles employed to finance publicly-owned capital improvements, prior contributions by
then-existing users, gifts or grants from federal or state government or private persons, the value of
unused capacity available to future system users or the cost of the existing facilities, and other relevant
factors identified by the City Council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future systems
users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities and shall be
available for public inspection.
(B) The methodology used to establish the improvement fee shall, where applicable, demonstrate
consideration of the projected cost of capital improvements identified in the plan and list adopted
pursuant to CCT 52.082 that are needed to increase the capacity of the systems to which the fee is related
and for which the need for increased system capacity will be required to serve the demands placed on the
system by future users. Improvement fees shall be calculated to obtain the cost of capital improvements
for the projected need for available system capacity for future users.
(C) The methodology shall also provide for a credit as authorized in CCT 52.085.
(D) The methodology shall also provide for periodic indexing of system development charges for
inflation, as long as the index used is:
(1) A relevant measurement of the average change in prices or costs over an identified time
period for materials, labor, real property or a combination of the three;
(2) Published by a recognized organization or agency that produces the index or data source for
reasons that are independent of the system development charge methodology; and
(3) Incorporated as part of the established methodology or identified and adopted in a separate
ordinance, resolution or order.
(E) Except when authorized in methodology adopted under division (C) of this section, the fees
required by this code which are assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in
lieu of a local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions
imposed by a land use decision are separate from and in addition to the system development charge and
shall not be used as a credit against such charge.
(F) The methodology used to establish the improvement fee or the reimbursement fee, or both, shall
be contained in a resolution adopted by the City Council.
(G) After the effective date of this subchapter, the city shall maintain a list of persons who have
made a written request for notification prior to adoption or amendment of a methodology for any system
development charge. Written notice shall be mailed to persons on the list at least 90 days prior to the first
hearing to establish or modify a system development charge, and the methodology supporting the
adoption or amendment shall be available at least 60 days prior to the first hearing to adopt or amend. The
failure of a person on the list to receive a notice that was mailed shall not invalidate the city’s subsequent
Sewers
33
action. The city may periodically delete names from the list, but at least 30 days prior to removing a name
from the list, the city must notify the person whose name is to be deleted that a new written request for
notification is required if the person wishes to remain on the notification list.
(Ord. 1272, passed 12-19-2012)
CCT 52.080 AUTHORIZED EXPENDITURES.
(A) Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements (and not operating expenses)
associated with the systems for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to repayment
of indebtedness.
(B) Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity increasing capital improvements, including
expenditures relating to repayment of debt for the improvements. An increase in system capacity may be
established if a capital improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing
facilities or provides new facilities. The portion of the improvements funded by improvement fees must
be related to the need for increased capacity to provide service for future users. A capital improvement
being funded wholly or in part from revenues derived from the improvement fee shall be included in the
plan adopted by the city pursuant to CCT 52.082.
(C) Notwithstanding divisions (A) and (B) of this section, system development charge revenues
may be expended on the direct costs of complying with the provisions of this subchapter, including the
costs of developing system development charge methodologies and providing an annual accounting of
system development charge expenditures.
(Ord. 1272, passed 12-19-2012)
CCT 52.081 EXPENDITURE RESTRICTIONS.
System development charges shall not be expended for:
(A) Costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an
incidental part of other capital improvements; or
(B) Costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements.
(Ord. 1272, passed 12-19-2012)
CCT 52.082 IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
Prior to the establishment of a system development charge, the City Council shall adopt a plan that:
(A) Lists the capital improvements that the City Council intends to fund in whole or in part with
improvement fee revenues;
Tillamook - Public Works
34
(B) Lists the estimated cost and percentage of costs eligible to be funded with revenues from the
improvement fee for each improvement; and
(C) Describes the process for modifying the plan. If a system development charge will be increased
by a proposed modification of the list to include a capacity increasing capital improvement, the city shall
provide, at least 30 days prior to the adoption of the modification, notice of the proposed modification to
the persons who have requested written notice under CCT 52.079. The city shall hold a public hearing if
a written request for a hearing on the proposed modification is received within seven days of the date the
proposed modification is scheduled for adoption. A change in the amount of a reimbursement fee or an
improvement fee is not a modification of the system development charge methodology if the change in
amount is based on a change in cost of materials, labor or real property applied to projects or project
capacity as set forth on the list adopted pursuant to CCT 52.082 or the periodic application of the
Construction Cost Index published by the Engineering News Record and is incorporated as part of the
established methodology or identified and adopted in a separate ordinance, resolution, or order.
(Ord. 1272, passed 12-19-2012)
CCT 52.083 COLLECTION OF CHARGE.
(A) The system development charge is payable upon issuance of:
(1) A building or construction permit of any kind, including any permit or permits issued in
connection with the set-up or installation of any trailer, mobile or manufactured home;
(2) A development permit;
(3) A development permit for development not requiring the issuance of a building permit;
(4) A permit to connect to the water system;
(5) A permit to connect to the sanitary sewer system;
(6) A permit to connect to the drainage and flood control system; or
(7) A permit to connect to the transportation system.
(B) If development is commenced or connection is made to the water, sanitary sewer, drainage and
flood control or transportation systems without an appropriate permit, the system development charge is
immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required.
(C) The City Manager or his or her designee shall collect the applicable system development charge
from the person responsible for or receiving the benefit of the development in accordance with division
(A) above. The City Manager or his or her designee shall not issue such permit or allow such connection
until the charge has been paid in full, or unless an exemption is granted pursuant to CCT 52.084, or
unless arrangements for payment of the charge, under such terms as the City Manager deems reasonable,
have been made, pursuant to division (D), which follows.
Sewers
35
(D) The obligation to pay the unpaid system development charge and interest thereon shall be
secured by property, bond, deposits, letter of credit or other security acceptable to the City Manager. The
net value of security accepted, excluding liens and encumbrances thereon, must be at least double the
amount of the system development charge secured thereby.
(E) If the system development charge is not paid upon issuance of the applicable permit, and the
applicant chooses to pay the charge in installments and secure the obligation with security acceptable
under division (D) above, then, there shall be added to the amount owing the following:
(1) Interest on the obligation at the rate established by the City Council for all unpaid
assessments;
(2) All costs associated with processing the particular form of security, such as title insurance,
escrow fees, recording costs, collection escrow costs and/or any other expense associated with the city
accepting such security;
(3) Any and all costs, as determined by the City Manager or his designee, incurred in
establishing payment schedules and administering the collections process;
(4) When the charge is secured by bond pursuant to O.R.S. 223.205 through 223.295, any and
all costs associated with administering the bond assessment program and issuing the bonds, as
determined by the City Manager or his or her designee;
(5) The intent of this division (E) is to recognize that the payment of a system development
charge by installments increases the administrative expense to the city. It is the intent of this division to
shift that added expense to the applicant, so that the city will not lose system development charge
revenue by accepting installment payments on such charges. Subject to the provisions of this division
(E), all costs added to the system development charge will be determined by the City Manager.
(F) No person may connect to the water or sewer systems of the city unless the appropriate system
development charge has been paid or the installment payment method has been applied for and approved.
(Ord. 1272, passed 12-19-2012)
CCT 52.084 EXEMPTIONS.
(A) The following are exempt from system development charges:
(1) Structures and uses established and legally existing on or before the effective date of this
subchapter are exempt from a system development charge, except water and sewer charges, to the extent
of the structure or use then existing and to the extent of the parcel of land as it is constituted on that date.
Structures and uses affected by this subsection shall pay the water or sewer charges pursuant to the terms
of this subchapter upon the receipt of a permit to connect to the water or sewer system.
(2) Additions to single-family dwellings that do not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit.
Dwelling unit means any building or portion thereof which contains living facilities, including provisions
Tillamook - Public Works
36
for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation;
(3) An alteration, addition, replacement or change in use that does not increase the parcel’s or
structure’s use of the system to which the system development charge applies;
(4) A project financed by city revenues is exempt from all portions of the system
development charge.
(5) A project financed by Habitat for Humanity is exempt provided that such projects provide
housing to families at or below the city’s 80 percent median income level as defined by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
(B) Any enlargement or change and any new connection or utilization of the system to which a
system development charge applies shall not be exempt.
(Ord. 1272, passed 12-19-2012; Ord. 1336, passed 7-2-2018)
CCT 52.085 CREDITS.
(A) A system development charge shall be imposed when a change of use of a parcel or structure
occurs, but credit shall be given in an amount equal to the existing system development charge as applied
to the pre-existing use. The credit so computed shall not exceed the calculated system development
charge. No refund shall be made on account of such credit.
(B) An improvement fee credit shall be given for the cost of a qualified public improvement
associated with a development, subject to the following:
(1) Such credit shall be only for the improvement fee charged for the type of improvement
being constructed, and credit for qualified public improvements under CCT 52.077 may be granted only
for the cost of that portion of such improvement that exceeds the city’s minimum standard facility size or
capacity needed to serve the particular development property or project. The applicant shall have the
burden of demonstrating that a particular improvement qualifies as qualified public improvement.
(2) When the construction of a qualified public improvement gives rise to a credit amount
greater than the improvement fee that would otherwise be levied against the project receiving
development approval, the excess credit may be applied against improvement fees that accrue in
subsequent phases of the original development project, if any.
(3) Credits shall be used within ten years from the date the credit is given.
(4) Credit shall not be transferable from one development to another or from one type of capital
improvement to another.
(Ord. 1272, passed 12-19-2012)
CCT 52.086 SEGREGATION AND USE OF REVENUE.
Sewers
37
(A) All funds derived from a particular type of system development charge are to be segregated by
accounting practices from all other funds of the city. That portion of the system development charge
calculated and collected on account of a specific facility system shall be used for no purpose other than
those set forth in CCT 52.080.
(B) The City Manager or his or her designee shall provide the City Council with an annual
accounting, based on the city’s fiscal year, for system development charges showing the total amount of
system development charge revenues collected for each type of facility and the projects funded, either in
whole or in part, from each account.
(Ord. 1272, passed 12-19-2012)
CCT 52.087 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
(A) A person aggrieved by a decision required or permitted to be made by the City Manager or his
or her designee under this subchapter or a person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of system
development charge revenues may appeal the decision or the expenditure to the City Council by filing a
written request with the City Manager describing with particularity the decision of the City Manager or
his designee or the expenditure from which the person appeals.
(B) An appeal of an expenditure must be filed within two years of the date of the alleged improper
expenditure. Appeals of any other decision required or permitted to be made by the City Manager must
be filed within ten days of the date of the decision.
(C) The City Council shall determine whether the City Manager’s decision or the expenditure is in
accordance with this chapter and the provisions of O.R.S. 223.297 to 223.314 and may affirm, modify or
overrule the decision. If the City Council determines that there has been an improper expenditure of
system development charge revenues, the City Council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent
amount shall be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent.
(D) A legal action challenging the methodology adopted by the City Council pursuant to
CCT 52.079 shall not be filed later than 60 days after adoption, and shall be contested according to the
procedure set forth in O.R.S. 34.010 to 34.100, and not otherwise.
(Ord. 1272, passed 12-19-2012)
CCT 52.999 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed
shall be subject to CCT 10.99.
(B) (1) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of CCT 52.015 through
52.020 and 52.050 through 52.060, excluding CCT 52.018(A), upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine up to $250.00 per offense. Each person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of
Tillamook - Public Works
38
a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of these sections is
committee or continued by the person, firm or corporation, and shall be punished accordingly.
(2) Any person, firm or corporation shown to be in violation of CCT 52.018(A), by smoke
testing, TV or pressure tests of any service lateral, shall be notified by the city by personal service or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and given 30 days to correct the defects in the service lateral. If,
after 30 days of the notification, a correction of the defects has not been made, then the sewer rates for the
property served by the lateral shall be doubled. For each subsequent 30-day period within which
correction of defects is not made, the sewer service rates for the property served by the defective lateral
shall again be doubled to offset the person’s, firm’s or corporation’s excessive use of the city’s collection
system and disposal plant capacities.
(1977 Code, ' 3-6)
(C) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of CCT 52.015 through 52.020,
52.035 through 52.039 or 52.050 through 52.060, shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine up
to $250.00 per offense. Each person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for
each and every day during any portion of which any violation of these sections is committed or continued
by the person, firm or corporation, and shall be punished accordingly.
(D) Unless otherwise indicated, any offense under this chapter is classified as a violation punishable
by a fine set by resolution.
(1977 Code, ' 3-7) (Ord. 926, passed 8-7-1978; Ord. 959, passed 7-16-1979; Ord. 969, passed
3-17-1980; Ord. 1030, passed 4-18-1983; Ord. 1047, passed 4-2-1984; Ord. 1315, passed 6-6-2016; Ord.
1334, passed 3-5-2018)
Design Standards
39
CHAPTER 53: DESIGN STANDARDS
Section
Public Works Design Standards
53.01 Short title and authority.
Appendix A
PUBLIC WORKS DESIGN STANDARDS
CCT 53.01 SHORT TITLE AND AUTHORITY.
This subchapter shall be known as the “City of Tillamook Public Works Design Standards”
(hereafter “this subchapter”). This chapter has been adopted to provide clear and concise information to
contractors, developers and engineers providing services within the City of Tillamook.
(Ord. 1298, passed 1-5-2015)
APPENDIX A: PUBLIC WORKS DESIGN STANDARDS
The Public Works Design Standards of the city, is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in full
herein. Copies are available through city offices.
(Ord. 1298, passed 1-5-2015)
1
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
70. GENERAL PROVISIONS
71. TRAFFIC CONTROL
72. PARKING
2
3
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Truck Restrictions
70.14 General Provisions
70.15 Restricting Trucks, Certain Vehicles, Weight Restrictions
70.99 Penalty
TRUCK, VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
' 70.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(A) Under the Federal Aviation Administration Authorization Act of 1994 as amended, 49 USC § 1450
(C)(1) generally prohibits states and cities from regulating prices, routes or services of any motor carrier
with respect to the transportation of property, except for public safety reasons.
(B) There are certain locations within the City of Tillamook with narrow streets, blind curves or other
unusual conditions where large trucks, and certain other vehicles, particularly those longer than a
three-axle, single unit truck as defined in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, larger than
eight feet wide and 30 feet long and any vehicle with an extended trailer or a weight of over 10,000 lbs.,
can cause dangerous situations for themselves, the road surface, other automobiles and pedestrians who
are traveling in those areas.
(C) The City identifies in the City Transportation System Plan (TSP) the City’s suggested freight routes,
providing a connection between state facilities (such as highways) and major freight destinations and
industrial businesses in the city.
(Ord. 1343, passed 3-4-2019)
' 70.15 LIMITING TRUCKS TO CERTAIN STREETS TO PROTECT PUBLIC SAFETY.
(A) The City Council has determined that motor vehicles or trucks longer than a three-axle, single
unit truck, larger than eight feet wide and 30 feet long and any vehicle with an extended trailer or a
weight of over 10,000 pounds, jeopardize the public’s safety when those vehicles travel on particular
Tillamook - Traffic Code
4
streets, roads or intersections, and the City Council, desires by ordinance, to prohibit such vehicles on
those streets or roads.
(B) The City Council has based its findings on evidence submitted by a qualified Engineer,
including, but not limited to:
(1) The turning radius and other geometries of an intersection;
(2) The width of a street or roadway;
(3) The base of a street or roadway;
(4) The maximum length and/or weight of a truck or other motor vehicle(s) that can safely
maneuver the intersection or area of the right-of-way without leaving the paved driving area;
(5) Proximity to schools and other high pedestrian use, especially with children;
(6) The speed limit in the area; and
(7) Any other deficiency that causes the public safety to be jeopardized.
(C) It is necessary for public safety reasons to limit trucks and certain other vehicles larger than
three-axle, single unit, larger than eight feet wide and 30 feet long or a weight of over 10,000 pounds, to
driving on the streets set forth below:
(Ord. 1343, passed 3-4-2019)
CERTAIN VEHICLE TRUCK RESTRICTED STREET(S).
Pursuant to ' 70.15, the following streets are hereby designated as certain vehicle, truck restricted:
(Ord. 1269, passed 10-15-2012; Ord. 1343, passed 3-4-2019) Penalty, see ' 70.99
(D) Nothing in this section shall prohibit the following from traveling on a restricted street:
(1) School and mass transit busses;
(2) Trucks collecting solid wastes or recyclables within the city;
(3) Emergency vehicles;
(4) Motor vehicles that are picking up from, delivering to, or servicing a location on the
restricted street, and travels on the restricted street or road for the shortest distance possible;
(5) Driving to and from the home of the vehicle’s owner/operator, if located on the restricted
General Provisions
5
street; or
(6) Motor vehicles that are originating from or returning to their home business located on the
restricted street, and travel on the restricted street or road for the shortest distance possible.
(Ord. 1269A, passed 10-15-2012; Ord. 1343, passed 3-4-2019) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 70.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed
shall be subject to ' 10.99.
(C) Any person, firm, corporation, trust, partnership, or other legal entity that violates or refuses to
comply with ' 70.15 shall have committed a civil infraction and shall be subject to a fine of up to $250.
Each incident shall constitute a new violation.
(Ord. 1102, passed 3-5-1990; Ord. 1142, passed 3-4-1996; Ord. 1269A, passed 10-15-2012; Ord. 1343,
passed 3-4-2019)
Tillamook - Traffic Code
6
7
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
71.001 Short title
71.002 Definitions, interpretation and conflict of laws
71.003 Penalties, fees set by resolution
Administration
71.015 Powers of the Council
71.016 Duties of the City Manager
71.017 Authority of police
General Regulations
71.030 Crossing private property
71.031 Unlawful riding
71.032 Roller skates, roller blades, skateboards, scooters, bicycles, sleds
71.033 Damaging sidewalks and curbs
71.034 Removing glass and debris
71.035 Storage of motor vehicles, personal property on streets, city parking lots or city property
Bicycles, Skateboards, Roller-skates, Scooters
71.050 Operating rules
71.051 Impounding of bicycles
71.052 Bicycle licensing
71.053 Renting of bicycles
Pedestrians
71.065 Pedestrians must use crosswalks
Parades and Processions
71.080 Prohibited activity
71.081 Parade permit
71.082 Appeal to Council
Tillamook - Traffic Code
8
71.083 Offenses against parade
71.084 Permit revocable
71.085 Funeral procession
71.999 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 71.001 SHORT TITLE.
This chapter may be cited as “Tillamook City Uniform Traffic Ordinance” or “this chapter.”
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
' 71.002 DEFINITIONS, INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT OF LAWS.
BUS STOP means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for use for bus loading or
unloading of passengers.
BUSINESS means any and all businesses that provide a service, merchandise or goods and collect fees
for that service, merchandise or goods; clubs and organizations with restricted memberships that
receive payment for food and drink served to members and non-members; providers of professional
services, and collecting fees for services provided.
CITY means the City of Tillamook, Oregon, a Municipal Corporation. “City” also means the geographic
area within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Tillamook.
CITY PROPERTY means, for the purposes of this and other section(s), property owned and/or
controlled by the city as described in this or other section(s). For example, city property include, but is
not limited to, highways, roadways, public rights of way, sidewalks, alleys, parking lots, parks, open
spaces and any other city owned property. (This does not include private parking lots or private property;
either open to the public or controlled access).
COMPACT VEHICLE means a motor vehicle, the overall length (bumper to bumper) of which is
less than 165 inches.
Traffic Control
9
DOWNTOWN PARKING DISTRICT means the parking district to include all commercial and public
properties enclosed within and fronting on the below streets:
The outer boundaries of the district will be described as Stillwell Avenue from Front Street to
Fifth Street, to also include a westward Fourth Street right-of-way extension to mid-block approaching
Grove; Front Street from Stillwell Avenue to Pacific Avenue, to also include the Hoquarton Landing and
the City parking lot on Front at Ivy, as part of the Sue H Elmore Park; Pacific Avenue from Front to First
Street; First Street from Pacific Avenue to Madrona Avenue; Madrona Avenue from First Street to
Fourth Street, to also include an eastward 3rd Street right-of-way extension to Nestucca Avenue; Fourth
Street from Madrona Avenue to Laurel Avenue; Laurel Avenue from Fourth Street to Fifth Street; Fifth
Street from Laurel Avenue to Main Avenue; Fifth Street from Main Avenue to Stillwell Avenue on the
north half of the right-of-way only, back to the point of beginning. All streets, right of ways and parking
lots within the above described boundaries are included in the district and subject to any restrictions
assigned through resolution.
EMPLOYER/EMPLOYEE means any owner, operator, sales person, agent or worker whether paid by
salary, bonus, commission, piece work or hourly wage and associated with or working for any
commercial, professional, fraternal or public establishment within the Tillamook City Parking District
unless excluded through franchise agreement or federal or state laws.
HOLIDAY. Those days set by resolution, as well as other days designated by city council.
IMPROPER PARKING. Where marked parking spaces are provided, a vehicle shall be positioned
within the parallel lines provided or within the lines marked perpendicular to curb for parallel parking.
LOADING ZONE. A space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for the purpose of loading or
unloading passengers or materials during specified hours of specified days.
MUNICIPAL COURT means the Municipal Court Judge or the Violations Bureau Clerk(s).
OFFICER means any City of Tillamook police officer or any other City of Tillamook police employee,
full time, part time or temporary, approved by the chief of police to enforce Code of the City of
Tillamook, or Oregon Revised Statutes, enforceable as violations, within the city limits of Tillamook.
OUT OF STATE VEHICLE means a vehicle registered in a state other than Oregon and owned by a
person, firm or corporation not working or residing within Tillamook County, Oregon.
PARK means to stand, stop or otherwise cause a motor vehicle to cease motion. “Park” does not include
vehicle movement interrupted by a traffic control device.
PARKING LANE means that portion of any roadway designated for or normally used to park
vehicles.
PERSON means a natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, police officer, or city.
Includes a member of the police of a city, municipal or quasi-municipal corporation.
Tillamook - Traffic Code
10
PROOF OF LIABILITY INSURANCE must include insurance company name, a currently valid
policy, its number and date of policy expiration, the vehicle(s) insured and the driver(s) insured.
PROOF OF OWNERSHIP means the title or registration in the claimant’s name (or signed off in case
of a Motor Vehicles title). The vehicle must have valid plates and tags.
ROADWAY means the portion of a highway/street that is improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular traffic exclusive of the shoulder.
STREET means highway, road or street as defined in ORS, including the entire width of the right-of
-way.
TAXICAB STAND means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for use by taxicabs.
TRAFFIC LANE means that area of the roadway used for the movement of a single line of traffic.
TRAILER means every vehicle, without motive power designated or designed to be drawn or towed by
another vehicle.
TRASH CONTAINER means an A.N.S.I. (American National Standards Institute), approved, 1 to 40
cubic yard, metal drop box.
VEHICLE means every vehicle that is self-propelled, including without limitation tractors, forklift
trucks, motorcycles, road building equipment, street cleaning equipment, and any other vehicle capable
of moving under its own power, notwithstanding that the vehicle may be exempt from licensing under the
motor vehicle laws of Oregon. Vehicle also means any trailer, whether or not required to be licensed or
registered by Oregon Revised Statutes. Vehicle also includes bicycles.
As used in this section, the singular includes the plural, and the masculine includes the
feminine.
The definitions of words and phrases used in this section and found in the Oregon Vehicle Code are
incorporated here by reference to supplement this section. However words and phrases specifically
defined herein shall control over conflicts with the Oregon Vehicle Code.
Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the definitions contained in the
Oregon Revised Statutes, as now or hereafter constituted, are adopted by reference and made a part of
this chapter. In any conflict of laws, the city’s definitions and interpretation shall control. The City
Council expressly retains the exclusive authority to define and interpret the meaning and application of
the city’s ordinances, orders, rules, resolutions and/or other city law, even those laws borrowed from any
other jurisdiction and incorporated as city law, such as, the Oregon Revised Statutes. The City Council
reaffirms and adopts current O.R.S. and O.A.R. in effect and referenced in this chapter.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010; Ord. 1263, passed 1-3-2012; Ord. 1337, passed 10-5-2018) Penalty, see
' 71.999
Traffic Control
11
' 71.003 PENALTIES, FEES SET BY RESOLUTION.
(A) Unless otherwise indicated, any offense under this chapter is classified as a violation punishable
by a fine set by resolution. Penalties not set by resolution shall be $250.00 per violation.
(Ord 1315, passed 6-6-2016)
(B) Each day or distinct time period of a violation, as described in this chapter, shall be considered a
separate violation, subject to a separate penalty as described in this chapter and by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 71.999
ADMINISTRATION
' 71.015 POWERS OF THE COUNCIL.
(A) Subject to state laws, the City Council, on all highways, streets, roadways, alleys, city property,
parks and city parking lots, shall exercise all road traffic and parking authority for the city except those
powers expressly delegated by this chapter or another section.
(B) The powers of the Council include but are not limited to:
(1) Designation of city-controlled through streets and directions of travel;
(2) Designation of truck routes;
(3) Designation of parking meter zones, spaces, rates and space leases;
(4) Designation of the type of vehicle traffic allowed;
(5) Authorization of greater maximum weights, heights or lengths for vehicles using city
streets than specified by state law;
(6) Revision of speed zones;
(7) Revision of speed limits in parks, city property and city parking lots;
(8) Temporary or permanent closure of any public roadway, street or other public way in the
city, not subject to state or federal control; and
(9) The regulation of all other vehicle and pedestrian uses of city property as reasonably
necessary for the public’s general health, safety and welfare, whether temporary or permanent.
Tillamook - Traffic Code
12
(C) Establishment, removal or alteration of the following traffic controls:
(1) Crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes, intersection channelization and areas where
drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left or U-turns, and the time when the prohibition applies; and
(2) Parking areas, parking restrictions and time limitations, including the form of permissible
parking.
(D) All vehicle and pedestrian regulations apply 24 hours a day, seven days a week, uninterrupted,
unless otherwise specified.
(E) All vehicle and pedestrian traffic control shall be posted by signs reasonably calculated to
inform the public of the regulation and of the time and place to which it applies. Signs conforming to
federal and state highway standards meet this standard.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
' 71.016 DUTIES OF THE CITY MANAGER.
The City Manager or his or her designee shall exercise the following duties: implement the Code of
the City of Tillamook, resolutions and motions of the Council.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
' 71.017 AUTHORITY OF POLICE.
The Police Chief or his or her designee shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
' 71.030 CROSSING PRIVATE PROPERTY.
No operator of a vehicle shall proceed from one street to another street by crossing private property
without the permission of the private property owner. This provision shall not apply to the operator of a
vehicle who stops on the property for the purpose of procuring or providing goods or services.
Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 71.999
' 71.031 UNLAWFUL RIDING.
(A) (1) The operator of a vehicle shall not permit a passenger to, and no passenger shall, ride on a
Traffic Control
13
vehicle on a street, premises open to the public or other city-owned property except within a part of the
vehicle designed or intended for the use of passengers.
(2) No person shall board or alight from a vehicle while the vehicle is in motion upon any
premises open to the public, street or other city-owned property.
(B) Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 71.999
' 71.032 ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER BLADES, SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS, SLEDS.
(A) No person shall:
(1) Use roller blades, roller skates, skateboards, scooters or sleds on sidewalks in public owned
parking lots in a designated parking district; or
(2) Use streets for traveling on sleds or similar devices except to cross at a crosswalk. When
crossing at a crosswalk, that person shall be subject to all duties applicable to pedestrians.
(B) Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010, Ord 1279, passed 8-19-2013) Penalty, see ' 71.999
' 71.033 DAMAGING SIDEWALKS AND CURBS.
(A) The operator of a motor vehicle shall not drive upon a sidewalk or roadside planting strip except
to cross at a permanent or temporary driveway.
(B) No person shall place dirt, wood or other material in the gutter or space next to the curb of a
street with the intention of creating a driveway.
(C) No person shall remove a portion of a curb, or move a motor vehicle or any device moved by a
motor vehicle upon a curb or sidewalk, without first obtaining city authorization and posting bond if
required. Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine to be set by resolution. A person who
causes damage to a curb shall be responsible for the cost of repair, in addition to any fine.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 71.999
' 71.034 REMOVING GLASS AND DEBRIS.
A party to a vehicle accident or a person causing broken glass or other debris to be upon a street shall
remove the glass and other debris from the street at his or her own expense. Violation of this section
shall be punishable by a fine to be set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 71.999
Tillamook - Traffic Code
14
' 71.035 STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES, PERSONAL PROPERTY ON STREETS, CITY
PARKING LOTS OR CITY PROPERTY.
(A) (1) No person shall store or permit to be stored on a street, city right-of-way, city parking lot or
city property, without permission of the City Manager, a vehicle or trailer, approved personal property,
trash containers, construction equipment or construction supplies for a period in excess of 24 hours.
Failure to move on a street (a minimum distance of 250 feet) a motor vehicle, trailer, trash container,
construction equipment or construction supplies for a period of 24 hours shall constitute prima facie
evidence of violation of this section.
(2) Vehicles directly in front of the owner’s residence shall be considered parked and not
stored, for purposes of this section, if the motor vehicle is currently registered to a resident at that address
and the vehicle is operational and currently insured; except that no vehicle, even in front of one’s
residence or business, shall be allowed to be parked for over 30 cumulative days in any six-month period.
Any vehicle(s) parked for over 30 cumulative days in a six-month period shall be in violation.
(B) When parked or stored on any city property, city right-of-way or street, any personal property,
trash containers, construction equipment or construction materials shall have safety, sight or warning
devices as to protect pedestrians or vehicles approaching. Trash containers, in addition to any warning
devices required by Public Works or the City Manager, shall have reflective devices or material placed
on them.
(C) The minimum requirements for reflectors shall be as follows.
(1) All trash containers shall be equipped with two front and two rear reflectors, as well as
forward and rearward side reflectors.
(2) Rear and rearward side reflectors shall be red.
(3) Front and forward side reflectors shall be amber.
(4) Rear reflectors shall be placed one on each side of the rear portion of the container, at the
corners.
(5) Front reflectors shall be placed one on each side of the front portion of the container, at the
corners.
(6) Forward side reflectors shall be mounted on each side, near the front of the container.
(7) Rearward side reflectors shall be mounted on each side, near the rear of the container.
(8) Reflectors shall be mounted on the container at a height not less than 15 inches and not
more than 60 inches above the ground on which the container sits.
Traffic Control
15
(9) Reflectors shall be of a size or characteristics and so mounted and maintained as to be
readily visible at night.
(10) Reflectors required to be mounted on the sides of the container shall reflect the required
color of light to the sides and those mounted to the front and rear shall reflect the required color light to
the front or rear.
(11) No trash container shall be placed on any street, city property or city right-of-way without
first obtaining a permit from the City Hall. A fee shall also be paid. The fee shall be set by resolution.
(D) A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine set by resolution. In addition, any cost
incurred by the city for removal of any vehicle, trailer, property, trash container, construction equipment,
construction material or any other property, vehicle or material shall also be recovered from the
responsible person(s).
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 71.999
BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, SCOOTERS
' 71.050 OPERATING RULES.
In addition to observing all other applicable provisions of this chapter and state law pertaining to
bicycles, a person shall:
(A) Not leave a bicycle, except in a bicycle rack. If no rack is provided, the person shall leave the
bicycle so as not to obstruct any roadway, sidewalk, driveway or building entrance. A person shall not
leave a bicycle in violation of the provisions relating to the parking of motor vehicles; and
(B) Not ride a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates or scooter upon a sidewalk within the Downtown
Parking District. Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine to be set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 71.999
' 71.051 IMPOUNDING OF BICYCLES.
(A) No person shall leave a bicycle on public or private property without the consent of the person
in charge or the owner thereof.
(B) A bicycle left unattended on city property for a period in excess of 24 hours may be impounded
by the Police Department.
(C) If a bicycle impounded under this chapter is licensed, or other means of determining its
ownership exist, the police shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner. No impounding fee shall
be charged to the owner of a stolen bicycle which has been impounded.
Tillamook - Traffic Code
16
(D) A bicycle impounded under this chapter which remains unclaimed shall be disposed of in
accordance with the city’s procedures for disposal of abandoned or lost personal property (see Chapter
34).
(E) Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 71.999
' 71.052 BICYCLE LICENSING.
(A) No person who lives or works within the city limits shall operate a bicycle upon the streets
within the city limits of this city, which has not been licensed as provided by this chapter.
(1) A number shall be assigned to each bicycle by the Police Chief or other official as directed
by him or her, and a record of the license issued shall be maintained as part of the police records. The
name of the city and license number assigned shall be affixed to the frame of the bicycle. The Police
Chief shall issue licenses and obtain the name and address of each person purchasing a license and record
the make, model and serial number (if any) of the bicycle.
(2) A person buying or otherwise obtaining a bicycle shall obtain a license from the Police
Chief.
(3) Bicycle licenses shall become invalid upon change of ownership.
(4) The fee for a bicycle license shall be set by resolution.
(5) A bicycle, whether or not licensed under the regulations of any other governmental unit, if
brought into this city, shall be licensed in accordance with this chapter within 30 days.
(6) No bicycle shall be licensed which is not equipped in accordance with this chapter.
(B) Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine to be set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 71.999
' 71.053 RENTING OF BICYCLES.
No person shall rent to another a bicycle not licensed and equipped as required by this chapter.
Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine to be set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 71.999
Traffic Control
17
PEDESTRIANS
' 71.065 PEDESTRIANS MUST USE CROSSWALKS.
(A) No pedestrian shall cross a street other than within a crosswalk in blocks with marked
crosswalks or if within 150 feet of a marked crosswalk. However, this section shall not excuse a
motorist from exercising reasonable care, in addition to any other duty required under local, state and/or
federal law.
(B) Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine to be set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 71.999
PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
' 71.080 PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.
No person shall organize or participate in a parade which may disrupt or interfere with traffic,
without first obtaining a city permit. A permit shall always be required of a procession of people
utilizing the public right-of-way and consisting of ten or more persons or five or more vehicles.
Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine to be set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 71.999
' 71.081 PARADE PERMIT.
(A) Application for parade permits shall be made to the City Manager at least 30 calendar days prior
to the intended date of the parade, unless for good cause the time is waived by the City Manager.
(B) Applications shall include the following information:
(1) The name and address of the person responsible for the proposed parade;
(2) The date of the proposed parade;
(3) The desired route, including assembling points;
(4) The number of persons, vehicles and animals which will be participating in the parade;
(5) The proposed starting and ending time; and
(6) The application shall be signed by the person designated as chairperson.
(C) If the City Manager, upon receipt of the application, determines that the parade can be
Tillamook - Traffic Code
18
conducted without endangering public safety and without seriously inconveniencing the general public,
he or she shall approve the route and issue the permit.
(D) If the City Manager determines that the parade cannot be conducted without endangering public
safety or seriously inconveniencing the general public, the City Manager may:
(1) Propose an alternate route;
(2) Propose an alternate date; or
(3) Refuse to issue a parade permit.
(E) The City Manager shall notify the applicant of his or her decision within five calendar days of
receipt of the application.
(F) If the City Manager proposes alternatives or refuses to issue a permit, the applicant shall have
the right to appeal his or her decision to the City Council.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
' 71.082 APPEAL TO COUNCIL.
(A) An applicant may appeal the decision of the City Manager by filing a written request of appeal
with the City Recorder within five business days after the City Manager has proposed alternatives or
refused to issue a permit.
(B) The Council shall schedule a hearing date, which shall not be later than the second regular
session following the filing of the written appeal with the City Recorder, and shall notify the applicant of
the date and time that he or she may appear either in person or by a representative.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
' 71.083 OFFENSES AGAINST PARADE.
(A) (1) No person shall interfere with a parade or parade participant.
(2) No person shall operate a vehicle that is not part of a parade between the vehicles or persons
comprising a parade while the parade is en route.
(B) Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine to be set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 71.999
Traffic Control
19
' 71.084 PERMIT REVOCABLE.
The City Manager may revoke a parade permit if circumstances show that the parade can no longer
be conducted consistent with public safely.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
' 71.085 FUNERAL PROCESSION.
(A) (1) A permit shall not be required to conduct a funeral procession.
(2) A funeral procession shall proceed to the place of interment by the most direct route, which
is both legal and practicable.
(3) The procession shall be accompanied by adequate escort vehicles for traffic control
purposes.
(4) All motor vehicles in the procession shall be operated with their lights turned on.
(5) No person shall interfere with a funeral procession.
(6) No person shall operate a vehicle that is not a part of the procession between the vehicles of
a funeral procession, when practical.
(B) Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine to be set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 71.999
' 71.999 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed
shall be subject to ' 10.99.
(B) Violation of this chapter, unless otherwise specified, shall be punishable by a fine to be set by
resolution.
\(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
20
CHAPTER 72: PARKING
Section
Parking Regulations, Generally
72.001 Method of parking
72.002 Prohibited parking
72.003 Use of loading zone
72.004 Exemption
72.005 Improper parking and penalties
Parking Meters
72.020 Deposit of coins
72.021 Legal time limits
72.022 Mechanical defect
72.023 Collections
72.024 Parking permits for construction purposes
72.025 Usage of revenues
Parking Citations and Owner Responsibility
72.040 Citations on illegally parked vehicles
72.041 Failure to comply with parking violation attached to parked vehicle
72.042 Notice of, and an opportunity to, contest proposed impound
72.043 Court order
72.044 Response by defendant
72.045 No response by defendant
Impoundment and Penalties
72.060 Impoundment of vehicles
72.061 Obstructing enforcement
72.062 Damaging parking control devices
72.063 Unauthorized use of parking permits
72.064 Unauthorized parking control devices
72.065 Owner responsibility
72.066 Presumption pertaining to registered owner
72.067 Violation classified
72.068 Costs, disbursements, fees and penalties
Parking
21
72.069 City impound fee
72.070 Fines and remedies
72.071 Interest
72.072 Hearing available to contest validity of tow and impoundment
Downtown Parking District
72.105 Definitions
72.106 Parking control
72.107 Parking restrictions
72.108 Overtime parking
72.109 Citations by officer on illegally parked vehicles
72.110 Citizen complaints, their service and citizen witness required
72.111 Limited exception from applicability
72.999 Penalty
PARKING REGULATIONS, GENERALLY
' 72.001 METHOD OF PARKING.
(A) On a street, highway, alley, city parking lot or city property:
(1) Where parking spaces are designated, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than in
the direction of the traffic flow and in such a manner that the front vehicle tire closest to the curb is
located within 12 inches of the curb and within a single marked space, unless the size or the shape of the
vehicle makes compliance impossible;
(2) Unless authorized by law, no person shall diagonal-park in any diagonal parking space by
backing into and parking backward in that space; and
(3) Where indicated by a yellow curb, no vehicle shall stand or park unless authorized by
specific sign and activity, to include but not be limited to bus, taxi or loading zone(s).
(B) Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine to be set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 72.999
' 72.002 PROHIBITED PARKING.
(A) On a street, highway, alley, city parking lot, loading zone or city property, no person shall park
or allow a vehicle to remain:
Tillamook - Traffic Code
22
(1) In violation of the State Vehicle Code or city code, in violation of a parking limitation or
restriction device or sign; or
(2) In an alley, for a stop of more than 30 consecutive minutes for loading and unloading
persons or materials.
(B) No operator shall park, and no owner shall allow a vehicle to be parked upon a street, city
parking lot or city property for the purpose of:
(1) Displaying the vehicle for sale, except a vehicle parked in front of a person’s residence or
place of work, while at work;
(2) Repairing or servicing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency; or
(3) Selling merchandise from the vehicle, except when proper permits have been obtained
from the city.
(C) Violation of this section is punishable by a fine to be set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 72.999
' 72.003 USE OF LOADING ZONE.
No person shall park a vehicle in a loading zone for more than 30 minutes, to load or unload persons
or materials. Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine to be set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 72.999
' 72.004 EXEMPTION.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons operating public vehicles, while engaged in
the public’s business, including without limitation:
(A) A city, county, state or public utility vehicle being used for public works maintenance,
construction, repair work, law enforcement or other public safety or vehicle being used for collection,
transportation or delivery of mail for the United States Postal Service; and
(B) Nothing in this chapter is intended to restrict a person with a state disability parking permit from
operating in compliance with state law.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
' 72.005 IMPROPER PARKING AND PENALTIES.
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on any street or public parking lot within the city with any part
of the vehicle extending over the marked lines. A vehicle which is longer or wider than the spaces
provided will not be in violation of this section. It shall also be a violation of this section to park in
Parking
23
violation of any height limitations indicated by sign or markings. Violation of this section shall be
punishable by a fine set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 72.999
PARKING METERS
' 72.020 DEPOSIT OF COINS.
A person parking a vehicle in a metered parking space shall immediately pay a parking space usage
fee by depositing United States of America coin in the appropriate parking meter sufficient for the time
the vehicle is parked there. However, a person may use remaining meter time sufficient for the person’s
parking use. Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine to be set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 72.999
' 72.021 LEGAL TIME LIMITS.
(A) (1) No person shall permit his or her vehicle to remain parked at a metered space after the time
on that parking space’s meter has expired.
(2) Parking meter fees are required for use of the metered parking spaces every day between
9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except on Sundays and holidays.
(B) Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine to be set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 72.999
' 72.022 MECHANICAL DEFECT.
An unintentional violation of '' 72.020 and 72.021 due to a mechanical failure of a parking meter is
a defense to a violation under either section.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
' 72.023 COLLECTIONS.
The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall be responsible for the collection of all coins
deposited in parking meters.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
' 72.024 PARKING PERMITS FOR CONSTRUCTION PURPOSES.
Tillamook - Traffic Code
24
The city may issue a parking permit to a person engaged in the construction, reconstruction or repair
of a building or installation of equipment in a building adjacent to a street within the Parking District. A
permit shall be issued only in non-metered areas, including alleys, which might be used or blocked off
without interference with commerce, or found reasonably close to the place where the person is engaged
and shall be issued for use for each particular construction job. A person with a properly issued permit
shall display it upon the permittee’s vehicle, easily visible from outside the vehicle. This will reserve
the parking space for the use of the permittee’s vehicle during the period when he or she is actually
engaged in the task for which the permit was issued. Violation of this section shall be punishable by a
fine to be set by resolution. Violation of this section may also result in the parking permit being
revoked.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
' 72.025 USAGE OF REVENUES.
Not less than 10% of all annual parking meter receipts may be budgeted yearly for parking
improvements.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
PARKING CITATIONS AND OWNER RESPONSIBILITY
' 72.040 CITATIONS ON ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.
Whenever a vehicle without an operator is found parked in violation of a restriction imposed by this
chapter, the officer finding the vehicle shall take its license number, and other information displayed on
the vehicle, which may identify its owner, and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a parking citation
for the operator to answer to the charge or pay the penalty. A subsequent violation occurs if the vehicle
remains in the same space after the issuance of a citation for a period which exceeds the time designated
as the parking time limitation for the space.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 72.999
' 72.041 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH PARKING VIOLATION ATTACHED TO PARKED
VEHICLE.
Upon order of the Municipal Court, vehicles used in the commission of a parking violation may be
impounded according to the provisions of this chapter and following due process. A person’s or
owner’s vehicle is subject to impound if the person or owner has two unpaid city parking convictions
issued to the same vehicle license plate or registration. A PARKING CONVICTION is a parking
citation that has been adjudicated by either a no contest or guilty plea or finding, or a finding of guilty by
failure to appear. An UNPAID, CITY PARKING CONVICTION does not include any unpaid
conviction for which an existing, court-authorized installment repayment plan for fines and other
assessments is not otherwise delinquent or in default.
Parking
25
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 72.999
' 72.042 NOTICE OF, AND AN OPPORTUNITY TO, CONTEST PROPOSED IMPOUND.
Notice of a proposed vehicle impound shall be served upon the vehicle’s registered owner, the
citation’s defendant (if different from owner), if known, and any person known to have a perfected or
recorded security interest in the vehicle as based on information on the registration from DMV. Notice
shall be served not less than 14 days in advance of any impound order. Service of notice shall be by any
means under state law reasonably calculated to convey actual notice to those person(s) entitled to notice,
including but not limited to personal service or first-class, certified, return receipt requested United
States mail. The defendant shall respond, if at all, in writing within 14 days from the date of mailing and
shall specify any affirmative defenses and explanations against the proposed impound.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
' 72.043 COURT ORDER.
The Court may order the vehicle impounded and assess any cost, disbursement or fee when
defendant has:
(A) Two unpaid city parking convictions, on the same vehicle license plate or registration;
(B) Been properly served notice of the pending vehicle impound proceeding; and
(C) Failed to respond, has waived his or her rights to contest the proposed impound and/or when the
Court finds the defendant failed to carry his or her burden of proof of any affirmative defense, excuse or
other explanation.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
' 72.044 RESPONSE BY DEFENDANT.
If defendant responds as required, the Court shall notify the defendant of the hearing date, time and
location on whether or not to order the proposed impound of the vehicle. The Court shall decide
whether or not to order impoundment of the vehicle in due course.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
' 72.045 NO RESPONSE BY DEFENDANT.
If the defendant does not timely respond, then the defendant shall be conclusively presumed to have
waived the defendant’s right to contest the proposed impound. The Court or its designee shall then issue
the order of impound.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
Tillamook - Traffic Code
26
IMPOUNDMENT AND PENALTIES
' 72.060 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.
(A) Impoundment. A vehicle is subject to impoundment whenever the vehicle is:
(1) Operated by a person who is driving while suspended or revoked, driving uninsured,
driving under the influence of intoxicants (DUII), or operating a vehicle without driving privileges or in
violation of driving restrictions;
(2) There is a court order for impoundment for unpaid parking violations; or
(3) In violation of ' 71.35 or ' 72.002 while on properly posted city property, streets or city
parking lot. A police officer may, without prior notice, order the vehicle to be impounded until a person
with right to possession of the vehicle complies with the conditions for release or the vehicle is ordered
released by a hearings officer or judge.
(B) Notice of towing/impoundment. In the event a police officer impounds a vehicle pursuant to
the provisions of division (A) above, notice consistent with the provisions of O.R.S. 819.180(2) shall be
sent within 48 hours of the impoundment (excluding weekends and holidays) to any owner(s), lessors or
security interest holder(s) as shown by the records of the appropriate Department of Motor Vehicles.
(C) Release of vehicle. Any person seeking the release of a vehicle impounded pursuant to the
provisions of division (A) above shall provide the city with proof of liability insurance, proof of
ownership and a valid operator’s license. In addition, any person lawfully entitled to the release of the
vehicle shall first pay, prior to the release of the vehicle, an administrative fee to the city. The
administrative fee shall be established by city resolution and the fee shall cover the administrative costs
of the impoundment. The person shall then be responsible to the towing company for all charges
incurred due to the impoundment of the vehicle.
(D) Inventory of contents. A vehicle that has been impounded, seized as evidence in a criminal
investigation or seized for forfeiture by the City Police Department, shall be inventoried for condition
and property contents to identify damage and to list all valuables in the vehicle to avoid civil liability.
The search and inventory shall be conducted pursuant to current City Police Department policies and
procedures.
(E) Release. A vehicle impounded for unpaid parking violations shall not be released until all
outstanding fines, towing and impoundment fees have been paid.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
' 72.061 OBSTRUCTING ENFORCEMENT.
Parking
27
(A) No person shall:
(1) Cover, erase or otherwise render indistinguishable any mark placed on the tires of a vehicle
by any officer having enforcement responsibility as provided by this chapter;
(2) Resist, interfere with or in any way hinder an officer who is actively in the discharge or
apparent discharge of the officer’s duties under this chapter;
(3) Give any false, untrue or misleading information to an officer; or
(4) Hinder, delay, mislead or impede an officer in the performance of his or her lawful duty.
(B) Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine to be set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 72.999
' 72.062 DAMAGING PARKING CONTROL DEVICES.
No person shall destroy, damage, deface, alter, tamper with or in any way impair the usefulness,
either temporarily or permanently, of any parking device or sign.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 72.999
' 72.063 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING PERMITS.
(A) No person shall copy, reproduce or alter any parking decal, form, sticker or other device issued
by the city pursuant to the provision of this chapter.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to use any altered, forged or expired permit on any vehicle
for the purpose of representing that the vehicle is in compliance with any section of this chapter, which
motor vehicle requires a sticker, form, decal or other device, when that vehicle and the owner or operator
thereof are not so entitled to use the same.
(C) Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine to be set by resolution.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 72.999
' 72.064 UNAUTHORIZED PARKING CONTROL DEVICES.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, erect, paint, inscribe or otherwise establish any
parking control device which purpose is to restrict or control parking, except any parking control devices
as may be authorized by the city and/or the state.
(B) Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine to be set by resolution. In addition, the
city may impound any device and hold until disposition is decided by the Municipal Court or other court
of venue.
Tillamook - Traffic Code
28
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 72.999
' 72.065 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
The owner, including the registered owner of a vehicle, who is parking in violation of a parking
restriction contained in this chapter, is responsible for any violation and fine, which may be assessed for
any violation of this chapter, except where the owner and/or registered owner proves that the possession
or use of the vehicle was secured by another without the consent of the owner and/or registered owner of
the motor vehicle.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 72.999
' 72.066 PRESUMPTION PERTAINING TO REGISTERED OWNER.
In a prosecution involving a parking violation under this chapter, proof that the vehicle that was
parked in violation of this chapter was registered to the defendant upon the records of the Department of
Motor Vehicles of this state shall constitute a presumption that the registered owner was the owner of the
vehicle at the time of the violation.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
' 72.067 VIOLATION CLASSIFIED.
Any offense described in this chapter is a violation punishable by fine. However other legal and/or
equitable remedies, costs, disbursements and/or fees may be assessed by the Court.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 72.999
' 72.068 COSTS, DISBURSEMENTS, FEES AND PENALTIES.
Upon a conviction of a violation of this chapter, the Court shall order that defendant pays any cost,
disbursement, fee or penalty authorized by this chapter. In addition, upon conviction by the Court, all
costs of removal and disposition of personal property, trash containers, construction equipment,
construction supplies, trash, vehicles or other property may also be levied as part of the fine.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 72.999
' 72.069 CITY IMPOUND FEE.
Defendant shall pay an administration fee, as set by resolution, for city staff arranging the tow and
impound of the vehicle. This fee expressly shall not include any private vendor charges for tow or
impound services.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
Parking
29
' 72.070 FINES AND REMEDIES.
(A) Defendant shall pay all fines assessed by the Court. Maximum fines shall be those currently
existing for the various infractions or offenses in this chapter or state law, unless otherwise modified by
this chapter or as set by Council resolution or subsequent amendment.
(B) The Court may award city restitution, damages and/or injunction.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010) Penalty, see ' 72.999
' 72.071 INTEREST.
Defendant shall pay interest at not less than the legal rate of interest on all amounts owed to city
which are 30 days or more past due originating from Court judgments or convictions.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
' 72.072 HEARING AVAILABLE TO CONTEST VALIDITY OF TOW AND
IMPOUNDMENT.
Tillamook - Traffic Code
30
In the event a person wishes to contest the validity of the impoundment of a vehicle seized pursuant
to this chapter, the person(s) must file a request to the city for a hearing within five calendar days of the
impoundment. When a timely request for a hearing is made, a hearing shall be held before a hearings
officer designated by the city. The hearing shall be set for four calendar days after the request is
received, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, but may be postponed at the request of the person
requesting the hearing. The city shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence
that there were reasonable grounds to believe that the vehicle was being operated in violation of O.R.S.
806.010, 807.010, 811.175, 811.182 or 813.010 or any provision of this chapter for which towing and
impoundment are city remedies. The police officer or parking enforcement officer who ordered the
vehicle impounded may submit an affidavit to the hearings officer in lieu of making a personal
appearance at the hearing. If the hearings officer finds that the impoundment of the vehicle was proper,
the hearings officer shall enter an order affirming the removal and shall find that the owner or person
entitled to possession of the vehicle is liable for the administrative fee and for usual and customary
towing and storage charges. The hearings officer may also find the owner or person entitled to
possession of the vehicle liable for costs of the hearing. If the hearings officer finds that reasonable
grounds for the impoundment of the vehicle was not supported by a preponderance of the evidence, then
the hearings officer shall order the vehicle released to the person entitled to possession and shall enter a
finding that the owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle is not liable for the administrative
fee and any towing or storage costs resulting from the impoundment. If there is a lien on the vehicle for
towing and storage charges, the hearings officer shall order it paid by the city.
(Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
DOWNTOWN PARKING DISTRICT
' 72.105 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
BLOCK. The area on both sides of a street between nearest cross-streets or intersection.
BUSINESS. Any and all businesses that provide a service, merchandise or goods and collect fees
for that service, merchandise or goods; clubs and organizations with restricted memberships that receive
payment for food and drink served to members and non-members; providers of professional services, and
collecting fees for services provided.
DAYS AND HOURS OF CODE ENFORCEMENT. Monday through Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., excluding Sundays and holidays.
DOWNTOWN PARKING DISTRICT. The downtown area of the city, defined by the boundaries
in the definition of DOWNTOWN PARKING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES below, where there is the
desire to control or restrict parking of employees, employers, residents, students, volunteers and resident
visitors, where indicated by approved sign(s), to provide customer parking and better access to
Traffic Schedules
31
businesses in the District.
DOWNTOWN PARKING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. The following streets, both sides of each
street are within the district, unless specifically indicated otherwise in this section. Parking Lots
specifically indicated, on identified boundaries are also now within the district.
The outer boundaries of the district will be described as Stillwell Avenue from Front Street to Fifth
Street, to also include a westward Fourth Street right-of-way extension to mid-block approaching
Grove; Front Street from Stillwell Avenue to Pacific Avenue, to also include the Hoquarton Landing
and the City parking lot on Front at Ivy, as part of the Sue H Elmore Park; Pacific Avenue from
Front to First Street; First Street from Pacific Avenue to Madrona Avenue; Madrona Avenue from
First Street to Fourth Street, to also include an eastward 3rd Street right-of-way extension to
Nestucca Avenue; Fourth Street from Madrona Avenue to Laurel Avenue; Laurel Avenue from
Fourth Street to Fifth Street; Fifth Street from Laurel Avenue to Main Avenue; Fifth Street from
Main Avenue to Stillwell Avenue on the north half of the right-of-way only, back to the point of
beginning. All streets, right of ways and parking lots within the above described boundaries are
included in the district and subject to any restrictions assigned through resolution.
EMPLOYEE/EMPLOYER. Any owner, operator, salesperson, agent or worker, whether paid by
salary, bonus, commission, piecework or hourly wage and associated with or working for any
commercial, professional, fraternal or public establishment within the City Parking District, unless
excluded through franchise agreement or federal or state laws.
EMPLOYEE/EMPLOYER VOLUNTEER. Any person, who not for compensation, acting or
serving willingly and with no constraint or guarantee of reward, performs any function(s) normally done
by an employee/employer in any commercial, professional, fraternal or public establishment within the
City Parking District, unless excluded through franchise agreement or federal or state laws.
OFFICER. Any city police officer, reserve police officer or other city employee, full-time,
part-time or temporary, approved by the Chief of Police to enforce city code or state statutes in regards to
any parking or code violations within the city limits.
PARKING DISTRICT. Includes all public streets and all off-street public parking facilities in the
boundaries of the Downtown Parking District.
PERMIT. A permit or pass, provided by the city, either for or not for a fee, set by resolution,
allowing parking in a parking space or area otherwise not allowed by this subchapter.
PERMIT(S). Include a daily construction permit as well as a delivery permit.
(1) DELIVERY PERMIT(S). Allow the permit holder(s) to park in any parking space in the
Downtown Parking District for up to 15 minutes at a time for the purpose of loading, unloading,
delivering or picking up items from his or her place of business or employment, providing a temporary
exemption from zone restriction(s) indicated for that space.
(2) DELIVERY AND CONSTRUCTION PERMITS. Shall be requested and provided
Tillamook - Traffic Code
32
through the Police Department.
RESIDENT. Regularly staying at an apartment or dwelling, a place where a person regularly stays
or lives, one’s legal domicile.
STUDENT. A student of any college, training center or school that receives payments from
students as tuition and accepts members of the public as customers who receive services for which
payments are made for those services, shall be classified as an employee/employer while attending the
college, training center or school.
VISITOR. Visiting, for any period of time, a resident or resident’s other visitor. This may include
other family member(s) who do not normally reside at the same residence as the resident.
WORK. All its common meanings, including activities as a volunteer or student.
ZONE(S). A specific number of connected parking space(s), either on a public street, or in a
public-owned parking lot, signed the same, to control duration of parking allowed and/or types of
person(s) allowed to park in those identified spaces.
(1) The goal of this section is to easily identify a specific area or number of spaces to have
consistent parking control for easier use and for easier enforcement. A specific number of parking
spaces could include but not be limited to a block, one side of a block, a row of parking spaces in a lot or
even an entire lot. Signs would all be consistent in the District and also be consistent with signs of
similar control, throughout the city.
(2) ZONE designation(s) for specific parking space(s) in city parking lot(s), on city street(s)
and other city-controlled parking area(s) or space(s) within the Downtown Parking District shall be
approved by the City Council by resolution.
(a) ZONE (A). Fifteen-minute parking, a maximum of 15 minutes at any one time in
spaces in this zone.
(b) ZONE (B). Thirty-minute parking, a maximum of 30 minutes at any one time in
spaces in this zone.
(c) ZONE (C). One-hour parking, a maximum of one hour at any one time in spaces in
this zone.
(d) ZONE (D). Two-hour parking, a maximum of two hours at any one time in spaces in
this zone.
(e) ZONE (E). Three-hour parking, a maximum of three hours at any one time in spaces
in this zone.
(f) ZONE (F). Four-hour parking, a maximum of four hours at any one time in spaces in
this zone.
Traffic Schedules
33
(g) ZONE (G). Eight-hour parking, a maximum of eight hours at any one time in spaces
in this zone.
(h) ZONE (H). Permit parking only, permits provided by the city, by process, with or
without fee.
(i) ZONE (I). No employee, employer parking in this zone without permit.
(j) ZONE (J). No resident parking in this zone, without permit.
(k) ZONE (K). No volunteer, student parking in this zone, without permit.
(l) ZONE (L). No visitor parking in this zone, without permit.
(Ord. 1216, passed 12-4-2006; Ord. 1264, passed 1-3-2012; Ord. 1337, passed 10-15-18)
Cross-reference:
Downtown Parking District defined, see also ' 71.004
' 72.106 PARKING CONTROL.
A person parking within the Parking District shall comply with this subchapter and with the posted
times on signs marking individual spaces or areas.
(Ord. 1216, passed 12-4-2006) Penalty, see ' 72.999
' 72.107 PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
No person shall cause any motor vehicle operated by that person to be parked upon a public street or
public-owned parking facility within the Downtown Parking District, in violation of any Zone (I), (J),
(K) or (L) restriction defined in this subchapter, identified by sign, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. daily, excepting holidays and Sundays.
(Ord. 1216, passed 12-4-2006) Penalty, see ' 72.999
' 72.108 OVERTIME PARKING.
No person shall park a vehicle on the same block for longer than the time designated for the parking
space or area. Where a sign designates maximum parking time limits, movement of a vehicle within
that block or parking lot shall not extend the time limits for parking. A subsequent violation occurs if
the vehicle remains after issuance of a citation for an additional time period which exceeds the time
designated for the space.
(Ord. 1216, passed 12-4-2006) Penalty, see ' 72.999
Tillamook - Traffic Code
34
' 72.109 CITATIONS BY OFFICER ON ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.
Upon violation of this subchapter, an officer shall record on the citation the information necessary to
identify the vehicle, its owner or operator, and to prove the violation for ORS parking violations. For
parking violation citations where only City Code is violated, and the citation only lists the City Code
parking violation, there is no requirement for owner or operator identification per ORS 153.030(2).
The citation shall include a summons notifying the owner or operator of the date, time and place to
appear and answer the citation in Court. The officer shall next serve the citation on the owner or
operator personally or by affixing the citation to the vehicle if the operator cannot be readily located. If
contested, a citation alleging a beginning and ending date and time shall be construed as alleging the
maximum number of separate offenses possible for person or subject vehicle for the parking space or
area identified.
(A) Violation of CCT 72.108 (Overtime Parking) shall be punishable by a fine to be set by resolution.
Language for this distinction shall be reflected in the appropriate penalty code section of 72.999.
(Ord. 1345, passed 4-15-2019)
' 72.110 CITIZEN COMPLAINTS, THEIR SERVICE AND CITIZEN WITNESS REQUIRED.
A parking violation citation may also be served by an officer upon a person alleged to be in violation
of this subchapter following receipt of a sworn parking complaint from a citizen. A citizen swearing out
a parking complaint agrees to appear as a witness for the prosecution in Municipal Court. If a citizen is
unwilling to appear as a witness, then the citation shall not be served.
(Ord. 1216, passed 12-4-2006)
' 72.111 LIMITED EXCEPTION FROM APPLICABILITY.
(1) Any person, group, or business may apply to the City for a limited exemption from certain
restrictions imposed by this section, within the Downtown Parking District. All other laws
and or ordinances shall remain in full force and effect. Exemption may be requested in writing,
to the City Manager, who, upon review of the requested, approve the request in full or part, or
present the request to the appropriate committee, to then be presented to the Council for
approval.
(2) Vehicles with appropriately displayed current handicap placards or license shall be exempt from
timed parking as indicated in Oregon Revised Statutes. Ln addition, employees, employers and
residents in the Downtown Parking District are also exempt from employee, employer, resident
parking restrictions when appropriately displaying current handicap placards or license.
(Ord 1280, passed 8-19-2013; Ord. 1342, passed 2-4-2019)
' 72.999 PENALTY.
Traffic Schedules
35
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed
shall be subject to ' 10.99.
(B) Violation of CCT 72.001 through 72.005, 72.020 through 72.025, 72.040 through 72.045 and
72.060 through 72.073 shall be punishable by a fine to be set by resolution.
(C) Violations of CCT 72.105 through 72.111:
(1) Unless otherwise indicated, any offense under this chapter is classified as a violation
punishable by a fine set by resolution. Penalties not set by resolution shall be $250.00 per violation.
(Ord 1315, passed 6-6-2016)
(2) A person found in violation of CCT 72.107 shall, for the first violation, be issued a written
warning. For all subsequent violations, the violation is punishable by a fine not less than $50 and not to
exceed $100.
(3) Each violation of CCT 72.108 shall be punishable by a fine of $5.
(4) Each day or distinct time period of an offense described by CCT 72.105 through 72.111
shall be considered a separate violation subject to a separate penalty as described by that subchapter.
(Ord. 1216, passed 12-4-2006; Ord. 1249a, passed 6-7-2010)
1
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. ANIMALS
91. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
92. PARKS AND RECREATION
93. TREES
95. EXCLUSION FROM CITY PROPERTY
Tillamook - General Regulations
2
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
Animal Control
90.01 Definitions
90.02 Licensing
90.03 Dogs at large prohibited
90.04 Barking dogs prohibited
90.05 Waste Matter
90.06 Poisoning of animals
90.07 Removal of carcasses
90.08 Animals at large
90.09 Animals
90.10 Continuous Annoyance
90.11 Animal confinement
90.12 Parent responsibility
90.13 Dog as public nuisance
90.14 Exception to dog as public nuisance
90.15 Vicious dog
90.16 Reporting of biting dogs or other animals
90.17 Biting and rabid dogs and other animals; quarantine
90.18 Impoundment of dogs
90.19 Impounding regulations; disposition of impounded dogs
90.20 Cost paid by responsible person
90.21 Interference with officer
90.22 Entry onto private land
90.98 Penalty
90.99 Separate violations
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
ALLOW. To neglect to restrain, or permit.
Animals
3
ATTEMPTS TO BITE. The overt actions of a dog which constitute a substantial step towards the
actual biting of one or more persons.
CONTINUOUS ANNOYANCE. Permit any animal to cause annoyance, alarm or disturbance for
more than 15 continuous minutes at any time of the day or night, be it repeated barking, whining,
screeching, howling, braying or other like sounds which can be heard beyond the boundary of the
owner’s property or create offensive odors which can be noticed beyond the boundary of the owner’s
property.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal which has the propensity to bite or attack any person or
animal without provocation and the capacity to inflict serious harm on such person or animal.
Additionally, any animal that has injured a human being or animal without provocation is a dangerous
animal.
KEEPER. Any person, firm, association, entity or corporation who is the licensed keeper of, or who
keeps, or who harbors, or who possesses, or who maintains, or who has custody of, or who exercised
control over any animal (including but not limited to any barking dog, dangerous animal, dog, exotic
animal, farm animal, fowl, livestock, vicious dog, watchdog or wildlife) or who knowingly permits any
such animal to remain on any premises occupied by him or her. Keeper does not include licensed
veterinarians or commercial kennel operators temporarily maintaining on their premises, for a period of
not more than 30 days, dogs kept by other persons. Any person, except a licensed veterinarian or
commercial kennel operator who resides where any animal is kept, harbored, or cared for, shall be
presumed to be the keeper. This presumption may be rebutted by proof that the person has no right in
the animal, is not the licensed keeper, and is neither harboring nor caring for the animal.
LEASH. Any humane device constructed of rope, leather strap, chain or other sturdy material not
exceeding six feet in length, being held in the hand of a person capable of controlling the animal to
which it is attached.
MUZZLE. A device constructed of strong, soft material or metal. The muzzle must be made in a
manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent
it from biting any person or animal.
OWN OR OWNING. Having a right of property in a dog, caring for or acting as the custodian for a
dog, or knowingly permitting a dog to remain on or about premises occupied by that person.
OWNER. Any person having a right of property in a dog or who harbors a dog or who has it in his
care, or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog to remain on or about the “owner’s”
property.
RUNNING AT LARGE. Off or outside the premises belonging to the person having the care, custody
or possession of the dog while the dog is not under the complete control of such person by means of an
adequate leash, or is within a vehicle of such person.
SECURE ENCLOSURE. A structure in which an animal is confined such that the animal does not
have access to humans or other animals. The structure will not be less than eight feet long, four feet
Tillamook - General Regulations
4
wide and five feet tall. If the floor is not concrete, the outside walls must extend into the ground not
less than one foot to prohibit the digging out of the animal. The top of the structure must be covered.
VICIOUS DOG. Any dog that has the propensity to bite, attack, lunge at, chase or knock down a
person or animal without provocation and the capacity to inflict serious harm upon, or cause serious
harm to, the person or animal shall be regarded as vicious. Additionally if any dog that has bitten a
person or animal without provocation is a vicious dog.
(Ord. 1276, passed 7-15-2013)
§ 90.02 LICENSING.
(A) EVERY owner of a dog which has grown a set of permanent canine teeth or has attained the
age of six months, whichever event occurs first, shall immediately obtain a license for the dog.
(B) Licenses shall be valid for one 365 day year, the period being March 1st to February 28 and
are renewable on March 1st of each year, with renewal notice sent out February 1. A penalty set
by resolution shall be collected for each dog not licensed by March 15th with further penalty set
after March 30th.
(C) No license shall be issued until a certificate of vaccination for rabies, valid for the license
year, is presented to the licensing department.
(D) For record purposes, a new owner of a licensed dog is required to notify within thirty (30)
days the City Police Department at no additional cost to the new owner.
(E) A license tag issued to a dog owner shall be attached securely to a collar or harness on the
dog that license was issued to, at all times. If a license tag is lost, the owner may obtain a
duplicate license tag upon satisfactory proof of loss and payment of the required fee.
(F) Issuance of License. Licenses shall be issued through the Tillamook City Police Department
during regular business hours. All accounting and records shall be the responsibility of that
department.
(G) License Fees. The dog license fee which is due and payable upon the issuance of a license,
and the other fees required to be paid under the provisions of this ordinance, shall be set by
resolution.
(H) No license fee shall be required for any service dog. A license shall be issued for such dog
upon proper proof of rabies vaccination.
(Ord. 1276, passed 7-15-2013)
§ 90.03 DOGS AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having the care or custody or possession of any
male or female dog of any age, to suffer or permit the same to run at large.
Animals
5
(Ord. 1276, passed 7-15-2013)
§ 90.04 BARKING DOGS PROHIBITED.
No person who is the owner of a dog shall allow the dog to bark loudly or with such frequency as
to unreasonably deprive a person of peace and quiet. Once a complaint has been received by the police
department. A citation may be issued under the following condition: A complaint is signed by the
person complaining on the barking dog and that person complaining agrees to appear in court and
testify.
(Ord. 1276, passed 7-15-2013)
§ 90.05 WASTE MATTER.
It shall be unlawful for an animal owner to allow the animal to be an annoyance by depositing
solid waste matter on any improved property other than that of the animal owner. It shall be a defense
to this section if the animal owner immediately removes the solid waste.
§ 90.06 POISONING OF ANIMALS.
No person shall put out or place or allow to be placed any poison or other harmful chemical or
product which is likely to harm any dog, farm animal or other animal.
§ 90.07 REMOVAL OF CARCASSES.
No person shall permit an animal carcass owned or controlled by him to remain upon public
property, or to be exposed on private property, for a period of time longer than is reasonably necessary
to remove or dispose of the carcass.
§ 90.08 ANIMALS AT LARGE.
No owner or person in charge of an animal shall permit the animal to be at large. Animals at large
may be taken into custody by the city and disposed of in accordance with the procedures provided by
ordinance for the impoundment of dogs.
§ 90.09 ANIMALS.
When any livestock, poultry, or domestic animals bellow, neigh, bark, bray, bleat, crow or make any
other noise and thereby annoy, molest or disturb any person, the keeping and maintaining of the
poultry, livestock and domestic animals is declared to be a nuisance. For the purposes of this section,
the owner, the person in charge of, or in whose custody said poultry, livestock or domestic animals, or
either of them is kept, shall be deemed and conclusively presumed to be maintaining a nuisance.
Tillamook - General Regulations
6
§ 90.10 CONTINUOUS ANNOYANCE.
No animal owner shall permit any animal to cause continuous annoyance.
§ 90.11 ANIMAL CONFINEMENT.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit any animal to be confined within or on a
motor vehicle, or at any location, under such conditions as may endanger the health or well-being of
the animal, including but not limited to dangerous temperature, lack of food, water or attention, or
confinement with a dangerous animal. No enforcement officer shall be held criminally or civilly liable
for action pursuant to this section, provided the officer acts in good faith, or probable cause and without
malice.
§ 90.12 PARENT RESPONSIBILITY.
It shall be no defense of any violation of this Ordinance when the true or registered owner of a dog
is of such minor age as to prohibit appearing to answer such charge(s) in court, and upon such
occurrence, the parent or guardian of such minor owner shall be required to appear instead and assume
the full responsibility of the actions of their minor owner.
§ 90.13 DOGS AS PUBLIC NUISANCE.
A dog is a public nuisance if it:
(A) Bites a person.
(B) Chases vehicles or persons.
(C) Damages or destroys property of persons other than the owner of the dog.
(D) Scatters garbage.
(E) Trespasses on private property of persons other than the owner of the dog.
(F) Disturbs any person by frequent or prolonged noises.
(G) Makes unprovoked attacks on other animals.
§ 90.14 EXCEPTION TO DOG AS PUBLIC NUISANCE.
A dog shall not be considered a public nuisance if the dog bites:
Animals
7
(A) A person assaulting the dog’s owner or the owner’s spouse or children or persons legally
residing with the owner, or.
(B) A person wrongfully assaulting the dog, or
(C) A person trespassing upon premises owned, leased, or rented by the dog’s owner or the
owner’s spouse or children, or
(D) A person entering a fully fenced area, regardless of where located, if that area is
conspicuously posted with signs warning of the presence of the dog within the fenced area.
§ 90.15 VICIOUS DOG.
(A) No person shall own a vicious dog that is located within the city limits.
(B) A vicious dog may be impounded by any peace officer or animal control officer and
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this code for the impoundment and
disposition of dogs.
(C) A vicious dog running at large that because of its disposition or diseased condition is too
hazardous to apprehend, may be destroyed by a peace officer, animal control officer, or by a
person acting in defense of the person, the person’s family, another person, or another dog
or animal.
§ 90.16 REPORTING OF BITING DOGS OR OTHER ANIMALS.
1. The keeper of a dog or other animal that bites a human being shall immediately notify law
enforcement of such bite, the time and circumstances of the bite and name and address of the
person bitten, if known.
2. Any person who is bitten by a dog or other animal shall immediately notify the law
enforcement of such bite giving the description of the dog or other animal, the time and
circumstances of the bite and the name and address of the keeper, if known.
3. When a doctor, veterinarian, hospital employee, or other person has information that a person
has been bitten by a dog or other animal, such person shall immediately notify law enforcement.
4. It is sufficient to report as required in this section, to any law enforcement agency having
jurisdiction for the location the bite occurred.
§ 90.17 BITING AND RABID DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS—QUARANTINE.
When either the animal control authority or the appropriate county or state public health agency has
grounds to suspect that a dog or other animal is infected with the disease of rabies, there shall be
delivered to the keeper of the dog or other animal, a written notice. The biting of any person by a dog
or other animal shall constitute adequate grounds for suspecting the dog or other animal to be so
Tillamook - General Regulations
8
infected. The keeper shall thereupon be required to quarantine the dog or other animal for 10 days.
The delivery of the notice to a member of the keeper’s family 14 years of age or older at the premises
where the dog or other animal is kept or at the keeper’s usual place of residence shall be considered a
delivery of the notice to the keeper. Any dog or other animal required to be quarantined shall be
confined as follows:
1. Inside the keeper’s home or garage. Pet can be exercised within a fenced yard under adult
supervision or walked on a leash within keeper’s yard under the control of a responsible
adult.
a. Pet is to be kept away from other animals and people. This does not include other
pets within the home or family members.
b. Pet must not be removed from the residence for any reason during the quarantine
period. This includes rides in the car or walks off keeper’s property.
c. If the keeper’s pet has been vaccinated for rabies the keeper will need to provide
proof of the vaccine or the name and telephone number of the keeper’s veterinarian.
d. If the keeper’s pet has not been vaccinated for rabies the keeper will have to wait
until the pet is released from quarantine before the keeper’s veterinarian can give the
vaccination at the owner’s expense, in a veterinary clinic.
1) Any animal that has been bitten by a dog or other animal proved to be
rabid shall be destroyed.
2) If a dog or other animal exhibits symptoms of rabies while it is under
quarantine, the director of public health may order in writing that it be
destroyed and that its head be submitted to the State Public Health
Laboratory.
§ 90.18 IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS.
1. Any peace officer or animal control officer may impound a dog that is in violation of
this code.
2. Any person whose property has been trespassed upon by any dog or other animal in
violation of this code may apprehend that dog and contact the police department.
3. If an animal control officer or a peace officer has probable cause to believe that any
animal that is in an unoccupied motor vehicle may be in danger, the officer may enter the
motor vehicle and impound the animal and leave a notice in the vehicle where the animal
may be reclaimed.
4. Any peace officer or animal control officer may impound a dog for safekeeping if the owner
is being transported to jail or the hospital until a family member or friend can claim the dog
and pay all associated fees.
§ 90.19 IMPOUNDING REGULATIONS AND DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS.
The animal control authority shall keep any dog impounded for the period of time hereinafter specified.
The animal control authority shall dispose of such dogs in accordance with the following provisions.
Animals
9
An unlicensed dog or a dog that the keeper is unknown which has not been redeemed within three days
after impoundment may be adopted out or destroyed.
A licensed dog for which the keeper is known which has not been redeemed within five days of
notification of the owner by telephone or leaving a notice of impoundment on the keeper’s property in
plain view may be adopted out or destroyed.
§ 90.20 COST PAID BY RESPONSIBLE PERSON.
Any reasonable costs incurred by the Police Department in seizing, impounding or confining any
dangerous or vicious animal shall be charged against the owner, keeper or harborer of such animal.
Such charge shall be in addition to any fine or penalty provided for violating this ordinance.
§ 90.21 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICER.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any way with, any police officer or dog control officer
of the City of Tillamook engaged in seizing or impounding any dog under authority of this ordinance.
§ 90.22 ENTRY ONTO PRIVATE LAND.
Any dog control officer or any peace officer shall have the privilege of entering onto private land in the
course of the officer’s duties in enforcing the provisions of this ordinance, but such officer shall not
enter into any building or dwelling without legal authorization or permission of the owner or occupant
of the premises.
§ 90.98 PENALTIES.
Unless otherwise indicated, any offense under this chapter is classified as a violation punishable by a
fine set by resolution.
§ 90.99 SEPARATE VIOLATIONS.
Each day’s violation of a provision of this Ordinance constitutes a separate violation.
The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violating this ordinance, but is an additional
remedy. The imposition of a penalty dies not relieve a person of the duty to abate the nuisance.
A citation or other charging instrument filed in court shall include all violations from the date of
any written warning, (a.k.a. abatement) notice as cited in the charging instrument.
There is no requirement for any violation of this ordinance, that a written notice must first be
Tillamook - General Regulations
10
delivered, to abate or cite, the violation. For determining the number of days the violation has
occurred or has continued it shall be from the day the violation is first identified by the City, not
the date a warning, written or verbal, is provided or received.
(Ordinance 1276, Adopted 7-15-2013)
11
CHAPTER 91: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
91.01 Adopting design standards and standard details
91.02 Defining city rights-of-way
91.03 Service driveways
91.04 Disturbance of pavement
Construction, Alteration, Repair and Cleaning of Sidewalks and Curbs
91.20 Definitions
91.21 Individual landowner duties; enforcement
91.22 Local improvement district; landowner duties; enforcement
91.23 Notice
91.24 Remedies
91.99 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 ADOPTING DESIGN STANDARDS AND STANDARD DETAILS.
(A) The document entitled Design Standards and Standard Details for the City of Tillamook shall
be adopted to provide clear and concise information to contractors, developers and engineers providing
services within the city.
(B) This section will provide acceptable construction standards and specifications for all
improvements and repairs within the city.
(Ord. 1160, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 91.02 DEFINING CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Tillamook - General Regulations
12
CITY. The City of Tillamook, Oregon.
PERSON. Individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, joint stock company and
similar entities.
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Include but are not limited to streets, roads, highways, bridges,
alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all other public ways or areas, including
subsurface and air space over these areas.
WITHIN THE CITY. Territory over which the city now has or acquires jurisdiction for the
exercise of its powers.
(A) Jurisdiction. The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over each public
right-of-way within the city and state law.
(B) Scope of regulatory control. The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over
each public right-of-way within the city whether the city has a fee, easement or other legal interest in
the right-of-way. The city has jurisdiction and regulatory control over each right-of-way within the
city whether the legal interest in the right-of-way was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription,
reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure or other means.
(C) City permission requirement. No person may occupy or encroach on a public right-of-way
within the city without the permission of the city. The city grants permission to use rights-of-way by
franchises, licenses and permits.
(D) Obligations of the city. The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory control over any public
right-of-way by the city is not official acceptance of the right-of-way and does not obligate the city to
maintain or repair any part of the right-of-way.
(Ord. 1152, passed 3-3-1997) Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.03 SERVICE DRIVEWAYS.
(A) Service driveway, definition. The term SERVICE DRIVEWAY as used herein shall mean any
driveway entering any street from private property and intended for use and used by the public or for
private purposes.
(B) Permit. It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any service driveway across any
sidewalk or curbing without first obtaining a permit for the construction from the City Manager.
Streets and Sidewalks
13
(C) Specifications. All driveways shall be constructed of 1:2:3 mix concrete, six inches thick and
one and one-half inch curb face shall be retained across the driveway. The slope from the gutter to the
sidewalk or property line shall be as directed by the City Manager. No curbing shall be disturbed
within four feet of the regular street crosswalk, nor shall any driveway be permitted to interfere with
any fire hydrant, power line or traffic sign.
(D) Curb length.
(1) The City Manager shall limit the curb length of all driveways as follows:
Frontage
Maximum Length
25 to 52.5 feet
22 feet
Over 52.5 to 75 feet
30 feet
Over 75 feet
35 feet
(2) If more than one service driveway is desired for frontage up to 105 feet, the maximum
length of driveway shall be 25 feet, and not more than two driveways will be permitted. If service
driveways less than 20 feet in length are desired, three 15-foot service driveways may be permitted;
provided, however, that not less than 12 feet of straight curb must separate service driveways under one
ownership. For any frontage in excess of 105 feet, each additional 105 feet or fraction thereof shall be
considered as separate frontage. Any service driveway in excess of the above maximum lengths must
receive the approval of the City Council. No driveway apron shall extend out into the street farther
than the face of the curb, and under no circumstances shall the driveway apron extend into the gutter
area.
(E) Permit fees. The permit fees for each service driveway shall be as follows: for any service
driveway authorized under permit from the City Manager, $2 for each ten feet of length, or fraction
thereof; for any service driveway requiring the approval of the City Council, $4 for each ten feet of
length, or fraction thereof.
(F) Driveway aprons. All existing driveway aprons which extend out into the street farther than
the face of the curb and into the gutter area hereby are deemed a nuisance.
(G) Abandoned driveways. Any existing driveway or apron which has been or shall hereafter be
abandoned by the property owner, his or her heirs or assigns, is hereby deemed a nuisance and the curb
and sidewalk shall be restored to its original condition, as directed, at the expense of the property
owner in the manner and at the times hereinafter provided.
Tillamook - General Regulations
14
(H) Conformance of existing driveways. Any existing driveway or apron violating any of the
above requirements shall be altered to conform to these requirements on or before September 1, 1950,
upon written notice to the owner, agent of the owner and/or occupant of the property from the City
Manager; provided, nevertheless, that in any case where the City Manager shall find that a driveway or
apron constructed in violation of this subchapter was so constructed at the express direction of and to
the exact specifications of the city, then the driveway or apron shall be altered at city expense. The
City Manager shall cause to be served on the owner, agent of owner and/or occupant, a notice
describing the property with convenient certainty by its legal description or by the street number of the
building situate thereon, requiring the owner, agent of the owner and/or occupant to conform to the
above requirements by September 1, 1950, or that the city will require the same to be done and the cost
thereof charged as a lien against the property.
(I) Notice to owner; liens. The notice shall be served upon the owner, agent of the owner and/or
occupant in person if he or she shall be found upon the premises within the city, and in case the owner,
agent of owner and/or occupant cannot be found in person within the city after reasonable diligence
and inquiry, the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises and a copy thereof
mailed to the last known post office address of the owner, agent of owner and/or occupant if any
address is known and return of service shall be filed with the Recorder. If by September 1, 1950, the
owner, agent of owner and/or occupant shall have failed and neglected to conform to the requirements,
the City Manager of this city shall cause the same to be done and shall file with the Council a verified,
itemized statement of the expenditure occasioned thereby, and the Recorder shall cause notice to be
served upon the owner, agent of owner and/or occupant in the manner hereinbefore described that the
statement will be considered and determined by the Council and a lien declared upon the property
involved, the time of which meeting shall be specified in the notice not less than ten days nor more
than 20 days from giving the same. The Council shall at the meeting hear any objection to the
statement and by ordinance determine the correctness of the same and declare the corrected amount a
lien upon the property benefited and instruct the Recorder to enter the same upon the city docket of
liens in the same manner and with the same effect that the street improvement liens and sewer liens are
entered; and the liens shall have the same force and effect as the street and sewer liens and shall be
foreclosed in the same manner.
(J) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to the
provisions of § 91.99.
(1977 Code, § 2-3) (Ord. 651, passed 11-7-1949) Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.04 DISTURBANCE OF PAVEMENT.
(A) Disturbance of pavement; supervision. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to cut any holes in paved streets, dig up any street, or in any way break the surface of the
pavements or streets in the city for water or sewer purposes, or any other purpose, without first
securing the consent of the City Manager. All work done pursuant to the above consent and for the
above purposes shall be done under the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works who shall
have authority to control the work. All repairs of the streets or pavements thereof shall be done as the
Superintendent directs with a view to preserving the same and without any cost to the city.
Streets and Sidewalks
15
(B) Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms of this section, upon
conviction thereof before the City Recorder shall be punished by a fine as set forth in § 91.99.
(1977 Code, § 2-2) (Ord. 448, passed 7-21-1924; Ord. 861, passed 2-14-1977) Penalty, see § 91.99
CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, REPAIR AND CLEANING OF SIDEWALKS AND CURBS
§ 91.20 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABNORMALLY DANGEROUS OR HAZARDOUS CONDITION. A two-inch or greater
displacement from grade or misalignment between or within sidewalk panels or any other condition
threatening the immediate health, safety or welfare interests of the public, such as any condition which
risks personal injury or property damage to any disabled person, whether or not wheelchair-bound.
CITY. The City of Tillamook, a municipal corporation of the State of Oregon, where the provision
involves a duty owed the city in either its governmental or its corporate capacity; otherwise it shall
mean the officer, department or agency of the city indicated by the context or where the context does
not clearly indicate a specific officer, department or agency, then the City Manager.
COMMERCIAL PREMISES. Includes all premises which are not private premises.
CONSTRUCTION. Construction of sidewalks and curbs upon official grades, fixing dimensions
of curbs and establishing curb lines on certain width streets and sidewalk widths.
COUNCIL. The City Council.
DANGEROUS/HAZARDOUS SIDEWALK. A sidewalk:
(1) With a surface that is not constructed to City Public Works Construction Standards -
Street Design Standards (ACity Standards@);
(2) Which contains a vertical or horizontal misalignment between or within sidewalk panels,
or between a sidewalk and curb, equal to three-fourths to two inches;
(3) Which contains structural defects negatively affecting pedestrian use; or
(4) Which has vegetation, whether growing on or overhanging the sidewalk, that negatively
affects pedestrian use.
DAYS. Twenty-four hour, calendar days.
ENGINEER. The City Public Works Director or the duly appointed City Engineer or any
Tillamook - General Regulations
16
consulting engineering firm who contracts with the city to provide engineering services.
PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation, social or fraternal
organization, trust, estate, receiver, syndicate, branch of government or any group or combination
acting as a unit.
SIDEWALK. A pedestrian walkway with permanent surfacing, which shall include curbs and
road approaches crossing, adjacent to or between the walkways.
(Ord. 1205, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 91.21 INDIVIDUAL LANDOWNER DUTIES; ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Standards and specifications. Sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed, altered, repaired and
maintained according to City Public Works Construction Standards - Street Design Standards (ACity
Standards@) as adopted and/or amended by the Council by resolution or otherwise.
(1) A sidewalk and/or curb not conforming to City Standards shall be, and is, a public
nuisance.
(2) No landowner shall allow a dangerous or hazardous sidewalk or abnormally dangerous or
hazardous sidewalk to exist on his or her property. This provision shall apply to existing exterior
commercial premises open to the public, to private premises adjacent to a public way, street, alley,
highway or road of any kind.
(B) Permit requirements, applications, fees and issuance.
(1) No person shall construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk or curb in or upon any
public street or right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the city and complying with the
provisions of the City Street Design Standards and the city’s tree ordinance (see Chapter 93).
(2) An application for a permit shall be filed with the city, on a form provided by the city,
together with any other information and data as required by the Engineer. An applicant for a permit
shall pay a permit fee to the city, which fee shall be set by Council by resolution to recover city’s actual
costs of review and monitoring.
(3) Upon application and fee payment for an improvement to which this subchapter applies,
city shall issue a permit. The permit shall be automatically void six months from the issue date if the
improvement is not complete. If the improvement is complete and receives City Engineer final
approval, then the permit shall become permanent.
Streets and Sidewalks
17
(C) Owner responsibility and liability.
(1) The owner of real property abutting a sidewalk is liable for any personal injury or
property damage which occurs because of the owner’s failure to maintain the sidewalk in good repair
or safe condition. The city shall not be liable under these circumstances unless the city is the owner
and the city’s act or failure to act is the direct and proximate cause of the injury or damage.
(2) If the city is required to pay damages for personal injury or property damage caused by
the failure of an owner to maintain a sidewalk in good repair or safe condition, the owner shall
reimburse the city for the full amount of the damages thus paid and for the attorney fees and cost of
defending against the claim for damages. The city may maintain an action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 1205, passed 12-5-2005) Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.22 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT; LANDOWNER DUTIES; ENFORCEMENT.
The Council may proceed in the manner set forth in §§ 36.091 through 36.113 and/or O.R.S.
223.387 et seq. for the creation of a local improvement district, as long as it is consistent with any
existing city sidewalk plan, if any of the following conditions are found to exist:
(A) (1) A dangerous or hazardous condition to pedestrians or vehicular traffic exists on a
sidewalk or in a street right-of-way;
(2) There is a general public health, safety and/or welfare need that a street be improved by
the construction of a sidewalk thereon not to exceed one block in length if platted as a block, or 300
feet if not platted, which sidewalk would connect with the sidewalk or sidewalks already constructed
on the street or cross-streets intersecting therewith; or
(3) The landowners within an area in the city specifically described request it; and
(B) Public funds sufficient to support the city’s portion of the project are available and
appropriated for that purpose.
(Ord. 1205, passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 1227, passed 11-19-2007)
Cross-reference:
Local improvement districts, see TSO IV
§ 91.23 NOTICE.
(A) Notice.
Tillamook - General Regulations
18
(1) Notice of public nuisances. Upon determination by the City Manager, City Engineer or
their designee that a public nuisance, dangerous/hazardous sidewalk or abnormally
dangerous/hazardous sidewalk exists, a written notice of the nuisance or hazard shall be provided to the
landowner and/or occupant, ordering the landowner and/or occupant to abate the nuisance, hazard or
danger within 14 days of receipt of the notice.
(2) Stay of enforcement; stay not a bar to fine. A notice shall stay the city’s enforcement
until the expiration of the notice period. This means a city notice under this division (A) shall cause
the city’s enforcement action under this subchapter only to be stopped or Aon hold@ until the notice
period ends. However, a stay of enforcement to gain compliance shall not be a bar to any fine or
penalty available under any law in any later prosecution to gain compliance. This means that, even
though city’s enforcement action is on hold, the fines and/or penalties under any law are not on hold,
but continue to accrue or increase as long as the condition constituting a violation continues to exist. A
notice under this division (A) may be superseded by a subsequent notice, which subsequent notice shall
control in any conflict between notices. This means the last notice issued to a landowner pursuant to
this division (A) is the notice to follow as compared to any conflicting parts of (or whole) an earlier
notice issued to that landowner on the same violation.
(3) Response to abnormally dangerous condition. Immediately upon receipt of notice of
abnormally dangerous sidewalk or curb, the landowner and/or occupant shall erect legally approved
and permitted safety devices to protect person(s) from the identified hazard. The safety devices shall
remain in place until the hazard is repaired as directed by this section.
(B) Notice service. Notices shall be served in the following manner:
(1) By personally serving a written notice;
(2) By posting on the main entrance to the property or structure;
(3) By mailing first-class mail, certified, return receipt requested to the landowner of record
as shown on records of the County Tax Collector/Assessor; or
(4) By any combination of the above or any other method reasonably calculated to provide
actual notice to the landowner.
(C) Notice contents.
(1) The notice to abate shall contain:
(a) A common description of the real property by street address or otherwise on which
the nuisance exists;
(b) A direction to abate the nuisance within 14 days from the date of receiving the
notice;
(c) A general description of the nuisance;
Streets and Sidewalks
19
(d) A statement that, unless the nuisance is abated, the city may abate the nuisance; and
the cost of abatement will be charged to the person responsible;
(e) A statement that failure to abate a nuisance may cause the person responsible be cited
into Municipal Court with possible imposition of a fine, as well as abatement costs;
(f) A statement that the person responsible may protest the order to abate by giving
notice to the City Manager within 14 days from the date of receipt of the notice; and
(g) A statement that the person responsible may request, to the City Manager, an
extension of time to abate the nuisance, not to exceed 30 days, from date of receipt of original notice.
(2) The City Manager, City Engineer or Police Department shall, upon sending out notice,
also cause a report to be filed in the Police Department, documenting all action occurring with this
nuisance.
(3) An error in the name or address of the person responsible shall not make the notice void.
(Ord. 1205, passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 1214, passed 11-20-2006; Ord. 1225, passed 11-5-2007) Penalty,
see § 91.99
§ 91.24 REMEDIES.
(A) Inspections authorized.
(1) The City Engineer shall inspect city sidewalks and curbs as time and public funds permit:
(a) Upon City Council request;
(b) Upon any written complaint describing the nature and location of the violation;
(c) As outlined in any existing city sidewalk improvement plan; or
(d) As otherwise required to monitor the sidewalk/curb construction or repair within any
city permit.
(2) Following inspection, the City Engineer shall report the Engineer’s analysis and
recommended action to the Council, City Manager and/or enforcement officer.
(B) City construction. If a sidewalk is not constructed or repaired within the time required by the
notice required by § 91.23(A), (B) and/or (C), then the city may, subject to the availability and
appropriation of public funds, proceed with enforcement, abatement and/or construction for all or part
of the sidewalk frontage of the property. The city may assess and collect the costs for the abatement or
construction as provided by this subchapter plus an administration fee of 25% of those costs.
Additionally, the sidewalk may be considered a public nuisance and subject to prosecution as a
Tillamook - General Regulations
20
violation punishable by a fine, as provided for in this subchapter. Each day a public nuisance exists
shall be considered a separate offense.
(C) Sidewalk construction requested by the property owner. If a property owner petitions the
Council for an order to build a sidewalk on the part of the street abutting his or her property, agrees to
pay cash or to make an application to pay the cost in installments as provided by the Bancroft Bonding
Act (as amended), waives the right of service and publication of notice of construction and consents to
the assessment of the property upon which the sidewalk abuts, the Council may order the construction
of the sidewalk if in its judgment the sidewalk should be built and sufficient public funds for the
project are available.
(D) Abatement by the person responsible.
(1) Within the time specified in a notice, the person responsible shall remove the nuisance or
show that no nuisance exists.
(2) A person responsible may protest that no nuisance exists by filing with the City Manager
a written statement which specifies in detail the protest’s bases. This statement shall be received by
City within 14 days from the date of receipt of the notice.
(3) The City Manager shall have 14 days to respond from the date the City Manager receives
the notice. The response shall indicate either that the nuisance no longer exists and no further action is
required, or that the nuisance still exists and set a further timeline of 14 days to abate the identified
nuisance.
(4) The person responsible may request an extension from the City Manager. The request
must be received by the City Manager within 14 days of the person responsible receiving the notice.
The City Manager may allow an extension to abate, not to exceed 30 days.
(5) Once the final date allowed to abate has passed, and the city determines the nuisance has
not been abated, the Police Department shall then cite the person responsible into Municipal Court.
(6) The time here shall be extended by three days where notice or reply was served by mail.
Streets and Sidewalks
21
(E) City repair and liens. Upon the city’s completion of work placing a sidewalk or curb in good
condition, a lien shall attach. Filing notice of city’s claim of lien shall be consistent with O.R.S. 87.366
for claiming a lien on real property. Recording of the notice shall be with the City Recorder in the
city’s lien record and/or with the County Recording Officer in a book kept for the recording of liens.
The city’s lien shall be valid for six years, unless extended by written agreement with the landowner
for two additional years. The landowners shall either pay the full amount or the city shall commence
lien foreclosure within that time. Foreclosure shall be in the manner provided in O.R.S. Chapter 88.
Except for tax liens, the city’s lien shall be superior to all subsequently perfected liens, mortgages
and/or other encumbrances, including state and federal liens, unless otherwise required by law. In suits
to foreclose on a lien created here, the Court, upon entering judgment for the lien claimant, shall allow
as part of the lien all monies paid for the filing and/or recording of the lien. In suits to foreclose a lien
created here, the Court shall allow reasonable attorney fees, costs and disbursements, at trial and on
appeal, to the prevailing party. This division (E) is effective on the thirtieth day after its adoption on
November 19, 2007.
(Ord. 1205, passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 1227, passed 11-19-2007) Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed
shall be subject to § 10.99.
(B) Unless otherwise indicated, any offense under this chapter is classified as a violation
punishable by a fine set by resolution.
(Ord. 1301, passed 4-20-2015; Ord. 1315, passed 6-6-2016)
Tillamook - General Regulations
22
23
CHAPTER 92: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
Use of City Parks
92.01 Short title
92.02 Definitions
92.03 Powers of the Council
92.04 Organized functions in the park
92.05 Prohibited conduct
User Fees for Carnahan Park
92.20 Definitions
92.21 Duration
92.22 Use of user fees
92.23 Fees
92.24 Fee collection
92.25 Parking permit required
92.26 Season permits
92.99 Penalty
USE OF CITY PARKS
§ 92.01 SHORT TITLE.
This subchapter may be cited as the “City Parks Ordinance.”
(Ord. 1192, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 92.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, in addition to definitions found in other city ordinance(s), the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CITY. Includes the Mayor, City Council.
Tillamook - General Regulations
24
CITY OFFICIAL. Includes the City Manager, Public Works Director, Public Works employee(s),
Police Chief, any police officer, any police community resource ordinance officer and/or any other city
designee.
ORGANIZED FUNCTION. Any planned activity of any kind involving 20 or more persons.
PARK. Any publicly or privately-owned real property placed under the jurisdiction of the city for
park or recreational purposes.
(Ord. 1192, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 92.03 POWERS OF THE COUNCIL.
(A) The city, except as herein otherwise provided, shall have the general management and
supervision of all parks, squares, openings and public grounds surrounding public buildings now
owned or hereafter acquired by the city, and also the power to regulate and control the planting,
trimming, growing, use, preservation and maintenance of all shade or ornamental trees, shrubs, plants
or flowers in, upon or over any street, boulevard, path or sidewalk of the city. These powers are in
addition to and not exclusive of any other powers or authority under the city’s Charter, state law and
this State and the United States Constitutions.
(B) The city may adopt any rules and regulations for the use, management and supervision of the
parks, squares, openings, public grounds and grounds surrounding public buildings or other places of
recreation, now belonging or hereafter acquired by the city as may be reasonable or necessary. The
rules and regulations shall be consistent with other city ordinances, state statutes and State
Administrative Rules.
(Ord. 1192, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 92.04 ORGANIZED FUNCTIONS IN THE PARK.
It shall be unlawful for any person or organization or association to conduct or participate in any
organized function in a park without the written permission of the city. Permission must first be
requested in writing, in a timely manner, so that the request may be reviewed by City staff with
sufficient lead time to allow for reasonable response. Specific provisions relating to application
form/permit shall be as established. Reasonable conditions to provide for the safety and sanitation
needs and to protect park users shall be added to the permit with costs borne by the applicant. Any
disagreement with the administrative dispensation of the request shall be subject to an appeal to the
City Council, the fee for which shall be established by resolution.
(Ord. 1192, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 1350, passed 9-5-2019) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.05 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
The following conduct unless otherwise excepted shall be prohibited within city parks.
Parks and Recreation
25
(A) Alcohol and Tobacco. Unless specifically authorized by city permit and subject to the further
requirement, if any, of the OLCC, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess or drink any alcoholic
beverage in any city park. Unless specifically authorized by permit it shall be unlawful for any person
to sell any alcoholic beverage in any city park.
Unless specifically authorized by permit, it shall be unlawful for any person to smoke tobacco
products in any city park or on any city off-street trail. For purposes of this policy, SMOKING and
TOBACCO are defined to include, but are not limited to: bidis, cigarettes, cigarillos, cigars, clove
cigarettes, e-cigarettes, nicotine vaporizers, nicotine liquids, hookahs, kreteks, and pipes.
(B) Park hours; closure. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in a park any time between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and the following 4:00 a.m.
(C) Additional park closures. The City Council, City Manager, his, her or its designate, or an
officer of the City Police Department may close any city park or any part thereof, at any time for any
reason herein by erecting barricades or placing signs prohibiting access. Notices that any park or part
thereof is closed shall be posted at appropriate locations during the period of the closure, if feasible.
However, failure to post the notices shall not invalidate the closure, nor shall it be a defense to the
charge of violating this section. The closure shall be done only in the interest of public safety and
health. The decision for closure shall be based upon one or more of the following criteria or conditions
existing in or near that park:
(1) Life or property is endangered and other means cannot reasonably be utilized to eliminate
the danger;
(2) The overcrowding of persons or vehicles prevents access by emergency assistance or
emergency vehicle(s);
(3) Park property or other property located near the park is endangered;
(4) Loud and unnecessary noise, fighting, violence or threatening behavior is occurring and
other means cannot reasonably be utilized to eliminate the condition;
(5) A hazardous condition exists; and/or
(6) Violation of any criminal offense or ordinance is occurring and other means cannot
reasonably be utilized to eliminate the condition.
(D) Park closure control. During the period of closure of a park in accordance with the above
provisions, it shall be unlawful for any person to enter the park or any part thereof that has been closed
or remain in the park or part thereof after having been notified of the closure and having been requested
to leave by the city official. The closure shall not exceed 18 hours without the written approval of the
City Manager or his or her designee. No person shall enter any building, enclosure or place within any
of the parks upon which the words ANo Admittance@ shall be displayed or posted by sign, placard or
otherwise without the consent of the city official in charge.
Tillamook - General Regulations
26
(E) Animals in parks. It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor or keeper of any animal to
permit the same to enter upon or to roam at large in any city park that has not been consigned to third
party control. Notwithstanding the above sentence, dogs are permitted in Carnahan Park, where dogs
shall remain on leash at all times, and under control of the owner, possessor or keeper of the dog.
Additionally, dogs are allowed within the boundaries of any identified, fenced-in, off-leash dog area.
These areas shall be set by Council resolution. While in the off-leash identified fenced-in area, dogs
shall remain under voice control at all times by the accompanying owner, possessor or keeper of the
dog. Owners, possessors, or keepers of any dog are subject to the Animal Code as set forth in Title IX,
Chapter 90 of the CCT.
Notwithstanding the above, dogs may also be allowed in city-owned wayside(s) and trails (including
trails that run through a park where dogs are not otherwise permitted off-trail) as approved by the City.
City wayside(s) not approved shall be signed appropriately to indicate no dogs allowed. Dogs in
approved city wayside(s) and trails shall always be on a leash except when secured in a vehicle.
Owners of dogs or other animals damaging and destroying park property will be held liable for the full
value of the property damaged or destroyed in addition to any penalties that may be imposed for
violation for this section. Animal(s) remaining in vehicle(s) are exempt from this section.
Notwithstanding the above, service animals are exempt from this subsection when accompanied by
their handler.
Fencing. Any designated dog-friendly area shall be fenced-in with a double-gated entrance
for safety of owners and dogs, as recommended by the City’s insurer.
Guidelines for use of dog-friendly area. Guidelines regarding the use of the dog-friendly
parks, or waysides, and trails are adopted as set forth in Appendix A, and shall be posted at
the entrance of the park, wayside, or trail. Guidelines regarding the use of the designated
fenced-in, off-leash dog areas are adopted and set forth in Appendix B, and shall be posted
at the entrance of the fenced-in area. Guidelines may be amended by a Resolution of the
City Council.
(F) Motorized vehicles. No motorized vehicles shall be permitted in any park or portion thereof
within the city except upon designated roadway(s) and parking area(s).
(G) Camping/campfires. No overnight camping or campfires shall be permitted within or upon
any public park within the city, unless otherwise specifically authorized by city.
(H) Firearms and explosive devices. No firearms, explosive devices, blowgun, bow and arrow,
crossbow, BB or pellet gun of any kind shall be permitted upon or within any city park without
appropriate permit or appropriate license during authorized hunting season(s).
(I) Advertising. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or attach any structure or sign of any
kind whatsoever on or upon any part of a city park without written permission.
(J) Rubbish and litter. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any straw, dirt, chips, paper
Parks and Recreation
27
shavings, shells, ashes, swill or garbage, or other rubbish, refuse or debris in any city park.
(K) Vandalism. It shall be unlawful for any person to damage city property.
(Ord. 1192, passed 6-21-2004, Ord. 1302, passed 6-1-2015, Ord. 1350, passed 9-5-2019) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
APPENDIX A: DOG-FRIENDLY PARK GUIDELINES
DOG-FRIENDLY PARK GUIDELINES
The following guidelines shall be posted at the entrance/exits of the dog-friendly park, wayside, or trail
to inform the patrons of the expectations for using the park.
CITY CODE
• The park will be open from 4:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., daily.
• Dogs may not harass humans or other animals.
• Park users who fail to comply with rules of the park and the City Code may be asked to leave,
and may result in fines.
DOGS
• Dogs must wear a visible and current license.
• Dogs showing any signs of aggression must leave the park immediately.
OWNERS
• Dogs must remain on a leash at all times.
• Always clean up after your dog. Remove and dispose of waste in the bins provided.
• No pet grooming is allowed in the park.
• Dog handlers must be at least 12 years old.
Tillamook - General Regulations
28
APPENDIX B: OFF-LEASH DOG PARK GUIDELINES
DOG PARK GUIDELINES
The following guidelines shall be posted at the entrance/exits of the dog-friendly area of the park to
inform the patrons of the expectations for using the park.
CITY CODE
• The park will be open from 4:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., daily.
• Dogs may not harass humans or other animals.
• Park users who fail to comply with rules of the park and the City Code may be asked to leave,
and may result in fines.
DOGS
• Dogs must wear a visible and current license.
• Dogs must be spayed and/or neutered or they will not be allowed in the park.
• Dogs must not be contagious and must be current on their immunizations for the protection of
your dogs and the dogs of other patrons of the park.
• Dogs that are aggressive, likely to bully other dogs, or start fights are not welcome in the park.
• Dogs showing any signs of aggression must leave the park immediately.
• Puppies who have not received all of their vaccinations should not be allowed in the park due to
the risk of them contracting the Parvo virus. If you do allow your puppy to play in the park
prior to receiving their vaccinations, you are doing so at your own risk.
OWNERS
• You are legally responsible for your dog’s behavior, and any injuries or damages he/she causes.
• Never leave your dog(s) unattended or allow them out of sight.
• Never leave the area without your dog(s). Unattended dogs may be impounded by the animal
control officer.
• Owners are required to have voice control over their dog(s) at all times.
• Always clean up after your dog. Remove and dispose of waste in the bins provided.
Parks and Recreation
29
• No pet grooming is allowed in the park.
• Dog handlers must be at least 12 years old.
Tillamook - General Regulations
30
USER FEES FOR CARNAHAN PARK
§ 92.20 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
CARNAHAN PARK. The city park located on the westerly boundaries of this city adjacent to the
Trask River.
USER. Any person, company, firm, partnership or corporation that has occasion to park a vehicle
at Carnahan Park.
VEHICLE. Any motorized or unmotorized vehicle or assembled personal property, including but
not limited to boats, trailers and house-trailers.
(Ord. 1124, passed 8-17-1992)
§ 92.21 DURATION.
Fees for parking in Carnahan Park shall be charged during the months of September, October and
November of each year.
(Ord. 1124, passed 8-17-1992)
§ 92.22 USE OF USER FEES.
Fees collected shall be used for maintenance, repair, ordinance enforcement and capital costs
associated with Carnahan Park usage only. Direct cost of personnel for normal maintenance/repair
work and ordinance enforcement shall be based on actual hours worked, multiplied by the hourly rate
and fringe costs paid by the city. Approved time slips shall be used for this purpose.
(Ord. 1124, passed 8-17-1992)
§ 92.23 FEES.
(A) Fee imposed. Two dollars per day per parking day per stall used.
(B) Seasonal permits. Seasonal permits will be $50 and are available at City Hall, 210 Laurel
Avenue, Tillamook, OR 97141.
(Ord. 1124, passed 8-17-1992; Ord. 1127, passed 6-7-1993; Ord. 1130, passed 7-5-1994; Ord. 1252,
passed 9-20-2010; Ord. 1275, passed 4-15-2013) Penalty, see § 92.99
Parks and Recreation
31
§ 92.24 FEE COLLECTION.
(A) Parking fees shall be collected by insertion of $2 within an approved Carnahan Park permit
envelope and placement within the collection box provided.
(B) The envelope shall be completed by the user prior to deposit, with the user retaining a tear-off
portion as a receipt of payment.
(C) The tear-off receipt taken from the completed envelope shall be displayed, including the date,
vehicle description, and license plates number visible to enforcement persons, on the vehicle dashboard
or, where no dashboard, in some clearly visible place in the vehicle.
(D) Failure to display this completed this tear-off portion of the permit shall constitute grounds for
issuance of a citation to appear in Municipal Court for violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1124, passed 8-17-1992; Ord. 1252, passed 9-20-2010; Ord. 1275, passed 4-15-2013) Penalty,
see § 92.99
§ 92.25 PARKING PERMIT REQUIRED.
No user of a parking space or stall in Carnahan Park shall use or occupy the space or stall with a
vehicle owned by, occupied by, controlled by or in the possession of the user without first having
obtained a parking permit as herein provided.
(Ord. 1124, passed 8-17-1992) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.26 SEASON PERMITS.
(A) Permits may be issued at the office of the City Recorder with payment as set forth in
§ 92.23(B).
(B) Permit shall be applied to lower left side of windshield to allow unobstructed view for
enforcement.
(C) Permit will be issued to vehicle based on current registered license plate and shall not be
transferred to other vehicles.
(D) Violators of this section will be cited per § 92.99.
(Ord. 1130, passed 7-5-1994) Penalty, see § 92.99
Tillamook - General Regulations
32
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed
shall be subject to § 10.99.
(B) Any person who violates any provision of §§ 92.01 through 92.05 may, upon conviction, be
punished as follows:
(1) Violation of § 92.05(A), (B), (D), (G), (H) or (K) shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $250. In addition, cost of repair(s) and or cleanup may also be levied.
(2) Violation of § 92.05(E), (F), (I) or (J) shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.
(C) Any user who violates any term of §§ 92.20 through 92.26, upon conviction, shall pay a fine
as follows:
(1) Failure to purchase, complete or display a parking permit: $20; and
(2) Failure to park a vehicle within a marked space at any time: $12.
(D) Unless otherwise indicated, any offense under this chapter is classified as a violation
punishable by a fine set by resolution.
(Ord. 1124, passed 8-17-1992; Ord. 1127, passed 6-7-1993; Ord. 1130, passed 7-5-1994; Ord. 1192,
passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 1252, passed 9-20-2010; Ord. 1275, passed 4-15-2013; Ord. 1315, passed 6-6-
2016)
Parks and Recreation
33
CHAPTER 93: TREES
Section
93.01 Title
93.02 Purpose and intent
93.03 Definitions
93.04 Delegation of City Tree Committee functions
93.05 Permit procedures, tree planting and types of trees to be planted, by abutting property owners
93.06 Special tree districts within the city
93.07 Tree maintenance, care, pruning, corner clearance and removal of dangerous or nuisance trees
93.08 Abuse, mutilation or indiscriminate topping of trees
93.09 Interference with the city
93.10 Administration of this chapter
93.99 Penalty
Appendix A: Planting Instructions
Appendix B: Locating Trees on Property
§ 93.01 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Tree Ordinance of the city.
(Ord. 1303, passed 9-8-2015)
§ 93.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
(A) Purpose. The city, recognizing the value of trees in preserving the aesthetic and environmental
qualities of the community, wishes to maintain the Tree City USA Program. This chapter shall constitute
the official Comprehensive City Tree Program of the city. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and
protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting,
maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants within the city public parks, public right-of-way
and other public places where the public has free access.
(B) Intent. It is the intent of the city that the terms of this chapter shall be construed as to promote:
(1) The recognition of the special significance of heritage and distinctive trees, and value the
contribution which these trees make to the beauty and quality of life in the city;
(2) The recognition that because of the known benefits of trees, trees on development
properties should be preserved so that they may be considered for incorporation into development
plans; and
Tillamook - General Regulations
34
(3) The intent is not to prohibit the removal of trees but to stop the thoughtless destruction of
that vegetation, which has a beneficial effect on the value of property and on the city in general.
(Ord. 1303, passed 9-8-2015)
§ 93.03 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
BUSH/SHRUB. All other woody vegetation not considered trees.
CITY. The City of Tillamook.
DBH. Diameter of a tree at breast height.
FELL. To remove or sever a tree or to use any procedure which is to cause the death or other
substantial destruction of the tree. FELL does not in any context include normal trimming or pruning.
ILLEGALLY REMOVED TREE. A tree removed without first obtaining City Street Tree
Committee approval and a city permit.
IMMEDIATE DANGER OF COLLAPSE OF A TREE. A tree may already be leaning with the
surrounding soil heaving, and/or there is a significant likelihood that the tree will topple or otherwise
fail and cause damage to the surroundings. IMMEDIATE DANGER OF COLLAPSE does not include
hazardous conditions that can be alleviated by pruning or treatment.
PARKING STRIP, PLANTER STRIP or TREE LAWN. The area between the street curb and
sidewalk in the public right-of-way, utilized for landscaping and street tree planting.
PEDESTRIAN TRAVEL PATH. Generally concrete, but can also be gravel, asphalt, and in some
cases, dirt or vegetation in non-improved areas.
POLLARD. A tree cut back to the trunk to promote the growth of a dense head of foliage.
SAFE PEDESTRIAN WAY. A travel path five feet wide, where possible, but not less than four
feet wide when affected by other obstacles in addition to a tree; an eight-foot overhead clearance from
the sidewalk to the lowest tree branches hanging over the travel path (seven foot overhead clearance
may be allowed when requiring an eight foot clearance would require removing a substantial portion of
the tree).
STREET. Includes land within the dedicated public right-of-way, including easements, sidewalks,
tree lawn or tree well, and roadway.
TREE. Any woody plant having a trunk six caliper inches or larger in diameter at breast height
(DBH). If a tree splits into multiple trunks above ground, but below four and one-half feet, the trunk is
measured at its most narrow point beneath the split, and is considered one tree if greater than six inches
DBHTrees specifically planted and maintained as a hedge shall not be considered a TREE. Different
classifications of TREES include the following:
(1) DEAD TREE. A tree is lifeless. Evidence of lifelessness may include unseasonable lack
Parks and Recreation
35
of foliage, brittle dry branches or lack of any growth during the growing season.
(2) HERITAGE TREE. A tree listed on the Official City Heritage Tree List adopted by the
City Planning Commission.
(3) PARK OR MONUMENT TREE. A tree located in a public park or other area owned by
the city having an individual name, and all other areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free
access as a park.
(4) PRIVATE TREE. A tree located on private property other than a dedicated right-of-way
or city utility easement or public parks and grounds.
(5) SIGNIFICANT TREE. A tree having a trunk 18 caliper inches DBH or larger in
diameter.
(6) STREET TREE. A tree on land lying within a dedicated right-of-way along either side of
a street, avenue or other way within a dedicated utility easement of the city.
(7) TREE CUTOUT or TREE WELL. The area between the street and a sidewalk in the
public right-of-way, for street tree planting.
TREE SIZE. Notwithstanding the above tree classifications, the size of a tree, though not specific,
will be described as either:
(1) SMALL. Being less than 15 feet high, usually with small main branches that are one to
three inches in diameter.
(2) LARGE. Being over 15 feet high, usually with main branches or limbs over three inches
in diameter.
TREE REMOVAL. To cut down a tree, or remove 50% or more of the crown, trunk or root system
of a tree; or to damage a tree so as to cause the tree to decline and/or die. REMOVAL includes topping.
REMOVAL includes but is not limited to damage inflicted upon a root system by application of toxic
substances, operation of equipment and vehicles, storage of materials, change of natural grade due to
unapproved excavation or filling, or unapproved alteration of natural physical conditions. REMOVAL
does not include normal trimming or pruning of trees.
TREE TOPPING. The severe cutting back of a tree’s limbs to stubs three inches or larger in
diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the natural canopy and disfigure the
tree. TOPPING does not include the practice of pollarding when conducted in accordance with the
standards established by the International Society of Arboriculture.
(Ord. 1303, passed 9-8-2015) (Ord. 1327, passed 4-17-2017)
Tillamook - General Regulations
36
§ 93.04 DELEGATION OF CITY TREE COMMITTEE FUNCTIONS.
(A) Designation. The authority of the Tree Committee is hereby delegated to the standing
Beautification Committee for the city.
(B) Duties and responsibilities of the City Tree Committee.
(1) The City Tree Committee shall study, investigate and develop, and/or update annually,
and administer the ordinance for the care, preservation, pruning, replanting, removal or disposition of
street trees and park trees. This chapter shall be presented when required to the City Council and upon
their acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree program of the city.
(2) The City Tree Committee, when requested by the City Planning Commission or City
Council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or
question coming within the scope of its work. Such report, with or without recommendations, shall be
presented first to the City Planning Commission and then to the City Council for their review and final
consideration and action if needed.
(3) This chapter provides full power and authority to the City Tree Committee to make
recommendations to the City Council which has final authority over all trees, plants and shrubs located
within street rights-of-ways, parks and public places of the city, and to trees, plants and shrubs located
on private property that constitute a hazard or threat as described herein.
(Ord. 1303, passed 9-8-2015; Ord. 1327, passed 4-17-2017)
§ 93.05 PERMIT PROCEDURES, TREE PLANTING AND TYPES OF TREES TO BE
PLANTED, BY ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS.
(A) Permit procedures. Property owners abutting the public right-of-way may be granted
permission to plant street trees administratively upon review by the assigned City Planner or designee if
street tree(s) are proposed on an existing tree lawn and an established road right-of-way with curb. The
following information must be provided to the city:
(1) A request in writing is provided in the form of a city public works permit application;
(2) A plot plan of area referencing water and sewer lines, power lines, driveways and
intersecting streets is provided;
(3) Approval, if granted by the city, shall be required in the form of an approved city public
works permit prior to planting of the tree or trees. Fees for the permit shall be paid prior to approval by
the abutting property owner; and
(4) A permit fee for the planting or removal of a street tree shall be established by resolution
and incorporated into the land use fee schedule.
(B) Diagrams. The diagrams contained in Appendix A to this chapter display general instructions
on how to plant a bare-root tree and a containerized tree.
Parks and Recreation
37
(C) Tree species to be planted and minimum tree planting dimensions. The Official City Street
Tree List of acceptable species of trees, shrubs, bushes and other woody plant material, as modified
below in the listings under minimum planting dimensions, shall be compiled by the Committee,
reviewed and adopted by the City Council in a resolution and made available to the public.
(1) No person, without the written permission of the city, through a city public works permit
shall plant a Street tree or Park (Monument) tree of a species other than those included on the list.
(2) Street tree (identified in ‘a – d’ below) and Park (Monument) tree (identified in ‘e’ below)
plantings shall be restricted to the following guidelines unless division (C)(2)(k) applies:
(a) The following small street trees are allowed in a minimum three-foot wide parking
strip, or a minimum three-foot by three-foot tree well in the Commercial Districts, with the exception of
the Town Center Commercial District, with minimum 20-foot spacing between trees:
Common Name Scientific Name
Almira Norway Maple Acer Platanoides "Almira"
English Hedge Maple Acer Campestre
Green Leaf Maple Acer Palmatum
LaValle Hawthorne Crataegus Lavellei
Red Leaf Maple Atropurpuraum
Thundercloud Plum Prunus "Thundercloud"
Chinese Dogwood Cornus kousa
Paper Bark Maple Acer griseum
Full Moon Maple Acer japonicum
Snake Bark Maple Acer laxiflorum
Manchurian Maple Acermanchuricanum
These trees will grow from 18-30 feet in height.
(b) The following small street trees are allowed in a minimum four-foot wide parking
strip, no closer than two feet from any curb, curb-line or sidewalk, with minimum 30-foot spacing
between trees:
Common Name
Scientific Name
Pyramidal European Hornbeam
Carpinus Betulus "Pyramidal"
Pyramidal Sycamore Maple
Acer Pseudo Plantanus
Rancho Little Leaf Linden
Tilia Cordata
Red Maple Species Acer rubrum species
Scarlet Oak Quercus coccinea
Northern Red Oak Quercus rubra
Tillamook - General Regulations
38
These trees will grow from 20-35 feet in height.
(c) The following medium street trees are allowed in a minimum six-foot wide parking
strip, no closer than three feet from any curb, curb-line or sidewalk, with minimum 40-foot spacing
between trees:
Common Name
Scientific Name
Norway Maple Species
Acer platanoides species
Crimean Linden
Tilia Echlora
Flame Ash
Fraxinus Pennsylvania "Atropurpurea"
Ginkgo
Ginkgo biloba
Mongolian Linden
Tilia
Purple European Hornbeam
Carpinus
Royal Crimson Maple
Acer Platanoides "Royal Crimson"
Ruby Red Horse Chestnut
Aesculus Carnea
Shade King Red Maple
Acer Rubrum"Shade King"
Vineleaf Sycamore Maple
Acer Pseudo Plantanus "Vineleaf"
Purple Beech Fagus riversii
Black Tupelo Nyssa silvatica
These trees will grow 35-40 feet in height.
(d) The following large trees are allowed in a minimum eight-foot wide parking strip, no
closer than four feet from any curb, curb line or sidewalk, with a minimum 50-foot spacing between
trees:
Common Name
Scientific Name
Blue Ash
Fraxinus quadrangulata
Linden Species
Tilia species
Norway Maple Cultivars
Acer platanoides
Oriental Plaintree
Plantanus orientalis
Pin Oak
Quercus palustris
Red Maple
Acer rubrum
Parks and Recreation
39
River Birch Betula nigra
Sugar Maple
Acer saccharinum
Tupelo
Nyssa sylvatica
These trees will grow 60-120 feet in height.
(e) The following Monument trees are recommended to be planted in City parks and other
public places:
Balsam Fir Abies balsamae
Fraser Fir Abies fraserii
Grand Fir Abies grandis
Korean Fir Abies koreana
Nordmann Fir Abies nordmanii
Noble Fir Abies procera
Big Leaf Maple Acer macrophyllum
Chinese Birch Betula albo-sinensis
Yellow Birch Betula lutea
Whitespire Birch Betula platyphylos
Weeping Alaska Cedar Chamaecyparis nootkatensis
Japanese Cedar Cryptomeria japonica
Honey Locust Gleditsia triacanthos
Witch Hazel Cultivar Hammamelis xintermedia species
Magnolia species Magnolia species
Dawn Redwood Metasequoia glyptostroboides
Oriental Spruce Picea orientalis
Lacebark Pine Pinus bungeana
Sourwood Oxydendrum arboreum
Yoshino Cherry Prunus xyedoensis
Swamp White Oak Quercus bicolor
Tillamook - General Regulations
40
English Oak Quercus robur
Northern Red Oak Quercus rubra
Pin Oak Quercus palustris
Bald Cypress Taxodium distichum
Zelkova Zelkova serrata
Japanese Snowbell Tree Styrax japonica
(f) The diagram contained in Appendix B to this chapter is an example of planting the
right trees in the right place.
(g) Street trees and Monument trees shall not be allowed closer than 20 feet from the
tangent point at street intersections as described in the vision clearance areas specified in §§ 153.021.
(h) Small tree species within the list in division (C)(2)(a) above of acceptable species
may be planted under overhead utilities.
(i) No trees shall be allowed within five lateral feet of underground utilities, sewer and
water lines.
(j) In new subdivisions or when the development of commercial property occurs, the
City Planner and Public Works Director shall review landscaping plans and may require Street trees and
Monument trees to be planted in any of the streets, parking lots, parks and other public places abutting
land henceforth developed and/or subdivided, prior to division (C)(2)(k) below.
(k) No person, without the written permission of the City Street Tree Committee, shall
plant a Street tree or a Monument tree of a species other than those included on the list.
(l) The following trees are illegal and may not be planted in dedicated street
rights-of-way or utility easements:
Common Name
Scientific Name
Box Elder
Acer Negundo
Catalpas
Catalpa Species
Elms
Ulmus
Hickory
Carya Species
Holly
Ilex Species
Parks and Recreation
41
Horse Chestnut Aescules Hippocastanum
Lilac Species
Syringa Species
Locust Species
Robinia Species
Pines
Pinus Species
Poplar Species
Populus Species
Silver Maple
Acer Saccharinum
Spruces
Picea Species
Tree of Heaven
Ailanthus Altissima
Walnuts
Juglans Species
Willow Species
Salix Species
In general, no conifers or fruit-bearing trees may be planted in the right-of-way as Street trees.
(D) Landscaping credit for street tree planting.
(1) The retention of trees shall be considered in the design of partitions, site plans,
subdivisions or planned developments; the placement of roads and utilities shall preserve trees wherever
feasible.
(2) The preservation of trees shall provide a basis for consideration of a landscaping credit,
which can reduce the landscaping requirements described in §§ 153.026.
(3) The planting of trees in the public right-of-way shall provide a basis for consideration of a
landscaping credit, which can reduce the landscaping requirements described in §§ 153.026.
(E) Tree Technical Manual. The Tree Committee may adopt a Tree Technical Manual, and revise
its contents from time to time. The Tree Technical Manual shall contain specialized, arboricultural
reference materials; establish procedures and design standards required for installation, planting,
grating, pruning, thinning, removal and maintenance of trees; and establish or preserve the tree and root
protection zone. Any person who is required under this code or pursuant to a condition of approval of a
development permit to undertake those activities or to comply with the tree and root protection zone
shall comply with the requirements and procedures set forth in the Tree Technical Manual.
(Ord. 1303, passed 9-8-2015)
§ 93.06 SPECIAL TREE DISTRICTS WITHIN THE CITY.
The following district(s) shall be considered special tree district(s), and shall have detailed
descriptions contained in Attachment C to Ordinance 1230, which attachment is hereby adopted by
reference, for the planned location of street trees and other amenities.
(A) Town Center (TC) District Streetscape Design Plan. This district shall include three-foot by
Tillamook - General Regulations
42
three-foot tree wells located approximately 30 feet apart from one another with an historic streetlight
centered between each tree (see adopted attachment). Street trees shall be required on all streets in the
Town Center District, except Main and Pacific Avenues, between First and Fourth Streets. A reduction
to the number of street trees may be granted when the development preserves healthy, mature trees
adjacent to the sidewalk. Under this design plan, there is no requirement to remove existing trees on
Main Avenue, but the planting of new trees on Main Avenue between First and Fourth Streets is
discouraged.
(B) Allowed trees. The following small street trees are allowed in the Town Center Commercial
District:
Common Name
Scientific Name
Hedge Maple Acer campestre
Paper Bark Maple Acer griseum
Manchurian Maple Acer mandshuricanum
(Ord. 1303, passed 9-8-2015)
§ 93.07 TREE MAINTENANCE, CARE, PRUNING, CORNER CLEARANCE AND REMOVAL
OF DANGEROUS OR NUISANCE TREES.
(A) Tree maintenance, care, pruning and corner clearance.
(1) Standards. All public trees must be pruned to National Arborist Association Pruning Standards
for Shade Trees. These standards shall be adopted as part of the City Tree Program.
(2) Adjacent property owners to maintain private and street trees. Unless identified in a written
agreement or Memorandum of Understanding, every adjacent property owner of any tree overhanging any
right of way within the city shall prune the branches so that the branches shall not obstruct the light from a
street lamp, or obstruct the view of any street intersection. The owner of a tree at or within 20 feet of a street
intersection shall follow the criteria for the vision clearance areas as described in §§ 153.021. The owner of
a tree which is encroaching on or adjacent to electric wires is required to notify the city People’s Utility
District (PUD) prior to removal of hazardous limbs or branches. It is PUD’s responsibility to remove, prune
or trim tree from electric wires. The owner shall maintain a clear space of 14 feet over the street, and a safe
pedestrian way. Owners shall remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs
which constitute a menace to public safety.
(a) In reviewing trees, tree size will be factored in where possible so as to be realistic in clearance
concerns.
(b) With small trees, there will be small limbs that will be less than the 7 foot height requirement,
over a walkway. As long as there is still a wide enough safe pedestrian way, esthetics and viability
will be used to determine if further pruning or cutting would not be required at present and in fact
could damage the tree or effect viability in certain conditions such as wind, criminal mischief etc.
Parks and Recreation
43
(c) With larger trees, aesthetics and viability will also be taken in account. If cutting off a major limb
would affect tree viability, as long as there is a safe pedestrian way, that limb would be allowed to
exist but would be reviewed on a regular basis.
(3) Adjacent property owners liable. Unless identified in a written agreement or Memorandum of
Understanding, the owner of property abutting trees on a right of way shall be liable for injury, damage or
loss to persons or property caused by the property owner’s negligent failure to comply with division (A)(2)
of this section.
(4) Notification. The Public Works Director or designee may serve notice on the adjoining
property owner to prune, remove or otherwise treat any tree on a right-of-way as conditions may
require. Neither the duty of the adjoining property owner to maintain trees located on a right-of-way,
nor the liability for the property owner’s failure to do so, is dependent upon any notice from the city.
(5) Debris removal. Unless identified in a written agreement or Memorandum of
Understanding, the owner of property abutting trees on a right-of-way, or public area shall be required
to remove all debris from the right-of-way by sunset of the same day, unless specifically authorized to
do otherwise by the Public Works Director or designee. The acceptable standard shall be a broom clean
finish or better.
(6) City tree maintenance. The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees located within the public right-of-way as may be necessary to preserve or enhance the symmetry
and beauty of the areas. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property
owners, providing that the selection and location of the tree is in accordance with § 93.05.
(7) City held harmless. The city shall not be liable for injury, damage or loss to person or
property caused in whole or part by the defective or dangerous condition of any tree located in or upon
a right-of-way. The property owner shall defend and hold harmless the city from all claims for loss and
damage arising from the owner’s negligent failure to comply with this chapter.
(8) Permit. A city public works permit is not required for the pruning of a street tree.
(B) Removal of dangerous or nuisance trees.
(1) The city may prune or cause to have pruned a private tree when it interferes with the
proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight, or interferes with the visibility of any traffic
control device or sign.
(2) The city may cause the removal of all, or part of any dead, dangerous or diseased park or
street tree when the tree constitutes a hazard to life, property or harbors insects or disease that
constitutes a potential threat to other trees within the city.
(3) The city may remove, or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in
an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electrical power lines,
natural gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus,
insect or other pest.
(4) Prior to the filing of an application for a city public works permit, abutting property
owners may be granted permission by the Tree Committee for the removal of dangerous or nuisance
trees if the tree is considered to be dead, dangerous or diseased, or when the tree constitutes a hazard to
Tillamook - General Regulations
44
life or property, or harbors insects or disease that constitutes a potential threat to other trees within the
city.
(5) Upon approval by the Tree Committee, the applicant shall provide for a one-for-one
replacement with a minimum of 2" DBH tree in a public space acceptable to public works.
(6) Notice to prune or remove dangerous or nuisance trees. If any property owner fails to
maintain adjacent trees as per this chapter, the Public Works Director or designee, shall order the person
or persons, within 30 days of mailing of the notice, to so prune or remove the tree(s).
(C) Existing trees. All trees existing in the right-of-way or parks or other City property used for
public assembly prior to the approval of this chapter or amendments thereto or identified in a Park
Replanting Plan shall be considered pre-existing and allowed to remain unless they are considered a
nuisance to, dead, diseased or dangerous to the general public by the City Street Tree Committee.
(Ord. 1303, passed 9-8-2015) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.08 ABUSE, MUTILATION OR INDISCRIMINATE TOPPING OF TREES.
(A) No person shall abuse, destroy or mutilate any street tree, in a dedicated public right-of-way,
park, or any other public place owned by the City; attach or place any rope or wire (other than one used
to support the tree itself), sign, poster, handbill or other thing to or on any tree growing in a public
place; cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to come into contact with any tree; or to allow
any gaseous, liquid or solid substance which is harmful to trees to come into contact with their roots or
leaves.
(B) Except as provided by this section, it shall be unlawful as a normal practice of any person, firm
or city department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property owned by the City.
Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or obstructions
where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this chapter by the determination
of the city.
(Ord. 1303, passed 9-8-2015) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.09 INTERFERENCE WITH THE CITY.
No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the city or any of its agents, while engaging in the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removal of any street trees, park trees or private
trees as authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. 1303, passed 9-8-2015) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.10 ADMINISTRATION OF THIS CHAPTER.
(1) The interpretation and administration of this chapter is the responsibility of the City Manager or
persons designated by the City Manager.
(Ord. 1303, passed 9-8-2015)
Parks and Recreation
45
(2) City staff shall review trees in the city right of ways and city property and, once a tree is
identified as being a concern, the person, business, entity responsible for the tree will be notified, either
in person or by letter, with letter being the best practice for documentation. The letter shall identify the
issue and the code(s) involved.
a)The notification process shall be performed by the Police Department, for documentation and
followup.
b)Extension of time for mitigating the concern may be allowed if requested but shall be timely
tothe concern.
c)If there is no response to the notification, then further action shall occur up to and including
citationinto Municipal Court, following City Codes.
(3) If the person, business or entity requests to contest the concern or remedy, prior to the issuance
of a citation, then the issue may be brought up before the Beautification Committee with the person,
business or entity being notified of date, time and location to appear and present their response or other
suggested remedy. The Police Department will also present all information to date available to the
Beautification Committee to assist in any further recommendation to the Council.
The Beautification Committee will then make a recommendation for the next Council Meeting, to either
move forward allowing the person, business or entity to complete a specific remedy or recommend that
there is no agreed upon resolution. The Council, after review, may revoke the charges, accept other
mitigation, or direct the Police Department to move forward with other enforcement options to include
citation into Municipal Court. (Ordinance 1332, passed 12-18-2017)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
(A) Nuisance. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to be causing a nuisance and be considered in violation of Chapter 130.
(B) Failure to comply. When a person to whom a notice is directed shall fail to comply within the
specified time, the violation shall be considered a nuisance and it shall be lawful for the city to cause
the tree(s) in question to be pruned and/or removed; and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the
property owner as provided by law in the case of public nuisance abatements.
(C) Unless otherwise indicated, any offense under this chapter is classified as a violation
punishable by a fine set by resolution.
(Ord. 1303, passed 9-8-2015; Ord. 1315, passed 6-6-2016)
Tillamook - General Regulations
46
Trees
47
APPENDIX A: PLANTING INSTRUCTIONS
(Ord. 1303, passed 9-8-2015)
Tillamook - General Regulations
48
APPENDIX B: LOCATING TREES ON PROPERTY
(Ord. 1303, passed 9-8-2015)
Trees
49
CHAPTER 95: EXCLUSION FROM CITY PROPERTY
Section
95.01 Definitions
95.02 Purpose of exclusion
95.03 Exclusion from City property
95.04 Telephone contact
95.05 Appeal
95.06 Hearing by City Council
95.07 Authority of Municipal Court to hear exclusion appeals
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
CITY MANAGER. City Manager of the City of Tillamook or the City Manager’s designee.
CITY BUILDING. A building owned or leased by the City of Tillamook.
CITY PROPERTY. Real property owned or leased by the City of Tillamook, including city buildings
and parks. “City Property” does not include city rights-of-way.
MUNICIPAL COURT. The Tillamook County Justice Court, or any other court designated by the
Tillamook City Council to act as the municipal court for the City of Tillamook.
NECESSARY OFFICIAL BUSINESS. A prearranged and verifiable meeting with a city employee or
official on City Property.
PROHIBITED CONDUCT. Any of the following types of conduct:
a. Behavior that constitutes a crime;
b. Behavior that constitutes a violation of the Code of the City of Tillamook or any city
ordinances;
c. Disorderly conduct;
d. Riotous or violent or threatening behavior;
e. Unreasonably loud or disruptive behavior;
f. Disorderly or riotous assemblies;
g. Disruption of lawful meetings, events or work;
h. Obstruction of access to government services;
i. Abusive language or conduct;
Tillamook - General Regulations
50
j. Visible intoxication;
k. Violation of City policies intended to maintain a safe, orderly and efficient work
environment in public buildings, including the Violence in the Workplace Policy and the
Anti-Harassment Policy; or
l. Conduct that is otherwise disruptive to the efficient functioning of government affairs.
§ 95.02 PURPOSE OF EXCLUSION.
In furtherance of maintaining a safe environment for public employees and citizens, and
pursuant to the powers and authority of the Tillamook City Council, this ordinance addresses 1)
exclusion from city property, and 2) prohibition on telephoning the City.
§ 95.03 EXCLUSION FROM CITY PROPERTY.
(A) An individual is subject to immediate exclusion from City Property if that individual is
observed to be engaged in Prohibited Conduct.
(B) An individual who engages in Prohibited Conduct on City Property in violation of this policy
may be excluded from the particular City Property on which the individual engaged in Prohibited
Conduct for a period of up to 6 months (Exclusion Period).
(C) During the Exclusion Period, the individual who has been excluded may, with prior notice to
and approval from the City Manager, enter onto the City Property from which the individual has been
excluded, to conduct Necessary Official Business.
(D) All exclusion notices shall be in writing, shall state the Prohibited Conduct that is the basis for
the exclusion notice, shall state the Exclusion Period, and shall include appeal information. The
exclusion notice shall be personally served on the individual or mailed to the individual by certified
mail if a mailing address is available. Service of an exclusion notice is deemed to have occurred on the
date of personal service or the date of acceptance of a certified mailing.
(E) The exclusion notice will be kept on file by the City Manager.
(F) The exclusion will remain in effect for the period of time specified in the notice unless
modified or rescinded due to an appeal.
(G) Except as provided in paragraph (3) of this section, if an individual who receives a notice of
exclusion remains in or returns to the City Property from which he or she has been excluded, the
individual is subject to immediate arrest for criminal trespass.
Exclusion from City Property
51
§ 95.04 TELEPHONE CONTACT.
(A) The City Manager has the authority to forbid individuals from calling city telephone numbers
for up to 6 months, if the individual has previously engaged in conduct that would violate ORS
166.090, Telephonic Harassment when calling city telephone numbers.
(B) All notices forbidding an individual from calling city telephone numbers must be in writing,
and either personally served or mailed to the individual by certified mail if a mailing address is
available. Service of a notice forbidding an individual from calling city telephone numbers is deemed
to have occurred on the date of personal service or the date of acceptance of a certified mailing.
(C) Notices forbidding an individual from calling a city telephone number must state the conduct
that is the basis for the notice, must state the period during which the individual may not call the city
telephone number, and must include appeal information.
§ 95.05 APPEAL.
(A) Any exclusion from City Property and any prohibition against calling city telephones may be
appealed by filing a written appeal with Municipal Court within five (5) business days after service of
notice of exclusion or notice forbidding telephone contact.
(B) The exclusion or prohibition against calling city telephones shall remain in effect during the
appeal period.
(C) If an appeal is not timely filed with the Municipal Court, no appeal hearing will be held and the
exclusion notice or notice forbidding telephone contact shall become the final decision of the City.
(D) The Municipal Court Judge shall hold a hearing on the appeal within seven (7) business days of
the date of filing of the appeal, unless the appellant and the City agree to a different date.
(E) The appeal hearing shall be conducted by the Municipal Court Judge. No jury shall be
empaneled for a hearing pursuant to this section.
(F) The Municipal Court Judge will review the written appeal and may consider any testimony,
evidence, and other argument presented by the City and by the person who is the subject of the notice,
as well as any other testimony, evidence, and other argument that the Municipal Court Judge considers
relevant to whether the exclusion of prohibition is lawful and consistent with this ordinance, ORS
166.090, or any other applicable law.
(G) The Municipal Court Judge shall issue a written decision on the appeal within five (5) business
days of the date of the appeal hearing.
(H) The Municipal Court Judge may uphold, amend, or rescind the exclusion or telephone
prohibition. The decision of the Municipal Court Judge is the final decision of the City.
Tillamook - General Regulations
52
§ 95.06 AUTHORITY OF MUNICIPAL COURT TO HEAR EXCLUSION APPEALS.
The Municipal Court of the City of Tillamook is hereby authorized to hear, consider, and render
a decision upon appeals of exclusions from City Property and prohibitions on calling city telephone
numbers, following the appeal process described in this ordinance.
1
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. BUSINESS REGISTRATION AND FEES
111. AMUSEMENTS
112. ADULT BUSINESSES
114. GARAGE SALES
Tillamook - Business Regulations
2
3
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS REGISTRATION AND FEES
Section
Businesses in General
110.001 Purpose of business registration
110.002 Definitions
110.003 Registration
110.004 Penalties
110.005 Coverage and Rates
110.006 Nonresident proprietors
110.007 Transfer and assignment of registration
110.008 Business registration non-contractual
110.009 Exempt businesses
110.010 Payment of business registration fees; nonrefundable; temporary registration
110.011 Application
110.012 Misrepresentation by applicant
110.013 Use of public rights-of-way, City property
110.014 Regulation of hours
110.015 Violation
110.016 Concurrent remedies
110.017 Business registration fee reduction or waiver; fee; appeal
Taxicab Regulations
110.030 Purpose
110.031 Definitions
110.032 General operating procedure
110.033 Taxicab company license required
110.034 Applications for taxicab company license
110.035 Liability insurance
110.036 License fee
110.037 Denial, revocation or suspension of license and permit
110.038 Taxi stands; fee
110.039 Driver’s permits required
110.040 Application
110.041 Denial of permit
110.042 Renewal of driver’s permit
110.043 Appeals
110.044 Conduct of drivers
Tillamook - Business Regulations
4
110.999 Penalty
Appendix A: Business License Application
Cross-reference:
Solid waste management franchises, see Chapter 50
BUSINESSES IN GENERAL
§ 110.001 PURPOSE OF BUSINESS REGISTRATION.
This subchapter is enacted for the purposes of providing for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of Tillamook by raising revenue for municipal purposes, to provide revenue to pay for the necessary
expense required to issue the business registration and for business identification. The registration fees
hereinafter imposed shall be in addition to all general ad valorem taxes now or hereafter levied pursuant
to law, and shall be in addition to any and all other license or franchise fees otherwise imposed by the
City of Tillamook under existing subchapters.
(Ord 1288, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 110.002 DEFINITIONS.
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS. Every person who shall by public outcry offer for sale, either as
principal or agent, to the highest bidder on the spot, any article of merchandise or property, shall be
deemed an AUCTIONEER, and every such sale shall be deemed an AUCTION; provided, however, that
nothing in this section shall apply to judicial sales, nor to sales by executors, administrators or trustees
under court order.
BUSINESS.
1. As a noun, shall mean all manufacturers, professions, trades, occupations and shops of all and
every kind carried on for profit
2. As a verb shall mean any lawful activity or enterprise engaged in for gain, benefit, advantage or
livelihood.
3. A business shall also be determined by the discrete location(s) which are encompassed by the
enterprises accounting records.
CITY PROPERTY. For the purposes of this and other subchapter(s), property owned and/or
controlled by the city as described in this or other subchapter(s). For example, city property include, but
is not limited to, highways, roadways, public rights of way, sidewalks, alleys, parking lots, parks, open
spaces and any other city owned property. (This does not include private parking lots or private property;
either open to the public or controlled access).
EMPLOYEE/EMPLOYER. Any owner, operator, sales person, agent or worker whether paid by
salary, bonus, commission, piecework or hourly wage and associated with or working for any
commercial, professional, fraternal or public establishment within the City of Tillamook, unless
Business Registration and Fees
5
excluded through franchise agreement or Federal or State laws.
EMPLOYEE/EMPLOYER VOLUNTEER. Any person, who not for compensation, acting or
serving willingly and with no constraint or guarantee of reward, performs any function(s) normally done
by an Employee/Employer in any commercial, professional, fraternal or public establishment within the
City of Tillamook, unless excluded through franchise agreement or Federal or State laws.
FISCAL YEAR. July 1 to June 30.
HAWKER. Any person who, for himself or as agent of another, carries for sale and offers for sale, or
exposes for sale, any goods, wares, or merchandise, or any article or thing for which a price is asked, in or
on the streets, to customers in or on the streets, or who offers or exposes for sale any such commodity
from a doorway, recess, alleyway, vacant lot, or other place facing on the street, whether making outcry
or not.
NON-PROFIT. For the purposes of this subchapter, the person which is:
1. Organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, testing for public safety,
literary or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals
2. For which no part of the net earnings inures to the benefit of a private shareholder or individual
3. By which no substantial part of the person’s activities is for carrying on propaganda or otherwise
attempting to influence legislation and which does not participate in or intervene in, including the
publishing or distributing of statements, any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for
public office and possessing a certificate from the Internal Revenue Service to that effect.
PEDDLE. Any sale, or offering for sale, or exposing for sale of any goods, wares, or merchandise, or
any article or thing for which a price is asked by a peddler in pursuance of his occupation as a peddler, but
shall not be construed to include any wholesaler selling directly to a licensed business.
PEDDLER. Any person who, for himself or as agent for another, goes from place to place, or from
house to house within the City of Tillamook, carrying for sale and offering or exposing for sale at retail
any goods, wares, or merchandise, or any article or thing for which a price is asked.
PERSON. All corporations, associations, syndicates, partnerships of every kind, joint ventures,
societies and individuals, employees, employers, volunteer, solicitor, transient, merchant, whether for
profit or non-profit, transacting and carrying on business in the City of Tillamook, Oregon.
RETAIL. Any sale direct to the ultimate consumer or user for consumption or use and not for resale
purposes; provided, however, that the above definition shall not be deemed to include persons engaged in
the sale of goods, wares and merchandise to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual
course of business, nor bona fide sales of goods, wares or merchandise by the same for future delivery in
interstate commerce, or to the sale of staple products by the grower thereof or his employee.
SOLICITOR. Every person or individual who goes from house to house or from place to place within
the City of Tillamook selling, offering to sell or taking orders for any products, wares, merchandise or
any article or service whether payment is made prior to receiving purchased goods/services or delivery is
made upon payment. The term “solicitor” shall not include any commercial traveler receiving orders for
Tillamook - Business Regulations
6
goods at wholesale from merchants nor shall said term include any person seeking customers for farm
fresh products.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily occupies a fixed location, sells and delivers
from stock on hand, and does business in much the same manner as a permanent business.
UMBRELLA REGISTRATION. A single business registration for a number of business or activities
on special occasions. Examples include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Insurance, real estate or other agency-type where brokers supervise independent agents
2. The Chamber of Commerce’s June Dairy Parade
3. Tillamook Revitalization Association’s events and/or Tillamook Farmers’ Market.
(Ord. 1288, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 110.003 REGISTRATION.
1. On or after July 1, 2002, any person who operates a business or conducts business, to include
peddlers, solicitors, hawkers and occult arts, within the jurisdiction of the City of Tillamook,
Oregon, shall first obtain a business registration registering that business. The applicant shall
apply on a form approved by the City and shall pay a fee for the registration in advance. Fees for
this Ordinance shall be set by resolution of the Tillamook City Council.
2. Any person that carries on or engages in a business that does not comply with City Code or
Regulation is prohibited from being issued a business license. Additionally, currently held
licenses may be revoked for violation of City Code or Regulation.
3. Registrations shall be valid for one 365 day year, the period being July 1st to June 30th.
Registrations are renewable on July 1st of each year, with renewal notices sent out in May of each
year. A late fee will be assessed if not paid by July 1. Additional penalty and citation into
Tillamook Municipal Court will be issued 15 days from the date of the written late notice.
(Ord. 1288, passed 4-7-2014, Ordinance 1302, passed 6-2-2015)
§ 110.004 PENALTIES.
1. Unless otherwise indicated, any offense under this chapter is classified as a violation punishable
by a fine set by resolution. Penalties not set by resolution shall be $250.00 per violation.
(Ord 1315, passed 6-6-2016)
2. Each day’s violation of a provision of this Subchapter constitutes a separate violation.
3. A citation or other charging instrument filed in court shall include all violations from the date of
any written warning notice (a.k.a. abatement) as cited in the charging instrument.
(Ord. 1288, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 110.005 COVERAGE AND RATES.
This subchapter shall apply to manufacturers, trades, professions, occupations, businesses and shops
of every kind, unless otherwise exempted. All business registration fees shall be established by resolution
of the Tillamook City Council.
Business Registration and Fees
7
' 110.006 NONRESIDENT PROPRIETORS.
Any agent or agents of non-resident proprietors engaged in any business in the City of Tillamook
shall be personally liable for the business registration fee required and shall be subject to the penalties
hereof for the failure to pay that fee to the same extent as if they were themselves the proprietors of the
business. The act of advertising within the city, of and by itself, shall not require a business registration
under this subchapter.
(Ord. 1288, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 110.007 TRANSFER AND ASSIGNMENT OF REGISTRATION.
No transfer or assignment of any business registration issued here shall be valid or permitted,
except as follows:
A business registration may be transferred or assigned for only the remainder of the registration
period when the successive business continues the same use and level of use of the property,
when the number of employees remains the same or less, and when City is notified and paid a
transfer or assignment fee, as set by resolution.
(Ord. 1288, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 110.008 BUSINESS REGISTRATION NONCONTRACTUAL.
The registration application is not a contract between City and registrant or any other person. City
may unilaterally at any time raise registration fees. However, the increased fee shall apply to the next
fiscal year’s registration fee and/or to registrations issued subsequent to the effective date of any new fee.
(Ord. 1288, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 110.009 EXEMPT BUSINESSES.
The following are exempt from the provisions of this subchapter:
1. Government agencies
2. Non-profit organizations which are federally tax exempt unless the non-profit organization is
carrying an umbrella registration as defined in this subchapter.
3. Home based businesses operated solely by the owner with no employees (i.e.
babysitting/childcare where the individual either goes to the person’s home or does babysitting in
their home, music teachers, house cleaning, cosmetic sales, yard care, odd jobs, mending, etc. if
the average weekly hours for any given month do not exceed 10 hours) Daycare facilities as
defined by the zoning subchapter do not qualify for this exemption.
4. Individuals below the age of 18 who do not operate a commercial business establishment or have
other employees.
5. Garage sales permitted under City ordinance.
Tillamook - Business Regulations
8
6. Non-resident businesses offering merchandise by catalog or by telecommunications for future
delivery to the customer.
7. Construction subcontractors working under a general contractor who possess a valid business
license.
8. Any agent or business specifically exempted by State Law.
9. Delivery services unless the deliverer operates from a facility based within the city’s jurisdiction
(Ord. 1288, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 110.010 PAYMENT OF BUSINESS REGISTRATION FEES; NONREFUNDABLE;
TEMPORARY REGISTRATION.
It shall be unlawful for any persons to carry on any business, trade, occupation, profession, or
calling, or transact any business as described in this subchapter, without first paying in advance the
registration fee as set by resolution. For the purpose of fairness the City shall allow registration fees to be
prorated for new applicants not applying on July 1. Fees shall be calculated for the remainder of the fiscal
year by quarters. A business may register for a temporary license under this subchapter for up to three (3)
months and the fee shall be one third of the yearly fee.
(Ord. 1288, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 110.011 APPLICATION.
Business registration is effective from July 1 to June 30 of each year. On or before the first day of
July of each and every business registration year after the passage of this subchapter, every
person/business as defined in the subchapter, engaged in a business, in the City of Tillamook, Oregon,
shall make application to the City upon a form furnished by the City, for a business registration to carry
on his/her business for the year in question.
The applications shall be numbered consecutively; they shall have the year for which application for
business registration is applied, printed or stamped thereon, and shall contain the following information:
1. Amount of business registration fee tendered with application
2. Signature of applicant or agent making application
3. Date of application
4. Type of business
5. Any other information the City Manager or City Recorder or common council deems said
application should contain.
The same application standard shall apply for those making application during the business
registration year. The City Manager, City Recorder or their designee shall be empowered to issue a
business registration upon receipt of proper application and appropriate fee paid. If a question arises
between the applicant for a business registration and the City, as to fee or otherwise, the same may be
referred to the common council for its determination. This determination may be made by the common
council at the next regularly scheduled council meeting. The determination of the council shall be final.
Each business registration issued under the provisions hereof shall at all times be displayed in a
conspicuous place in the business. Replacement license costs shall be established by resolution.
Business Registration and Fees
9
(Ord. 1288, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 110.012 MISREPRESENTATION BY APPLICANT.
It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any person to willfully make any false or misleading
statement in his/her application for the purpose of determining the amount of any business registration to
be paid, or to fail or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter. The penalty for
violation of this section shall be set by resolution. The conviction of any person for violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter shall not relieve said person from paying any business registration fee or
penalty for which said person shall be liable, nor shall the payment of any business registration fee be a
bar to or prevent prosecution in the City Municipal Court of any complaint for the violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1288, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 110.013 USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY, CITY PROPERTY.
It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any business, person conduction business, peddler,
solicitor, hawker or other activity described in this subchapter as requiring a business registration, to
conduct business, operate a business, solicit, peddle, hawk, or conduct any other activity described in this
subchapter, on any public rights of way or city property, as defined in this subchapter, without written
approval of the City of Tillamook. Penalty for violation of this subchapter shall be set by resolution.
(Ord. 1288, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 110.014 REGULATION OF HOURS.
No peddler, solicitor or hawker registered under this subchapter shall solicit before the hour of 9:00
a.m. or after the hour of 8:00 p.m.
(Ord. 1288, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 110.015 VIOLATION.
Upon conviction of a violation of this subchapter, the court shall order the defendant to pay any
cost, disbursement, fee, fine, or penalty authorized by this subchapter or as amended.
Each day or distinct time period of a violation as described in this subchapter, shall be considered a
separate violation, subject to a separate penalty as described in this subchapter and by resolution. Fees
and fines identified in this subchapter shall be set by resolution.
(Ord. 1288, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 110.016 CONCURRENT REMEDIES.
In addition to the penalties heretofore provided, and as separate and distinct remedies, the City of
Tillamook - Business Regulations
10
Tillamook may sue in any court of competent jurisdiction to obtain judgment and to enforce payment of
any business registration fee due pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter and to seek injunctive
relief against any person violating this subchapter. Attorney fees, costs, disbursements and/or prevailing
party fees shall be awarded to the prevailing party, unless otherwise agreed or waived by City.
(Ord. 1288, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 110.017 BUSINESS REGISTRATION FEE REDUCTION OR WAIVER; FEE; APPEAL.
A person may apply for a reduction or waiver of the business registration fee by submitting a letter
justifying the request to the City Manager. The City Council or City Manager, may grant in writing, a
reduction or waiver of the business registration fee for good cause shown, hardship or equity. The City
Manager may refer an application directly to the City Council. The applicant may appeal, without
additional fee, the City Manager’s decision to the City Council.
(Ord. 1288, passed 4-7-2014)
TAXICAB REGULATIONS
§ 110.030 PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this subchapter to require that those persons operating taxicabs do so in a safe,
fair and efficient manner. Because taxicabs constitute an essential part of the city’s transportation
system, some regulation is necessary to ensure that the safety and well-being of its citizens is protected,
the public need provided and the public convenience promoted.
(1977 Code, ' 6-17) (Ord. 984, passed 9-15-1980)
§ 110.031 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
LICENSEE. A person or entity who has applied for a license to operate a taxicab company or to
whom a license to operate a taxicab company has been issued.
OPERATE. To drive a vehicle, to use a vehicle in the conduct of business, to receive money from
the use of a vehicle, or to cause or allow another person to do the same.
PERMITTEE. A person who has applied for a permit to operate a taxi or to whom a permit to
operate a taxi has been issued.
TAXI or TAXICAB. Every motor vehicle which carries passengers for hire and has a seating
capacity of nine passengers or less, as per manufacturer’s rating; excepting, however, that motor vehicles
for rent without drivers and motor vehicles of private nonprofit organizations which provide
Business Registration and Fees
11
transportation of passengers for hire, or not for hire, and are not operated exclusively over a fixed and
defined route are not TAXIS or TAXICABS.
TAXICAB COMPANY. A person or any entity operating taxicabs other than as a driver and
regardless of whether the vehicles so operated are owned by the company, leased or owned by individual
members of the company.
(1977 Code, ' 6-17) (Ord. 984, passed 9-15-1980)
§ 110.032 GENERAL OPERATING PROCEDURE.
All taxis operating within the limits of the city shall be clean, properly equipped and in safe
condition for the transportation of passengers. Further, the vehicle shall be clearly marked Ataxi@ or
Ataxicab@ in an approved method.
(1977 Code, § 6-17) (Ord. 984, passed 9-15-1980)
§ 110.033 TAXICAB COMPANY LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall conduct business as a taxicab company within the corporate limits of this city
without first obtaining from the City Recorder a license permitting the operation of a taxicab company
business.
(1977 Code, § 6-17) (Ord. 984, passed 9-15-1980) Penalty, see § 110.999
§ 110.034 APPLICATIONS FOR TAXICAB COMPANY LICENSE.
(A) Any person making application for a license to operate a taxicab company business within the
city shall produce satisfactory evidence at the time of making application for a license that the applicant
has complied with all the laws of the state with reference to registration of the automotive equipment to
be used under the license.
(B) In addition, each applicant shall furnish the following information to the City Recorder under
oath:
(1) Name under which business is to be conducted;
(2) Name and address of all owners or persons having an interest in the business;
(3) Name and address of each operator;
(4) Name, make and identification of all vehicles to be operated;
(5) Name and address of the insurance company or companies (together with policy numbers)
in which the liability insurance coverage required in § 110.035 is in force;
Tillamook - Business Regulations
12
(6) Applicant’s certification of giving direction to all insurance companies to give 15 days’
advance notice to City Recorder of the company’s intention to cancel any policy on any of the applicant’s
taxicabs, and requiring the same to be included on all policies; and
(7) Any additional information as the City Manager may require for the efficient
administration of this subchapter, including but not limited to fingerprints, criminal record, if any, and
motor vehicle driving record of all persons having an interest in the business.
(C) The application shall thereupon be submitted to the office of City Manager for investigation. If
the City Manager finds from his or her investigation that the following divisions (C)(1) through (C)(5)
apply, the City Manager shall direct the City Recorder to issue the license:
(1) The applicant (and all persons having an interest in the business) has complied with all the
applicable laws of the state and the ordinances of this city;
(2) Applicant (and all persons having an interest in the business) is financially responsible and
adequately equipped to conduct the business;
(3) The equipment listed is safe for operation;
(4) The operation is not contrary to the public interest; and
(5) The granting of the license will not result in the impairment of the ability of existing
operators to serve the public adequately.
(1977 Code, § 6-17) (Ord. 984, passed 9-15-1980)
§ 110.035 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
A licensee who operates a taxicab or taxicab company in the city shall at all times have in full force
and effect as to each taxicab in operation, liability and property damage insurance policy or policies
issued by an insurance company licensed to conduct insurance business in the state. The minimum
limits of insurance coverage for liability for injury to person shall not be less than $100,000 as to any one
person and $300,000 in any single occurrence for injuries to more than one person, and $50,000 for
damage to property. Proof of this insurance shall be filed with the City Recorder, who shall be entitled
to receive 15 days’ notice in advance of any insurance company’s intention to cancel any policy on any
taxicab.
(1977 Code, § 6-17) (Ord. 984, passed 9-15-1980)
§ 110.036 LICENSE FEE.
Business Registration and Fees
13
After the application has been approved by the City Manager, the City Recorder shall, upon payment
of fees established by the City Council in this subchapter or as may hereafter be amended by resolution of
the City Council, grant a license to the applicant to operate a taxicab company. The annual license fee is
as follows: for each vehicle to be operated as a taxi, the sum of $25.00 per year; provided, however, that
the license may be issued semi-annually upon the payment of $12.50, the license to expire on June 30 and
December 31 of each year. Each taxi shall carry its own license which shall be plainly visible in the
vehicle at all times. The license shall not be transferable to another licensee or to another vehicle;
provided, however, that the City Manager in his or her discretion may authorize a transfer of a license
from a less serviceable vehicle to a more serviceable vehicle and waive payment of the regular license fee
upon proof that the less serviceable vehicle has been permanently withdrawn from use in carrying
passengers for hire by the licensee, or upon proof that the previous vehicle is in a temporary state of
needing service and repairs.
(1977 Code, § 6-17) (Ord. 984, passed 9-15-1980)
§ 110.037 DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE AND PERMIT.
(A) Except as herein provided, a license to operate a taxicab company and a permit to operate a taxi
shall be denied, revoked or suspended by the City Manager when either of the following has occurred
with respect to any licensee or permittee:
(1) Conviction of a felony within the past five years;
(2) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;
(3) Conviction of a major traffic offense within the past five years;
(4) Repeated violation of the laws of the state;
(5) Repeated violation of the ordinances of the city;
(6) Violation of the terms of this subchapter;
(7) Physical or mental illness or disability which may make the operation of a taxicab
hazardous to members of the public; or
(8) Engaging in any of the following acts of misconduct:
(a) Allow another person to use his or her driver’s permit;
(b) Operate a taxi while under the influence of intoxicants or in a careless or reckless
manner;
(c) Use a taxicab in the commission of any crime; or
(d) Defraud a passenger in any way.
Tillamook - Business Regulations
14
(B) Upon receiving information that any licensee or permittee has engaged in any conduct
prohibited by division (A) of this section, or has been convicted in any manner proscribed by division (A)
of this section, the City Manager shall give written notice by United States mail to the licensee/permittee
at his or her last known address or by personally delivering the notice to him or her, stating that unless the
licensee/permittee appears at the office of the City Manager, City Hall, Tillamook, Oregon, at a
designated date and hour, which shall be not sooner than five days nor longer than 14 days from the date
the notice is mailed or is personally delivered, and shows good cause why his or her license/permit
should not be revoked, it will be revoked. The notice shall state the reason for the revocation or
proposed revocation. After hearing the evidence produced by licensee/permittee, the City Manager
shall within five days thereafter make a determination as to whether the license/permit should be
revoked.
(C) The City Manager shall have the authority to summarily and without prior notice suspend a
license and permit for a period of ten days where facts of a strong and convincing nature come into his or
her possession causing him or her to have strong reason to believe that the licensee/permittee’s
license/permit should be revoked under the provisions of this subchapter and that the following of the
procedure of giving notice as set forth in division (B) of this section could reasonably result in serious or
irreparable injury to the best interests of the city and/or its citizens. At the same time the City Manager
issues a suspension order as provided in this section, he or she shall forward a notice to the
licensee/permittee for a hearing as provided in division (B) of this section.
(1977 Code, § 6-17) (Ord. 984, passed 9-15-1980; Ord. 1166, passed 7-2-2001)
§ 110.038 TAXI STANDS; FEE.
Whenever a license has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter for the
operation of a taxi within the corporate limits of the city, application may be made to the City Council of
the city for the designation by the Council of a taxi stand upon the street or streets of the city, and proper
marking thereof upon the curb of the street so designated for the use and benefit of the licensee. The
annual permit fee for each and every taxicab stand shall be $150.
(1977 Code, § 6-17) (Ord. 984, passed 9-15-1980)
§ 110.039 DRIVER’S PERMITS REQUIRED.
No person shall drive or allow another person to drive a taxicab without a valid State Class 4 license
and a taxicab driver’s permit issued under § 110.040. Taxicab driver’s permits shall be valid for no
more than one year and all permits shall expire on December 31 of each year.
(1977 Code, § 6-17) (Ord. 984, passed 9-15-1980; Ord. 1093, passed 3-20-1989)
§ 110.040 APPLICATION.
An applicant for a taxicab driver’s permit shall submit to the Chief of Police an application form
containing any information as the city may require, including two passport-size photographs and a
Business Registration and Fees
15
nonrefundable fee of $10. The information given by the applicant shall be under oath. The applicant
shall submit to fingerprinting if required to do so. Driver’s permits shall be renewed upon the payment
of a renewal fee of $10 on or before December 1 of each year. If any of the information contained in the
application changes, the applicant or permittee shall promptly report the change to the city. Upon
presentation of convincing evidence that a taxicab driver’s permit has been lost or destroyed and a
payment of a replacement fee of $5, the city shall issue a replacement permit. The Chief of Police shall
submit all applications and information to the office of City Manager for issuance or renewal of a taxicab
driver’s permit.
(1977 Code, § 6-17) (Ord. 984, passed 9-15-1980)
§ 110.041 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
No taxicab driver’s permit shall be issued to any person that the permit, had it been issued, should be
revoked for any of the grounds for revocation set forth in § 110.037. The grounds for revocation of a
license/permit set forth in § 110.037 are adopted by this reference as grounds for the denial of a driver’s
permit in the first instance.
(1977 Code, § 6-17) (Ord. 984, passed 9-15-1980)
§ 110.042 RENEWAL OF DRIVER’S PERMIT.
Any driver’s permit may be renewed only upon the determination by the City Manager that if it were
in force it should not be revoked as provided in § 110.037.
(1977 Code, § 6-17) (Ord. 984, passed 9-15-1980)
§ 110.043 APPEALS.
The denial of issuance, or revocation/suspension of any license or permit, by the office of the City
Manager is subject to appeal before the City Council. Any appeal must be submitted to the office of the
City Manager in writing at least five days prior to a regularly scheduled Council meeting.
(1977 Code, § 6-17) (Ord. 984, passed 9-15-1980)
§ 110.044 CONDUCT OF DRIVERS.
No taxicab driver shall:
(A) Operate a taxi in a manner contrary to the laws of this city or state;
(B) Use profane or obscene language while operating a taxicab;
(C) Smoke or chew tobacco without the consent of the passenger;
(D) Be discourteous to a passenger or fail to accede to a passenger’s reasonable request;
Tillamook - Business Regulations
16
(E) Drive a passenger to his or her destination by any other than the most direct route, unless
requested to do so by the passenger; or
(F) Refuse to issue a receipt for a fare paid, if one is requested.
(1977 Code, § 6-17) (Ord. 984, passed 9-15-1980)
§ 110.999 PENALTY.
Unless otherwise indicated, any offense under this chapter is classified as a violation punishable by a
fine set by resolution. Penalties not set by resolution shall be $250.00 per violation.
(Ord 1315, passed 6-6-2016)
Business Registration and Fees
17
CHAPTER 111: AMUSEMENTS
Section
Amusement Devices, Pinball Games and the Like
111.001 Definition
111.002 Privilege license fee
111.003 License year defined
111.004 Receipt
111.005 Display of receipt
111.006 Effective date
Social Games and Games of Chance
111.020 Gambling prohibited; confiscation of property
111.021 Definitions
111.022 Application for license
111.023 Cardroom license not transferable
111.024 Granting and denial of application
111.025 Suspension and revocation of license
111.026 Regulations
111.027 Signs
111.028 Cardroom and card table fees
111.029 Exceptions to license
Occult Arts
111.080 License required
111.081 Application; fees
111.999 Penalty
Tillamook - Business Regulations
18
Amusements
19
AMUSEMENT DEVICES, PINBALL GAMES AND THE LIKE
§ 111.001 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
AMUSEMENT DEVICE. A device designed to be operated for music or amusement only or for
playing a game by the insertion of legal tender of the United States in the machine, which amusement
device is so designed and constructed that it cannot pay tokens, money or any other thing of value in
violation of the laws of the state, and which can be operated, played or employed for amusement
purposes only.
(Ord. 1123, passed 6-1-1992)
§ 111.002 PRIVILEGE LICENSE FEE.
There is hereby imposed on every music and amusement device of every description or designation
a privilege license fee as follows: each music machine, $50 annually; for every amusement device or
game, $100 annually; providing, however, that a maximum fee of $1,000 shall be charged annually to
any one licensee for amusement devices or games located at any one business location, notwithstanding
the number of devices or games exceeding ten in number at one location.
(Ord. 1123, passed 6-1-1992)
§ 111.003 LICENSE YEAR DEFINED.
The fee as specified in § 111.02 shall be paid on an annual basis. The license year for the purposes
of this subchapter shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31.
(Ord. 1123, passed 6-1-1992)
§ 111.004 RECEIPT.
Upon payment of the privilege license fee hereby imposed, the City Recorder shall issue to each
applicant a receipt therefor. For each new amusement device or game acquired any time after January 1
of any year, the full fee as listed in § 111.002 shall be paid on a monthly proration to year end. All
license fees paid shall be nonrefundable.
(Ord. 1123, passed 6-1-1992)
§ 111.005 DISPLAY OF RECEIPT.
It is hereby made unlawful for any person to display in any public or private place of amusement or
business in the city any amusement device subject to the fee imposed by this subchapter unless there be
affixed to the device subject to the fee, or posted in a conspicuous place in the room in which the device
Tillamook - Business Regulations
20
is displayed, a receipt of the City Recorder for payment of the fee. The receipt, sticker or label shall
contain the name and address of the owner and operator thereof, the number of the device, the receipt
number, the date issued and the year and months for which the same is issued, signed by the City
Recorder. Absence of a duly issued receipt as herein provided shall be prima facie evidence that the fee
has not been paid.
(Ord. 1123, passed 6-1-1992) Penalty, see § 111.999
§ 111.006 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This subchapter shall be in full force and effect 30 days from the date it is signed by the Mayor of the
city.
(Ord. 1123, passed 6-1-1992)
SOCIAL GAMES AND GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 111.020 GAMBLING PROHIBITED; CONFISCATION OF PROPERTY.
No person shall participate in, operate or assist in operating any gambling game or activity,
including a lottery. No person shall have in his or her possession any property, instrument or device
designed or adapted for use in any type of gambling activity. Any such property, instrument or device is
a nuisance and may be summarily seized by any police officer. Property so seized shall be placed in the
custody of the Chief of Police of the city. Upon conviction of the person owning or controlling the
property for a violation of this section, the Municipal Judge shall order the property confiscated and
destroyed.
(1977 Code, § 6-11) (Ord. 855, passed 1-3-1977) Penalty, see § 111.999
§ 111.021 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
CARDROOM. Any place open to the public wherein any table is maintained upon which games of
cards are played.
GAMBLING.
(1) Any contest, game, gaming scheme, gaming device or machine in which the outcome
depends in a material degree upon an element of chance, notwithstanding the skill of the contestants may
also be a factor therein.
(2) The term GAMBLING shall not include social games.
Amusements
21
SOCIAL GAMES.
(1) A game involving the playing of cards only, which does not include lotteries or any game
involving the use of any property, instrument or device designed or adapted for the use in any type of
gambling activity, between players in a private home where no house player, house bank or house odds
exist, and there is no house income from the operation of the SOCIAL GAME.
(2) A game involving the playing of cards only, which does not include lotteries or any game
involving the use of any property, instrument or device designed or adapted for the use in any type of
gambling activity, between players in a private business, private club or place of public accommodation,
where no house player, house bank or house odds exist and there is no income from the operation of the
SOCIAL GAMES.
(1977 Code, § 6-11) (Ord. 855, passed 1-3-1977)
§ 111.022 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
From and after this date, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in or carry
on, or maintain or conduct any cardroom in the city without having valid license for the cardroom and
licenses for the card tables therein. Any person desiring to obtain licenses under the provisions of this
subchapter shall pay to the City Recorder fees as specified in § 111.028.
(1977 Code, § 6-11) (Ord. 855, passed 1-3-1977; Ord. 994, passed 5-4-1981) Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.023 CARDROOM LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
No cardroom license shall be assignable or transferable. A change of persons having a financial
interest in a licensed business shall be reported immediately to the City Manager, who shall order an
investigation by the Police Department and the changes approved or denied by the City Council.
Application for change of financial ownership shall be accompanied by a $65 nonrefundable
investigation fee.
(1977 Code, § 6-11) (Ord. 855, passed 1-3-1977; Ord. 994, passed 5-4-1981)
§ 111.024 GRANTING AND DENIAL OF APPLICATION.
(A) The City Council shall either approve the application and grant the license applied for or deny
the application and refuse to grant the license.
(B) The above shall not be granted if:
(1) The applicant has been previously convicted of a felony within the last ten years;
(2) The applicant has been convicted of five misdemeanors, the last of which was within five
years;
Tillamook - Business Regulations
22
(3) The applicant has been convicted of or forfeited bail for any crime involving gambling
within the last five years;
(4) The applicant has been directly or indirectly involved in a forfeiture proceeding regarding a
gambling device as defined in state statutes where the gambling device has been ordered destroyed, or a
bond has been forfeited in lieu of the gambling device being destroyed within the last five years;
(5) Any false or misleading information is supplied in the application or any information
requested is omitted from the application;
(6) The applicant has had a license which was in his or her name revoked or suspended three
times by the State Liquor Control Commission, the last of which was in the last five years;
(7) The applicant violates any section of this subchapter; or
(8) Any other conduct involving moral turpitude on the part of the applicant.
(1977 Code, § 6-11) (Ord. 855, passed 1-3-1977; Ord. 1027, passed 1-17-1983)
§ 111.025 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
(A) The City Manager shall temporarily suspend any cardroom license issued hereunder if:
(1) Any person who has any interest in the business has been previously convicted of a felony;
(2) Any person who has any interest in the business has been convicted of five misdemeanors,
excepting minor traffic offenses;
(3) Any person who has any interest in the business has been convicted of or forfeited bail for
any crime involving gambling;
(4) Any person who has any interest in the business has been directly or indirectly involved in
a forfeiture proceeding regarding a gambling device as defined in the state statutes where the gambling
device has been ordered destroyed or a bond has been forfeited in lieu of the gambling device being
destroyed;
(5) Any false or misleading information is supplied in the application;
(6) Any person who has any interest in the business has had a license which was in his or her
name revoked or suspended three times by the State Liquor Control Commission;
(7) Any person who has any interest in the business or any employee who violates any section
of this subchapter; or
(8) Any other conduct involving moral turpitude on the part of any person who has any interest
in the business.
Amusements
23
(B) Action in this respect shall be subject to the right of appeal to the City Council meeting in
regular Council session. Notice of the appeal shall be filed with the City Recorder within ten days or the
action shall be deemed final and conclusive. A temporary suspension shall be 30 days.
(C) Permanent revocation may be made only by the City Council, and the revocation shall only take
place at a City Council meeting in regular Council session upon application of the City Manager and only
after the licensee has been served with notice at least 20 days prior to the City Council meeting. The
notice shall include the time and date of the City Council meeting and the grounds upon which the
permanent revocation is sought. Notice shall be deemed to have been received by the licensee if the
City Manager mails the notice to the address listed by the licensee on his or her application for a license.
(1977 Code, § 6-11) (Ord. 855, passed 1-3-1977; Ord. 1027, passed 1-17-1983)
§ 111.026 REGULATIONS.
It shall be unlawful to operate a cardroom in violation of any of the following regulations and rules.
(A) With respect to the social games set forth in this subchapter, there shall be a limit on any bet of
$10 and a three-raise limit.
(B) Licensees holding or obtaining licenses under the provisions of this subchapter shall thereby
automatically agree to be bound by and observe each and all of the terms, conditions and provisions of
this subchapter and of the regulations and rules established thereby.
(C) Each and all of the games conducted or operated in the city pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter shall be conducted and operated in full conformity with, and subject to, all the provisions of
the laws of this state and the city.
(D) No licensee shall allow the use of any cardroom between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of
any day.
(E) All cardrooms shall be open to police inspection during all hours of operation. The cardroom
license shall be available for inspection during all hours of operation.
(F) No person who has any direct financial interest in a business permitting social gaming, per this
subchapter and state law, shall participate in any card game, procure players, back, farm out, assign or
sublet any card games lawfully permitted on the premises in which the person has any interest or works.
DIRECT FINANCIAL INTEREST means any interest, legal or equitable, of any person as an owner,
co-owner, stockholder, officer or shareholder in any corporation, joint venture, partnership, trading
company or association.
(G) The playing of all card games shall be so arranged as to provide free access and visibility to any
interested party. Doors leading into the cardroom must remain unlocked during all hours of operation.
(H) No person under the age of 21 shall be permitted to participate in any card game or to enter or
Tillamook - Business Regulations
24
remain upon the premises.
(I) No charge shall be collected from any player for the privilege of participating in any game.
(J) With respect to tables at which any form of Blackjack or Twenty-one is played, there shall be a
limit of three tables for the play in any licensed cardroom.
(K) To provide for special events and promotional programs temporary tables will be allowed. The
following requirements for temporary tables shall apply in addition to regulations set forth in this
subchapter for regular table operations:
(1) The maximum number of tables in operation shall not exceed six, including regularly
licensed tables;
(2) Licenses must be issued prior to the use of the temporary tables;
(3) The license fee for temporary tables shall be per § 111.028;
(4) Temporary table licenses may be suspended or denied by the City Manager upon receiving
a report from the Chief of Police of the city that the business establishment of a temporary license has
become a law enforcement problem by reason of any of the following:
(a) Rowdy and/or disorderly conduct occurring on the premises of the licensed business;
(b) Drunkenness and/or being under the influence of intoxicants on the premises of the
licensed business;
(c) The use, possession, sale, gifts, barter or exchange by any person on the premises of
licensed business of any controlled substance as defined by O.R.S. 475.005 or any drug whose
possession, sale, exchange, gift or use is made illegal by any law of this state or of the United States of
America;
(d) Gambling occurring and/or permitted on the premises of the licensed business contrary
to the law of the state and/or this subchapter; or
(e) Any lewd, lascivious or immoral conduct or act occurring upon the premise of the
licensed business which is contrary to or offends the current moral standards of the community.
(5) Denial or suspension of all temporary table licenses may be made by the City Manager
upon receiving a report by the Chief of Police that, on the dates of special promotional events, increased
law enforcement demands occur within public or private properties within the city by reason of the
following:
(a) Drunkenness and/or being under the influence of intoxicants;
(b) Rowdy and/or disorderly conduct;
Amusements
25
(c) Lewd, lascivious or immoral conduct or acts; and/or
(d) Vandalism of public or private property.
(6) Upon suspension of a temporary license, the licensee may give notice of an appeal to the
City Recorder within 24 hours of being advised by the City Manager of the suspension. Within 48 hours
after an appeal is filed, a hearing shall be held before the City Recorder, at which time licensee shall show
cause why the temporary license suspensions should not be made permanent. When the City Manager
gives notice of the suspension to licensee, there shall be included with the notice the reason for the
suspension. The burden of proof pertaining to a suspension of a license shall be by the preponderance of
the evidence.
(1977 Code, § 6-11) (Ord. 855, passed 1-3-1977; Ord. 989, passed 2-3-1981; Ord. 1027, passed
1-17-1983; Ord. 1070, passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 1974, passed 7-21-1986) Penalty, see § 111.999
§ 111.027 SIGNS.
(A) Signs advertising gambling, playing of cards or advertising specific forms of card playing or
enticing players, shall not be displayed so as to be seen from outside the building housing the cardroom.
(B) Signs visible from inside the building, informing the public in which areas cards may be played
and/or designating permitted games, will be allowed.
(C) Neon signs or flashing light signs will not be permitted.
(D) Signs, and the placement of same, shall first be approved by the City Manager.
(1977 Code, § 6-11) (Ord. 855, passed 1-3-1977; Ord. 994, passed 5-4-1981)
§ 111.028 CARDROOM AND CARD TABLE FEES.
Any person who shall keep, maintain or operate any cardroom shall pay in advance a yearly
cardroom license fee of $50. Tables at which any form of Blackjack or Twenty-one is played shall be
charged each quarter a table license fee of $140, or once annually a table license fee of $500, at the option
of the applicant. Quarterly licenses shall expire on March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31,
respectively, during the year. Annual licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year for which it is
issued. Card tables used for other card games shall be charged $50 for each card table kept or
maintained therein. Cardroom and table licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year for which they
are issued.
(1977 Code, § 6-11) (Ord. 855, passed 1-3-1977; Ord. 975, passed 7-7-1980; Ord. 994, passed
5-4-1981; Ord. 1042, passed 2-7-1984)
§ 111.029 EXCEPTIONS TO LICENSE.
A nonprofit society, club or fraternal organization having adopted bylaws and duly elected directors
Tillamook - Business Regulations
26
and members may be granted a permit at an annual fee of $500, expiring on December 31, when it
appears that the tables are for the exclusive use of members of the society, club or fraternal organization,
and no charge is made for participation. The society, club or fraternal organization shall have been in
continuous existence, actively conducting its affairs in the city for a period of two years immediately
preceding application for a license, and only if the conduct of a cardroom is not the primary reason for
existence of the society, club or fraternal organization.
(1977 Code, § 6-11) (Ord. 855, passed 1-3-1977; Ord. 975, passed 7-7-1980)
OCCULT ARTS
§ 111.080 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful from and after the passage of this subchapter for any person to engage in the
business of telling fortunes or the practice of necromancy, conjuration, spiritualism, mesmerism or any
of the occult arts or sciences for the purpose of healing or otherwise within the corporate limits of the city
for a fee or consideration of any kind, without first having obtained a license from the City Recorder so to
do.
(1977 Code, § 6-3) (Ord. 554, passed 10-16-1939) Penalty, see § 111.999
§ 111.081 APPLICATION; FEES.
Any person desiring to engage in the business of telling fortunes or the practice of necromancy,
conjuration, spiritualism, mesmerism or any of the occult arts or sciences for the purpose of healing or
otherwise, for a fee or consideration paid directly or indirectly, shall apply to the City Recorder for a
license and at the time of making the application shall deposit with the City Recorder the sum of $10,
which application shall be presented to the City Council at its next regular meeting and shall be then
considered by the City Council; and if the application be approved by the Council, the City Recorder
shall thereupon issue a license to the applicant upon the payment of $10 license fee; and the license shall
authorize the person to engage in the business or practice described in the license for a period of one
week; provided, however, that the licensee prior to the expiration of the period of one week may pay an
additional $5 which will automatically extend the license period for an additional week; and the license
may continue from week to week upon payment of the $5 until the same shall be revoked by order of the
City Council of this city. In the event the license be not granted, the City Recorder shall return the
application, together with the $10 fee paid.
(1977 Code, § 6-3) (Ord. 554, passed 10-16-1939)
Amusements
27
Cross-reference:
Occult arts, see also § 110.005
§ 111.999 PENALTY.
(A) Unless otherwise indicated, any offense under this chapter is classified as a violation punishable
by a fine set by resolution. Penalties not set by resolution shall be $250.00 per violation.
(Ord 1315, passed 6-6-2016)
(B) Any person violating any of the provisions of § 111.001 through 111.006, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the privilege license fee amount plus court costs.
(C) Violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of §' 111.020 through 111.029 is
punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or imprisonment in jail not to exceed one
year, or both the fine and imprisonment.
(1977 Code, § 6-11)
(D) Violation of any provision of § 111.045 through 111.047 is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$150.
(1977 Code, § 6-5)
(E) Violation of any provision of § 111.060 through 111.067 is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$200, or by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or by both the fine and imprisonment.
(1977 Code, § 6-4)
(F) Violation of any provision of § 111.080 and 111.081 is punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.
(1977 Code, § 6-3)
(Ord. 554, passed 10-16-1939; Ord. 579, passed 8-5-1941; Ord. 630, passed 10-18-1948; Ord. 855,
passed 1-3-1977; Ord. 870, passed 3-28-1977; Ord. 871, passed 3-28-1977; Ord. 874, passed 3-28-1977;
Ord. 1123, passed 6-1-1992)
Tillamook - Business Regulations
28
29
CHAPTER 112: ADULT BUSINESSES
Section
Generally
112.01 Definitions
112.02 Findings of fact
112.03 Additional enforcement
112.04 Business hours
112.05 Activities not prohibited
Administration
112.20 License suspension or revocation
112.21 Notice of appeal
112.22 Date, time, place for hearing
112.23 Scope of matters considered in appeal
112.24 Waiver of right to appeal
112.25 Action after hearing
112.26 Appeal from City Council
112.27 Stay during appeal
Licenses
112.40 License for establishment required; fee; expiration
112.41 License for managers, entertainers required; fee
112.42 Due date for license fees
112.43 Renewal of license; late penalty
112.44 License applications
112.45 Manager on premises
Regulations
112.60 Standards of conduct and operation
112.61 List of entertainments, fees
112.62 Physical layout of premises; sight obstructions
112.63 Notice to customers
Tillamook - Business Regulations
30
112.64 Additional requirements for peepshows
112.65 Additional requirements for adult entertainment establishments
112.99 Penalty
GENERALLY
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. Any exhibition, performance or dance of any type conducted in a
premises where the exhibition, performance or dance involves a person who is unclothed or in such
costume, attire or clothing as to expose any portion of the breast below the top of the areola or any portion
of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, or wearing any device or covering exposed to view
which simulates the appearance of any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any
portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, or human male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or any exhibition, performance or dance of any
type conducted in a premises where the exhibition, performance or dance is distinguished or
characterized by a predominant emphasis on the depiction, description, simulation or relation to the
following specified sexual activities:
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
(3) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female
breast; or
(4) Any exhibition, performance or dance intended to sexually stimulate any patron and
conducted in a premises where the exhibition, performance or dance is performed for, arranged with or
engaged in with fewer than all patrons on the premises at that time, with separate consideration paid,
either directly or indirectly, for the performance, exhibition or dance. For purposes of example and not
limitation, these exhibitions, performances or dances are commonly referred to as table dancing, couch
dancing, taxi dancing, lap dancing, private dancing or straddle dancing.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. Any commercial premises to which any
patron is invited or admitted and where adult entertainment is provided on a regular basis and as a
substantial part of the premises activity.
Adult Businesses
31
APPLICANT. The individual or entity seeking an adult entertainment license in the city.
APPLICANT CONTROL PERSONS. All partners, corporate officers and directors and any other
individuals in the applicant’s business organization who holds a significant interest in the adult
entertainment establishment, based on responsibility for management of the adult entertainment
business.
EMPLOYEE. Any and all persons, including managers, entertainers and independent contractors
who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of any adult entertainment
establishment.
ENTERTAINER. Any person who provides live adult entertainment, whether or not a fee is
charged or accepted for the entertainment.
MANAGER. Any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the affairs and/or the
conduct of any portion of any activity involving adult entertainment occurring at any adult entertainment
establishment.
OPERATOR. Any person operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment
establishment.
PANORAMA or PEEPSHOW. Any device which, upon insertion of a coin or by any other means
of payment, including membership fee or other charge, exhibits or displays a picture or view by film,
video or by any other means, including observation of live performances.
PANORAMA PREMISES. Any premises or portion of a premises or portion of a premises on
which a panorama is located and which is open to the public, including through membership.
PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated
association, marital community, joint venture, governmental entity or other entity or group of persons,
however organized.
SEXUAL CONDUCT. Acts of:
(1) Sexual intercourse within its ordinary meaning;
(2) Any contact between persons involving the sex organs of one person and the mouth or anus
of another;
(3) Masturbation, manual or instrumental, of oneself or of one person by another; or
(4) Touching of the sex organs or anus, of oneself or of one person by another.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
Tillamook - Business Regulations
32
§ 112.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
Based on public testimony and other evidence presented to it, the City Council makes the following
findings of fact.
(A) The secondary effects of the activities defined and regulated in this chapter are detrimental to
the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city and, therefore, these
activities must be regulated.
(B) Regulation of the adult entertainment industry is necessary because in the absence of the
regulation significant criminal activity has historically and regularly occurred. This history of criminal
activity in the adult entertainment industry has included prostitution, illegal employment of minors,
narcotics and alcoholic beverage law violations, breaches of the peace, tax evasion and the presence
within the industry of individuals with hidden ownership interests and outstanding arrest warrants.
(C) Proximity between entertainers and patrons during adult entertainment performances can
facilitate sexual contact, prostitution and related crimes. Concerns about crime and public sexual
activity are legitimate and compelling concerns of the city which demand reasonable regulation of adult
entertainment establishments in order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(D) The activities described in divisions (B) and (C) of this section occur, in the absence of
regulation, regardless of whether the adult entertainment is presented in conjunction with the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
(E) It is necessary to license entertainers in the adult entertainment industry to prevent the
exploitation of minors; to ensure that each entertainer is an adult; and to ensure that the entertainers have
not assumed a false name, which would make regulation of the entertainer difficult or impossible.
(F) It is necessary to have a licensed manager on the premises of establishments offering adult
entertainment at such times as the establishments are offering adult entertainment so that there will at all
necessary times be an individual responsible for the overall operation of the adult entertainment
establishment, including the actions of patrons, entertainers and other employees.
(G) The license fees required in this chapter are necessary as nominal fees imposed as necessary
regulatory measures designed to help defray the substantial expenses incurred by the city in regulating
the adult entertainment industry.
(H) Hidden ownership interests for the purposes of skimming profits and avoiding the payment of
taxes have historically occurred in the adult entertainment industry in the absence of regulation. These
hidden ownership interests have historically been held by organized and white collar crime elements. In
order for the city to effectively protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of its citizens
and effectively allocate its law enforcement resources, it is important that the city be fully apprised of the
actual ownership of adult entertainment establishments, and identities and backgrounds of persons
responsible for management and control of the adult entertainment establishment.
(I) It is not the intent of this chapter to suppress or censor any expressive activities protected by the
Adult Businesses
33
First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article 1 of the State Constitution, but rather to
enact time, place and manner regulations which address the compelling interests of the city in mitigating
the secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments.
(J) In an undercover operation in 1995, police officers entered the Deja Vu adult entertainment
establishment in Federal Way, Washington over an approximately five-month period. Approximately
24 criminal violations were charged for acts occurring while the officers were inside Deja Vu. Police
officers repeatedly observed managers ignoring criminal law violations committed inside Deja Vu,
within a short distance from the manager. Managers would look at the patrons/officers while criminal
violations were committed by the entertainers. Entertainers continuously violated the Federal Way city
code. There have been numerous instances where entertainers masturbate the patrons and where the
entertainers, without invitation, press their vaginas on the genital area and mouths of the patrons,
including undercover officers.
(K) Experience in the city demonstrates that in less than three months of operation of one adult
entertainment establishment, violations of liquor laws, controlled substance laws, assaults, lewd conduct,
vandalism and excessive noise were reported. In addition, within a few days of operation a serious
injury was suffered by an employee of the establishment which resulted in hospitalization and reportedly
lifelong debility. As a consequence of repeated offenses by this establishment, the State Liquor Control
Commission denied the application for a permanent liquor license for the establishment based on the
negative neighborhood impact.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.03 ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT.
Notwithstanding the existence or use of any other remedy, the City Recorder may seek legal or
equitable relief to enjoin any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of any
provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.04 BUSINESS HOURS.
No adult entertainment shall be conducted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.05 ACTIVITIES NOT PROHIBITED.
(A) This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit:
(1) Plays, operas, musicals or other dramatic works which are not obscene as defined in this
chapter;
(2) Classes, seminars and lectures held for serious scientific or educational purposes; or
Tillamook - Business Regulations
34
(3) Exhibitions or dances which are not obscene.
(B) Whether or not activity is obscene shall be judged by consideration of the following factors:
(1) Whether the average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find that
the activity taken as a whole appeals to a prurient interest in sex;
(2) Whether the activity depicts or describes in a patently offensive way, as measured against
community standards, sexual contact as described in O.R.S. 163.305; and
(3) Whether the activity taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific
value.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 112.20 LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
(A) The City Recorder may, at any time upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police and as
provided below, suspend or revoke any license issued under this chapter:
(1) Where the license was procured by fraud or false representation of fact;
(2) For the violation of, or failure to comply with, the provisions of this chapter or any other
similar local or state law by the licensee or by any its servants, agents or employees when the licensee
knew or should have known of the violations committed by its servants, agents or employees; or
(3) For the conviction of the licensee of any crime or offense involving prostitution, promoting
prostitution, or transactions involving controlled substances (as that term is defined in O.R.S. 167.002
through 167.027) committed on the premises, or the conviction of any of the licensee’s servants, agents
or employees of any crime or offense involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, or transactions
involving controlled substances (as that term is defined in O.R.S. Chapter 475) committed on the
licensed premises when the licensee knew or should have known of the violations committed by its
servants, agents or employees.
(B) A license procured by fraud or misrepresentation shall be revoked. Where other violations of
this chapter or other applicable ordinances, statutes or regulations are found, the license shall be
suspended for a period of 30 days upon the first violation, 90 days upon the second violation with a
24-month period, and revoked for third and subsequent violations within a 24-month period, not
including periods of suspension.
(C) The City Recorder shall provide at least ten days’ prior written notice to the licensee of the
decision to suspend or revoke the license. The notice shall inform the licensee of the right to appeal the
decision to the hearing examiner or other designated hearing body and shall state the effective date of the
Adult Businesses
35
revocation or suspension and the grounds for revocation or suspension.
(D) Notification shall be by personal service or registered or certified mail, return receipt requested,
of the decision. Notice mailed to the address on file shall be deemed received three days after mailing.
The notice shall specify the grounds for the suspension or revocation. The suspension or revocation
shall become effective ten days from the date the notice is delivered or deemed received unless the
person affected thereby files a written request with the City Recorder for a hearing before the City
Council within the ten-day period. The City Council shall conduct a hearing and render its decision
within 45 days following the close of the appeal hearing. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
City Council shall have the right to appeal the decision to the Circuit Court within 14 days of the City
Council’s decision, by writ of mandamus as provided in the state statutes. The decision of the City
Recorder shall be stayed during the pendency of any administrative and judicial appeals, except as
provided in division (E) below.
(E) Where the City Building Official, Fire Marshal or the County Health Department find that any
condition exists upon the premises of an adult entertainment establishment which constitutes a threat of
immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property, the official may immediately suspend any
license issued under this chapter pending a hearing in accordance with division (C) above. The official
shall issue notice setting forth the basis for the action and the facts that constitute a threat of immediate
serious injury or damage to persons or property, and informing the licensee of the right to appeal the
suspension to the City Council under the same appeal provisions set forth in division (C) above;
provided, however, that a suspension based on threat of immediate serious injury or damage shall not be
stayed during the pendency of the appeal.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.21 NOTICE OF APPEAL.
Any person falling under the provisions of this chapter may appeal from any notice of suspension,
denial or revocation or civil penalty assessment by filing with the City Recorder within ten days from the
date the notice is delivered or deemed received, a written appeal containing:
(A) A heading in the words: ABefore the City Council for the City of Tillamook;@
(B) A caption reading AAppeal Of@ giving the names of all appellants participating in the appeal;
(C) A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants participating in the
appeal;
(D) A brief statement in concise language of the specific order or action protested, together with any
material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant;
(E) A brief statement in concise language of the relief sought, and the reasons why it is claimed the
protested order or action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside;
(F) The signatures of all parties named as appellants, and their official mailing addresses; and
Tillamook - Business Regulations
36
(G) The verification, by declaration under penalty of perjury, of at least one appellant as to the truth
of the matters stated in the appeal.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.22 DATE, TIME, PLACE FOR HEARING.
As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the City Council shall fix a date, time and
place for the hearing of the appeal before the City Council. The date shall be not less than ten days nor
more than 30 days from the date the appeal was filed with the City Recorder, unless the parties agree to
an extension of time. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten days
prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the City Recorder either by causing a copy of the
notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid,
addressed to the appellant at his or her address shown on the appeal.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.23 SCOPE OF MATTERS CONSIDERED IN APPEAL.
Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant in the written notice of appeal shall
be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.24 WAIVER OF RIGHT TO APPEAL.
Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter shall
constitute a waiver of his or her right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and
order, or any portion thereof.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.25 ACTION AFTER HEARING.
Upon completion of the hearing, the City Council shall:
(A) Affirm the City Recorder’s decision; or
(B) Reverse or modify the City Recorder’s decision.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.26 APPEAL FROM CITY COUNCIL.
(A) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Council shall have the right to appeal the
Adult Businesses
37
decision to the Circuit Court within 14 days of the City Council’s decision, by writ of mandamus as
provided in the state statutes.
(B) If no appeal is filed, or the applicant or license holder does not follow the procedures within the
time periods set forth in this chapter, the Council decision shall be final.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.27 STAY DURING APPEAL.
The decision of the City Recorder to suspend, revoke or refuse to renew a license under this chapter
shall be stayed during administrative and judicial review, but refusal to issue an initial license shall not be
stayed.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
LICENSES
§ 112.40 LICENSE FOR ESTABLISHMENT REQUIRED; FEE; EXPIRATION.
(A) Adult entertainment establishments shall not be operated or maintained in the city unless the
owner or operator has first obtained a license from the City Recorder, as set forth in this chapter. It is
unlawful for any entertainer, employee or operator to knowingly work in or about, or to knowingly
perform any service directly related to the operation of any unlicensed adult entertainment establishment.
(B) The fee for an adult entertainment establishment license in the city as required in this section is
$500 per year.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.41 LICENSE FOR MANAGERS, ENTERTAINERS REQUIRED; FEE.
No person shall work as a manager or entertainer at an adult entertainment establishment without
having first obtained a manager’s or an entertainer’s license from the City Recorder pursuant to sections
9-110(b) and 9-111. The annual fee for the license shall be $50.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996) Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.42 DUE DATE FOR LICENSE FEES.
(A) The license fee required by § 112.40 is due and payable to the City Recorder at least two weeks
before the opening of the adult entertainment establishment.
(B) The license fees required by § 112.40 and 112.41 are due and payable to the City Recorder
Tillamook - Business Regulations
38
before the beginning of the entertainment or beginning employment.
(C) Every license issued or renewed pursuant to this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each
year.
(D) The entire annual license fee shall be paid for the applicable calendar year regardless of when
the application for license is made, and shall not be prorated for any part of the year, except that if the
original application for license is made subsequent to June 30, the license fee for the remainder of that
year shall be one-half of the annual license fee. Annual license renewals shall be required to be obtained
and paid in full by January 31 of each respective calendar year.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.43 RENEWAL OF LICENSE; LATE PENALTY.
A late penalty shall be charged on all applications for renewal of a license received later than seven
days after the expiration date of the license as set forth in the respective resolution or ordinance
establishing the expiration date of the license. The amount of the penalty is fixed as follows:
Days Past Due
Additional
8 B 30
$25
31 B 60
$50
61 and over
$100
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.44 LICENSE APPLICATIONS.
(A) Adult entertainment establishment license.
(1) Required information: all applications for an adult entertainment establishment license
shall be submitted to the City Recorder in the name of the person or entity proposing to conduct the adult
entertainment establishment on the business premises and shall be signed by the person or his or her
agent and notarized or certified as true under penalty of perjury. All applications shall be submitted on a
form supplied by the city, which shall require the following information:
(a) The name of the applicant, location and doing-business-as name of the proposed adult
entertainment establishment, including a legal description of the property, street address and telephone
number, together with the name and address of each owner and lessee of the property;
(b) For the applicant and for each applicant control person, provide: names; any aliases or
previous names; driver’s license number, if any; Social Security number, if any; and business, mailing
and residential address, and business telephone number;
Adult Businesses
39
(c) If the applicant is a partnership, whether general or limited; and if a corporation, date
and place of incorporation, evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of this state, and name and
address of any registered agent for service of process;
(d) For the applicant and each applicant control person, list any other licenses currently
held for similar adult entertainment or sexually oriented businesses, including motion picture theaters
and panoramas, whether from the city or another city, county, state and if so, the names and addresses of
each other licensed business;
(e) For the applicant and each applicant control person, list prior licenses held for similar
adult entertainment or other sexually oriented businesses, whether from the city or from another city,
county or state, providing names, addresses and dates of operation for the businesses, and whether any
business license or adult entertainment license has been revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor;
(f) For the applicant and all applicant control persons, any and all criminal convictions or
forfeitures within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, other than parking
offenses or minor traffic infractions including the dates of conviction, nature of the crime, name and
location of court and disposition;
(g) For the applicant and all applicant control persons, a description of business,
occupation or employment history for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application;
(h) Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information to confirm any
statements set forth in the application;
(i) Two 2-inch by two-inch photographs of the applicant and applicant control persons,
taken within six months of the date of application showing only the full face;
(j) For the applicant or each applicant control person, a complete set of finger prints
prepared at the City Police Department on forms provided by the Department; and
(k) A scale drawing or diagram showing the configuration of the premises for the
proposed adult entertainment establishment, including a statement of the total floor space occupied by
the business, and marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. Performance areas, seating areas,
manager’s office and stations, restrooms and service areas shall be clearly marked on the drawing. An
application for a license for an adult entertainment establishment shall include building plans which
demonstrate conformance with this chapter.
(2) The application must demonstrate compliance with the provisions of the city’s zoning code
concerning allowable locations for adult entertainment establishments.
(3) An application shall be deemed complete upon the applicant’s provision of all information
requested above, including identification of Anone@ where that is the correct response, and the
applicant’s verification that the application is complete. The City Recorder may request other
information or clarification in addition to that provided in a complete application, where necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter.
Tillamook - Business Regulations
40
(4) A nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $65 must be paid at the time of filing an
application, in order to defray the costs of processing the application.
(5) Each applicant shall verify, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained in the
application is true.
(6) If any person or entity acquires, subsequent to the issuance of an adult entertainment
establishment license, a significant interest based on responsibility for management or operation of the
licensed premises or the licensed business, notice of the acquisition shall be provided in writing to the
City Recorder, no later than 21 days following the acquisition. The notice to the City Recorder shall
include the same information required for an initial adult entertainment establishment license
application.
(7) The adult entertainment establishment license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is issued, the expiration date, the doing-business-as name and the
address of the licensed establishment. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the adult entertainment establishment so that it can be easily read at any time the business is
open.
(8) No person granted an adult entertainment establishment license pursuant to this chapter
shall operate the establishment under a name not specified on the license, nor shall any person operate the
establishment at any location not specified on the license.
(9) Upon receipt of the complete application and the nonrefundable application fee, the City
Recorder shall provide copies to the Police, Fire and Community Development Departments for their
investigation and review to determine compliance of the proposed adult entertainment establishment
with the laws and regulations which each department administers. Each department shall, within 25
days of the date of the application, inspect the application and premises and shall make a written report to
the City Recorder whether the application and premises complies with the laws administered by each
department.
(a) No license may be issued unless each department reports that the application and
premises comply with the relevant laws. In the event the premises is not yet constructed, the
departments shall base their recommendation as to premises compliance on their review of the drawings
submitted in the application.
(b) Any adult entertainment establishment license approved prior to the premises
construction shall contain a condition that the premises may be open for business until the premises have
been inspected and determined to be in substantial conformance with the drawings submitted with the
application.
(c) A department shall recommend denial of a license under this division (A)(9) if it finds
that the proposed adult entertainment establishment is not in conformance with the requirements of this
chapter or other law in effect in the city.
Adult Businesses
41
(d) A recommendation for denial shall cite the specific reason therefor, including
applicable laws.
(10) An adult entertainment establishment license shall be issued by the City Recorder within 30
days of the date of filing a complete license application and nonrefundable application fee, unless the
City Recorder determines that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements of this chapter or
provide any information required under this division (A)(10), or that the applicant has made a false,
misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact on the application for a license.
(a) The City Recorder shall notify the applicant within five working days of application
submittal if the application is incomplete, and shall grant an applicant’s request for a reasonable
extension of time in which to provide all information required for a complete license application.
(b) If the City Recorder finds that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements
for issuance of an adult entertainment establishment license, the City Recorder shall deny the application
in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable law.
(c) If the City Recorder fails to issue or deny the license within 30 days of the date of filing
of a complete application and fee, the applicant shall be permitted, subject to all other applicable law, to
operate the business for which the license was sought until notification by the City Recorder that the
license has been denied, but in no event may the City Recorder extend the application review time for
more than an additional 20 days.
(B) Application for manager or entertainer license.
(1) Required information: no person shall work as a manager/assistant manager or entertainer
at an adult entertainment establishment without an adult entertainment manager or entertainer license
from the city.
(a) All applications for a manager’s or entertainer’s license shall be signed by the
applicant and notarized or certified to be true under penalty of perjury.
(b) All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city, which shall require
the following information:
1. The applicant’s name, home address, home telephone number, date and place of
birth, fingerprints taken by County Sheriff, Social Security number and any stage names or nicknames
used in entertaining;
2. The name and address of each business at which the applicant intends to work;
3. Documentation that the applicant has attained the age of 18 years. Any two of
the following shall be accepted as documentation of age:
a. A motor vehicle operator’s license issued by any state bearing the applicant’s
photograph and date of birth;
Tillamook - Business Regulations
42
b. A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant’s photograph and date
of birth;
c. An official passport issued by the United States of America;
d. An immigration card issued by the United States of America; and/or
e. Any other identification that the city determines to be acceptable.
4. A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any misdemeanor or
felony violations in this or any other city, county or state within five years immediately preceding the
date of the application, except parking violations or minor traffic infractions;
5. A description of the applicant’s principal activities or services to be rendered;
6. Two 2-inch by two-inch photographs of the applicant, taken within six months of
the date of application showing only the full face; and
7. Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to investigate and confirm any
statements set forth in the application.
(2) The City Recorder may request additional information or clarification when necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter.
(3) (a) A manager’s or an entertainer’s license shall be issued by the City Recorder within 14
days from the date the complete application and fee are received unless the City Recorder determines that
the applicant has failed to provide any information required to be supplied according to this chapter, has
made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application, or has failed to
meet any of the requirements for issuance of a license under this chapter.
(b) If the City Recorder determines that the applicant has failed to qualify for the license
applied for, the City Recorder shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons
therefor, including applicable laws. If the City Recorder has failed to approve or deny an application for
a manager’s license within 14 days of filing of a complete application, the applicant may, subject to all
other applicable laws, commence work as a manager in a duly licensed adult entertainment establishment
until notified by the City Recorder that the license has been denied, but in no event may the City
Recorder extend the application review time for more than an additional 20 days.
(4) (a) Every adult entertainer shall provide his or her license to the adult entertainment
establishment manager on duty on the premises prior to his or her performance.
(b) The manager shall retain the licenses of the adult entertainers readily available for
inspection by the city at any time during business hours of the adult entertainment establishment.
(5) An applicant for an adult entertainer’s license shall be issued a temporary license upon
Adult Businesses
43
receipt of a complete license application and fee. The temporary license will automatically expire on
the fourteenth day following the filing of the complete application and fee, unless the City Recorder has
failed to approve or deny the license application, in which case the temporary license shall be valid until
the City Recorder approves or denies the application, or until the final determination of any appeal from
a denial of the application. In no event may the City Recorder extend the application review time for
more than an additional 20 days.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.45 MANAGER ON PREMISES.
A licensed manager shall be on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment at all times that
adult entertainment is being provided.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
REGULATIONS
§ 112.60 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT AND OPERATION.
The following standards of conduct must be adhered to by employees of any adult entertainment
establishment.
(A) No employee or entertainer shall be unclothed or in a less than opaque and complete attire,
costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or
any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, except upon a stage at least 18 inches
above the immediate floor level and removed at least eight feet from the nearest patron.
(B) No employee or entertainer mingling with patrons shall be unclothed or in less than opaque and
complete attire, costume or clothing as described in division (A) of this section, nor shall any male
employee or entertainer at any time appear with his genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered, or wear or use any device or covering which simulates the same.
(C) No employee or entertainer mingling with patrons shall wear or use any device or covering
exposed to view which simulates the breast below the top of the areola, vulva, genitals, anus or buttocks.
(D) No employee or entertainer shall caress, fondle or erotically touch any patron. No employer or
entertainer shall encourage or permit any patron to caress, fondle or erotically touch any employee or
entertainer. No employee or entertainer shall sit on a patron’s lap or separate a patron’s legs.
(E) No employee or entertainer shall perform actual or simulated acts of sexual conduct as defined
in this chapter, or any act which constitutes a violation.
(F) No employee or entertainer mingling with patrons shall conduct any dance, performance or
Tillamook - Business Regulations
44
exhibition in or about the non-stage area of the adult entertainment establishment unless that dance,
performance or exhibition is performed at a torso-to-torso distance of no less than four feet from the
patron or patrons for whom dance, performance or exhibition is performed.
(G) No tip or gratuity offered to or accepted by an adult entertainer may be offered or accepted prior
to any performance, dance or exhibition provided by the entertainer. No entertainer performing upon
any stage area shall be permitted to accept any form of gratuity offered directly to the entertainer by any
patron. Any gratuity offered to any entertainer performing upon any stage area must be placed into a
receptacle provided for receipt of gratuities by the adult entertainment establishment or provided through
a manager on duty on the premises. Any gratuity or tip offered to any adult entertainer conducting any
performance, dance or exhibition in or about the non-stage area of the adult entertainment establishment
shall be placed into the hand of the adult entertainer or into a receptacle provided by the adult entertainer,
and not upon the person or into the clothing of the adult entertainer.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.61 LIST OF ENTERTAINMENTS, FEES.
There shall be posted and conspicuously displayed in the common areas of each place offering adult
entertainment a list of any and all entertainment provided on the premises. The list shall further indicate
the specific fee or charge in dollar amounts for each entertainment listed.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.62 PHYSICAL LAYOUT OF PREMISES; SIGHT OBSTRUCTIONS.
Every place offering adult entertainment shall be physically arranged in such a manner that:
(A) Performance area. The performance area, where adult entertainment as described in § 112.01
is provided, shall be a stage or platform at least 18 inches in elevation above the level of the patron
seating areas, and shall be separated by a distance of at least eight feet from all areas of the premises to
which patrons have access. A continuous railing three to five feet in height above the floor and located
at least eight feet from all points of the performance area shall separate the performance area and the
patron seating areas. The stage and the entire interior portion of cubicles, rooms or stalls wherein adult
entertainment is provided must be visible from the common areas of the premises and at least one
manager’s station. Visibility shall not be blocked or obstructed by doors, curtains, drapes or any other
obstruction whatsoever; and
(B) Not visible to public. No activity or entertainment occurring on the premises shall be visible at
any time from any other public place.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.63 NOTICE TO CUSTOMERS.
A sign shall be conspicuously displayed in a common area of the premises which shall read as
Adult Businesses
45
follows in 24-point type or larger:
This adult entertainment establishment is regulated by the city. Entertainers are:
1. Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct;
2. Not permitted to appear semi nude or nude, except on stage;
3. Not permitted to accept tips or gratuities in advance of their performance; and
4. Not permitted to accept tips or gratuities directly from patrons while performing upon any
stage area.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.64 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PEEPSHOWS.
The following additional requirements must be adhered to at any panorama or peepshow.
(A) The interior of the panorama or peepshow premises shall be arranged in such a manner as to
ensure that customers are fully visible from the waist down, and all persons viewing the panorama
pictures shall be visible from the entrance to the premises.
(B) The licensee shall not permit any doors to public areas on the premises to be locked during
business hours.
(C) Any room or area on the premises shall be readily accessible at all times for inspection by any
law enforcement officer or license inspector.
(D) Sufficient lighting shall be provided in and equally distributed in and about the parts of the
premises which are open to patrons so that all objects are plainly visible at all times, and so that on any
part of the premises which is open to patrons, a program, menu or list printed in eight-point type will be
readable by the human eye with 20/20 vision from two feet away.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.65 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
ESTABLISHMENTS.
At any adult entertainment establishment the following are required:
(A) Admission must be restricted to persons of the age of 18 years or more;
(B) No adult entertainment shall be visible outside of the adult entertainment establishment, nor any
photograph, drawing, sketch or other pictorial or graphic representation which includes lewd matter as
defined in O.R.S. Chapter 167 or display of sexually explicit material in violation of O.R.S. Chapter 167;
and
(C) Sufficient lighting shall be provided in and equally distributed in and about the parts of the
premises which are open to patrons so that all objects are plainly visible at all times, and so that on any
part of the premises which is open to patrons, a program, menu or list printed in eight-point type will be
readable by the human eye with 20/20 vision from two feet away.
Tillamook - Business Regulations
46
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
(A) Criminal penalty. Any person violating any of the terms of this chapter shall be guilty of a
Class A misdemeanor.
(B) Civil penalty. In addition to any other penalty provided in this section or by law, any person
who violates any provision of any business license ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty in an
amount not to exceed $250 per violation, to be directly assessed by the City Recorder. The City
Recorder, in a reasonable manner, may vary the amount of the penalty assessed to consider the
appropriateness of the penalty to the size of the business of the violator; the gravity of the violation; the
number of past and present violations committed; and the good faith of the violator in attempting to
achieve compliance after notification of the violation. All civil penalties assessed that remain unpaid
for 30 days after assessment will be docketed as a lien on real property in the lien book of the city and be
enforced and collected in accordance with the procedure for foreclosing liens on real property.
(Ord. 1145, passed 5-20-1996)
Soliciting
47
48
CHAPTER 114: GARAGE SALES
Section
114.01 Definitions
114.02 Exemptions
114.03 Permits
114.04 Advertising
114.99 Penalty
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
GARAGE SALE. Any sale, displaying of goods for sale, or the offer to sell used goods within the
city limits by any individual or group of individuals from any private property, including but not limited
to garages, porches, carports and yards.
PERSON. Any natural person, corporation, organization or personal representative.
(1977 Code, § 6-12) (Ord. 890, passed 5-9-1977)
§ 114.02 EXEMPTIONS.
The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
(A) The offering for sale of one item by public display with a sign indicating the item is for sale, and
the sale of more than one individual item not offered for sale by public display or by signs concerning a
sale or place of sale; and
(B) Sales commonly referred to as Arummage sales,@ conducted by members of fraternal, civic,
patriotic, religious, service, charitable or educational organizations.
(1977 Code, § 6-12) (Ord. 890, passed 5-9-1977)
Garage Sales
49
§ 114.03 PERMITS.
(A) The City Manager or his or her delegate shall issue a permit for a garage sale upon application
and upon payment of a fee, if it appears from the application that the applicant will comply with the terms
and provisions of this chapter. Issuance of a permit under this chapter shall not constitute a waiver of
the requirements of the zoning ordinance or any other ordinance of the city. The fee shall be $5 and any
future fee increases shall be set by resolution.
(B) The City Manager may prescribe the form of permit and the application to be used therefor,
subject to the terms of this chapter.
(C) The City Manager or his or her delegate may issue a permit upon application, for a period not to
exceed three consecutive days; provided, however, that no more than two permits shall be issued for
sales at the same location within any calendar year.
(D) No permit granted under the provisions herein shall be assignable.
(1977 Code, § 6-12) (Ord. 890, passed 5-9-1977; Ord. 972, passed 6-16-1980; Ord. 993, passed
4-20-1981; Ord. 1016, passed 8-2-1982; Ord. 1122, passed 2-18-1992; Ord. 1219, passed 5-21-2007)
§ 114.04 ADVERTISING.
(A) There shall be allowed only one sign, not to exceed 24 inches by 25 inches, posted on the
premises from which the garage sale is to be held under the provisions of this section; and no other signs
shall be posted on the premises or on any other public or private place advertising the sale.
(B) This section is not intended to prohibit advertising in newspaper, radio or television.
(1977 Code, § 6-12) (Ord. 890, passed 5-9-1977)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
A person in violation of this chapter shall be subject to fine not exceeding $100. Each day that a
sale is conducted in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(1977 Code, § 6-12) (Ord. 890, passed 5-9-1977)
1
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
130. GENERAL OFFENSES
2
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Offenses/Nuisances
130.01 Purpose
130.02 Public nuisance
130.03 Separate violations
130.04 Summary abatement
130.05 Definitions, interpretations and conflict of laws
130.06 Drinking in public places
130.07 Public urination
130.08 Noise Disturbance—Repetition and Failure to Cease
130.09 Radio and television interference
130.10 Discharge of weapons
130.11 Fireworks
130.12 Throwing rocks
130.13 Noxious vegetation, trees, hedges, bushes and shrubs
130.14 Fences
130.15 Waters, drainage, snow and ice
130.16 Minors in places of amusement
130.17 False reports
130.18 Open cellar doors or grates
130.19 Obstruction of fire hydrants
130.20 Painting or marking sidewalks and curbs
130.21 Obstruction of streets and sidewalks; permits
130.22 Posted notices
130.23 Hauling
Nuisances Affecting Public Health and Safety
130.35 Nuisances affecting public health
130.36 Creating a hazard
130.37 Offensive littering
130.38 Trash, rubbish
130.39 Inoperable motor vehicles
130.40 Graffiti
130.41 Offenses outside city limits
130.42 Soliciting or confederating to violate ordinances
130.43 Attempt to commit offenses
General Offenses
3
Abatement
130.55 Abatement generally
130.56 Citation or warning; procedure
130.57 Abatement by the person responsible
130.58 Nuisance abatement; warrant
130.59 Protection of things seized; liability of agency; disposal of nuisance property removed
130.60 Order of abatement; cancellation
130.61 Costs of securing or abating property as lien; priority of lien; filing notice of pendency
130.62 Collection
130.99 Penalty
GENERAL OFFENSES/NUISANCES
' 130.01 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to list and define actions by individuals which cause harm to the
citizens of this city generally. This chapter is not intended to create private, civil causes of action
between private parties. That is left to the state’s tort law, whether statutory or common.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010)
' 130.02 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
No person shall commit a public nuisance as defined by this chapter within or on any land owned
or controlled by the city. Any offense under this chapter is classified as a violation punishable by a
fine as set forth in ' 130.99.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.03 SEPARATE VIOLATIONS.
(A) Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.
(B) The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violating this chapter, but is an additional
remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person of the duty to abate the nuisance.
(C) A citation or other charging instrument filed in court shall include all violations from the date
of any written warning (a.k.a. Aabatement@) notice as cited in the charging instrument.
(D) There is no requirement for any violation of this chapter, that a written notice must first be
Tillamook - General Offenses
4
delivered, to abate or cite the violation. For determining the number of day(s) the violation has
occurred or has continued, it shall be from the day the violation is first identified by the city, not the
date a warning, written or verbal, is provided or received.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.04 SUMMARY ABATEMENT.
The procedures and/or remedies provided by this chapter are not exclusive but are in addition to
the procedures and/or remedies provided by other ordinances. The Chief of the Fire Department, the
Chief of Police or any other city official may proceed summarily to abate a health or other nuisance
which imminently endangers human life or property.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010)
' 130.05 DEFINITIONS, INTERPRETATIONS AND CONFLICT OF LAWS.
ABATEMENT is a judicial remedy in addition to any fine, fee or other available judicial remedy for
any violation of this ordinance. Abatement means the destruction, extinguishment, removal, stoppage,
suppression, or otherwise rendering harmless by any reasonable means of that which causes a nuisance.
City may issue a citation and/or City may issue a written warning in advance of a possible citation to
the person responsible to fix or abate the alleged nuisance within a certain time. Abatement also refers
to this discretionary warning process by City to a person responsible for a violation of this ordinance
that a citation is imminent if the nuisance is not abated. However, an Abatement Warrant shall issue
only after a judge issues an order or judgment for an offense of a City ordinance or other law.
CITY means, as the context may require, the City of Tillamook, its City Mayor and Council, City
Manager, Police Chief, Public Works Director or other City of Tillamook employee charged with
noticing, reporting or enforcing any City ordinance violation.
DAY means a 24-hour calendar day.
DEBRIS means bits, pieces and/or whole units of rubbish and/or litter whether of animal, mineral,
vegetable, or man-made material, or a combination thereof.
DISCARDED VEHICLE means any vehicle which is licensed or unlicensed and is in one or more of
the following conditions; inoperative, wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, abandoned, junked
or which cannot be moved without being repaired or dismantled or is no longer safely usable for the
purpose for which it was manufactured. This term shall also include, but not be limited to, major
vehicle parts such as vehicle bodies, engines or transmissions.
DRIVEWAY means the area that provides vehicular access to a site from the street. A driveway
generally is the same width as the curb cut excluding any aprons or extensions of the curb cut.
EMERGENCY MINOR VEHICLE REPAIR means, for purposes of this ordinance, the process of
making repairs or minor installation of parts or equipment to a vehicle over a period of
General Offenses
5
GRAFFITI means any inscription, word, figure, design, painting, writing, drawing or carving that is
marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted or otherwise applied to property without the authorization of
the owner of the property regardless of the graffiti content, or nature of the material used in the
commission of the act, or the material of the property.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE is defined in section 28.
JUNK is defined as follows:
(1) Trash that is kept outdoors and visible to any member of the public within Tillamook City; or
(2) Rubbish or trash that is deposited on or remains on any public right of way, street, road,
highway or alley within Tillamook City, or on any private property within view from any premises
open to the public or public way.
(3) Junk or trash that is kept outdoors on any street, lot, private property or premises or in any
building that is not wholly or entirely enclosed, except for doors used for entry and exit. Junk
includes all motor vehicles not functioning, licensed and insurable, motor vehicle parts, old
machinery, old machinery parts, appliances or parts thereof, metal scrap, glass, paper, lumber or
wood or other waste or discarded material. This section does not apply to a licensed business,
which maintains or sells these described items.
NOISE is defined with the following parameters:
(1) No person shall allow, cause to be made, make, or assist another person in making any noise
which disturbs, injures or endangers the health, safety or welfare of others. Noise is sound which:
(a) Is capable of being heard at or beyond the boundary of property from which the noise
originates;
(b) Results in a disturbance of the peace; and/or
(c) Exceeds sound in volume made by any make and model of engine or machine that is not
consistent with its new or stock, manufactured condition;
(d) Can be heard inside a noise sensitive unit;
(2) The following list of violations of this section is not exclusive, but illustrates some noise.
(a) The keeping of an animal, which by loud and frequent or continued noise disturbs the
comfort of a person in the vicinity;
(b) The use of an engine, thing or device which is so loaded, out of repair or operated in such
manner as to create a loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise;
Tillamook - General Offenses
6
(c) The use of a mechanical device operated by compressed air, steam or otherwise, unless the
noise created thereby is effectively muffled;
(d) The construction, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of a building or
other structure, or repair of a vehicle or other machinery other than between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except upon special permit granted by the City;
(e) The use or operation of an automatic or electric piano, phonograph, radio, television,
loudspeaker or sound-amplifying device so loudly as to disturb persons in the vicinity thereof,
or in such manner as renders the same a public nuisance, unless otherwise allowed by a permit
granted by the City in advance.
NOISE SENSITIVE UNIT means any building or other structure, or portion thereof, used as a church,
day care center, hospital, nursing care center, school or place used for overnight accommodations of
persons, including, but not limited to, individual homes, individual apartments, trailers and nursing
homes.
NOXIOUS VEGETATION means grass and/or weeds exceeding 8 inches in height, and/or
blackberries, shrubbery or brush allowed to create a fire or safety hazard or to go to seed.
NUISANCE GENERALLY means an intentional, negligent or reckless act or failure to act by a person
which interferes with the use and/or enjoyment of the life or property of another person or which
interferes with the rights of the public and for which the law will presume resulting damage. Nuisance
here more specifically means any of the enumerated offenses identified by this ordinance. However,
the enumerated offenses in this ordinance shall not be considered an exhaustive list. Additional public
nuisances may be identified by facts and circumstances meeting the elements of the general definition.
Nuisance also means alleged nuisance as the context in this ordinance may require.
OWNER means the owner of the title of real property, or the contract purchaser of real property of
record, as shown on the last available complete tax assessment roll. Owner shall also mean any agent of
the owner.
PERSON means a natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or legal entity of any kind
subject to the jurisdiction of the City of Tillamook.
PERSON IN CHARGE OF PROPERTY means an agent, manager, occupant, lessee, contract
purchaser or other person having possession or control of property or the supervision of any
construction project of any person.
PERSON RESPONSIBLE means the owner of real and/or personal property, and/or owner’s agent,
assignee, beneficiary or successor-in-interest, if any, or tenant of any kind. Person Responsible also
means person in charge having care, custody or control of real and/or personal property.
POLLUTE means to corrupt, defile or contaminate the soil, air and/or water by the addition of any
noxious substance and/or noise.
General Offenses
7
PUBLIC PLACE means a building, way, place or accommodation, whether publicly or privately
owned, which is open and available to the general public.
PUBLIC WAY is defined in section 26.
RUBBISH WITHIN RIGHT OF WAYS means depositing without City’s prior permission any
material within public or private rights of ways, including but not limited to trash as defined in this
section, compost piles, garbage cans, cages, dog houses, trailers and any other materials which will in
any way create a safety or fire hazard or become unsightly or obnoxious.
STORED VEHICLE means, for purposes of this ordinance, a motor vehicle that is parked on private
property for a period longer than 30 cumulative days in any 6-month period and the vehicle is not
currently registered, insured and in immediate legal operating condition.
TRASH means unregistered or currently unlicensed motor vehicles as defined by the Oregon Motor
Vehicle Code, vehicle parts, machinery, appliances, appliance parts, iron or other metals, broken
pieces, plastic, glass, paper, lumber, wood or furniture.
VEHICLE UNDER REPAIR/REMODEL means any vehicle, which is in the process of being
dismantled, discarded, repaired, other than emergency minor repair, discarded, remodeled or
refurbished, or stored as defined in this ordinance.
Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the definitions contained in the
Oregon Revised Statutes, as now or hereafter constituted, are adopted by reference and made a part of
this chapter. In any conflict of laws, the city’s definitions and interpretation shall control. The City
Council expressly retains the exclusive authority to define and interpret the meaning and application of
the city’s ordinances, orders, rules, resolutions and/or other city law, even those laws borrowed from
any other jurisdiction and incorporated as city law, such as, the Oregon Revised Statutes. The City
Council reaffirms and adopts current O.R.S. and O.A.R. in effect and referenced in this chapter.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010; Ord. 1262, passed 1-3-2012)
' 130.06 DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
No person shall drink or consume alcoholic liquor in or upon a street, alley, mall, parking lot or
structure, motor vehicle, public grounds, city park or other public place without a license or permit
from the city and/or the State Liquor Control Commission, if applicable.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.07 PUBLIC URINATION.
No person shall urinate or defecate while in, or in view from, a public place, except in toilets
complying with all applicable local, state and federal health laws.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
Tillamook - General Offenses
8
' 130.08 NOISE DISTURBANCE—REPETITION AND FAILURE TO CEASE.
No person shall allow, cause to be made, make or assist another person in making a noise
disturbance which disturbs, injures or endangers the health, safety or welfare of others.
1) It shall be unlawful for any person responsible for a noise disturbance caused by electronically
amplified sound or a gathering of five or more people to:
(a) Fail within 30 minutes to eliminate or cease such noise disturbance after
receiving a citation or other notice of a violation of this section, or
(b) Intentionally or recklessly create the same or similar noise disturbance within 6 months
of having received a citation or other notice of a violation of this section.
2) Noise Disturbance- Specific Prohibitions
Unless exempted by Section 3 of this code, the following acts are declared to be noise
disturbances; However, this enumeration shall not be deemed an exclusive list of violations of
this code, nor shall the recitation of specific prohibitions below be deemed the exclusive and
entire listing of unlawful noise disturbances for each sub category:
a) Sound producing, amplifying or reproducing equipment. Operating or permitting the use or
operation of any device designed for sound production, amplification, or reproduction,
including but not limited to a radio, drums and other musical instruments, phonograph,
television set, tape recorder, loud speaker, or other similar device;
1) Between the hours of 10 PM and 7 AM the following day so as to be plainly audible
within any dwelling unit or noise sensitive unit which is not the source of the sound;
or
2) On public property or on a public right of way so as to be plainly audible 50 feet or
more from such device, except as specifically authorized in writing by the City
through a right of way permit issued under CCT 130.21. The City Manager or Chief of
Police shall approve a permit to use such a device on public property or on a public
right of way if an applicant submits a right of way application that demonstrates
compliance with the requirements listed in CCT 130.21(C)(1-2).
(Ord. 1347, passed 6-3-2019)
b) Animals. Keeping or permitting keeping of any animal of fowl otherwise permitted to be
kept, which, by any sound, cry or behavior causes vocal or other sounds on a sustained
basis during a 15-minute period shall constitute a noise disturbance.
c) Is capable of being heard at or beyond the boundary of property from which the noise
originates and or can be heard inside a noise sensitive unit
d) The use of an engine, thing or device which is so loaded, out of repair or operated in
manner as to create a loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise;
General Offenses
9
e) The use of a mechanical device operated by compressed air, steam or otherwise, unless
the noise created thereby is effectively muffled;
f) The construction, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of a building or
other structure, or repair of a vehicle or other machinery other than between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except upon special permit granted by the city.
3) Exemptions
The following sounds are exempted from the provisions of this section:
a) Sounds made by warning devices to protect persons or property from imminent exposure
to danger, provided however that burglar or fire alarms shall not operate continuously for
more than 15 minutes,
b) Sounds made by an emergency vehicle, as defined in ORS, when responding to or from an
emergency or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law,
c) Sounds produced pursuant to a specific variance granted by the Oregon Environmental
Quality Commission, or by the city.
d) Sounds caused by sources regulated as to sound production by federal law or sounds
caused by sources the regulation of which is preempted by state law.
e) Sounds not electronically amplified, created by athletic and entertainment events other
than motor vehicle racing events.
f) The sounding of any horn or signaling device on an automobile, motorcycle or other
vehicle reasonably required by the exigencies of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
g) Sounds specifically authorized under a permit or license issued by the city.
(Ord. 1341, passed 2-4-2019)
Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.09 RADIO AND TELEVISION INTERFERENCE.
(A) No person shall interfere by any means with radio or telephone reception or transmission,
unless otherwise permitted by local, state or federal law. This section shall also specifically apply to
interference with any police, fire and/or emergency communication systems.
(B) This section does not apply to devices licensed approved and operated under the rules and
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.10 DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS.
No person, other than a peace officer during the performance of his or her duties, shall fire or
discharge a gun, including spring or air-actuated pellet guns, air guns or BB guns, or other weapon
which propels a projectile by use of gunpowder or other explosive, jet or rocket propulsion, unless
otherwise approved by the City Council or protected under the State Constitution or Constitution of the
Tillamook - General Offenses
10
United States of America.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.11 FIREWORKS.
(A) No person shall discharge fireworks except in compliance with local, state, and federal
law.
(B) No owner of property, as defined in section 5, (15), or person in charge of property, as
defined in section 5, (17) shall allow unlawful fireworks to be possessed and or discharged on property
owned, possessed, supervised or controlled by that person. (Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010; Ord. 1278,
passed 8-19-2013) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.12 THROWING ROCKS.
No person shall throw, cast or sling from his or her hand, or by a slingshot, bean shooter or other
device, any stone, pebble, rock, shot or other solid substance within the city.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.13 NOXIOUS VEGETATION, TREES, HEDGES, BUSHES AND SHRUBS.
(A) No owner or person in charge of property that abuts upon a street or public sidewalk shall
permit trees, hedges or bushes on his or her property to interfere with street or sidewalk traffic. It shall
be the duty of an owner or person in charge of property that abuts upon a street or public sidewalk to
keep all trees, hedges, shrubs and bushes on his or her premises, including the adjoining parking strip,
trimmed to a height of not less than eight feet above the sidewalk and not less than 14 feet above the
roadway.
(B) No owner or person in charge of property shall allow standing a dead or decaying tree to
become or remain a hazard to the public or to persons or nearby property.
(C) No owner, person responsible or person in charge of property shall allow noxious vegetation
to exist on property within the city.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010; Ord. 1256, passed 6-6-2011) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.14 FENCES.
(A) No owner or person in charge of property shall construct or maintain a barbed wire fence
thereon, or permit barbed wire to remain as part of a fence along a sidewalk or public way; except this
wire may be placed above the top of other fencing not less than six feet, six inches high.
(B) No owner or person in charge of property shall construct, maintain or operate an electric fence
along a sidewalk or public way or along the adjoining property line of another person, unless placed at
General Offenses
11
least three feet behind an initial fence.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.15 WATERS, DRAINAGE, SNOW AND ICE.
(A) Waters. No owner or person in charge of a building or structure shall suffer or permit
rainwater, ice or snow to fall from the building or structure onto a street or public sidewalk or to flow
across the sidewalk.
(B) Drainage. The owner or person in charge of property shall install and maintain in good repair
adequate drainpipes and/or stormwater drainage system to prevent water flowing from owner’s
property to flow across or upon a sidewalk.
(C) Snow and ice. No owner or person responsible of property abutting on a public sidewalk shall
permit snow or ice to remain on the sidewalk for a period longer than the first two hours after sunrise
or after the snow has fallen or ice has formed unless the snow or ice is covered with sand, ashes or
other suitable material to assure safe pedestrian travel.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.16 MINORS IN PLACES OF AMUSEMENT.
(A) No person responsible shall allow a person under 18 years of age to, and no person under age
18 years shall, enter, visit or loiter in or about a public card room, poolroom or billiard parlor, or to
engage therein in any game of cards, pool, billiards, dice, darts, pinball, games of like character or
games of chance, either for amusement or otherwise.
(B) This section shall not apply to the playing of billiards or pool in a recreational facility. As
used in this section, a RECREATIONAL FACILITY means an area, enclosure or room in which
facilities are offered to the public to play billiards or pool for amusement only, and:
(1) Which is clean, adequately supervised, adequately lighted and adequately ventilated;
(2) In which no alcoholic liquor is sold or consumed; and
(3) Access to which does not require passing through a room where alcoholic liquor is sold or
consumed.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
Cross-reference:
Minors, see Chapter 131
' 130.17 FALSE REPORTS.
No person shall knowingly or recklessly make or file with the city, its Police Department and/or
Tillamook - General Offenses
12
City Attorney a false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the violation or alleged
violation of a city ordinance, or the commission or alleged commission of a crime, or any application
for any city permit or approval.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.18 OPEN CELLAR DOORS OR GRATES.
No owner or person in charge of property shall permit a cellar door or grate located in or upon a
sidewalk or public pathway to remain open except when the entrance is being used and, when being
used, there are adequate safeguards to prevent harm to pedestrians using the sidewalk.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.19 OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
No owner of property adjacent to a street upon which is located a fire hydrant shall place or
maintain within four feet of the fire hydrant any bush, shrub or tree, or other obstruction.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.20 PAINTING OR MARKING SIDEWALKS AND CURBS.
No person shall paint, paste, print, mark or color anything upon any sidewalk, curbing or other
public right-of-way within the city, without first having obtained permission from the city.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.21 OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS; PERMITS.
(A) No person(s) shall use any City Property, as defined in 71.002, or other public right of way,
for the purpose of selling, offering for sale, exhibiting or advertising merchandise, vehicle(s) or any
other goods or services, without written permission of the city. No person(s) shall use any city property
for any activity, event or use other than obvious intended use, generally indicated by sign or design
without written permission of the city. In those cases, specifically involving a right of way within the
City, a right of way application shall be submitted and approved prior to using any city property. A fee
shall be set by resolution for any application, license, and /or permit. Regulations governing the
approval of any application, license, and/ or permit may be set by resolution. All permits, licenses, and
/or permissions shall be revocable by the city.
(B) No person(s) shall place or deposit upon any city property, city right of way or other public
right of way to include but not be limited to sidewalks, streets and alleys, any sign, barricade or other
item or article without written permission from the city. A right of way application shall be completed,
submitted, approved and all fees paid prior to any sign, barricade, item or article being placed or
deposited on any city right of way or city property.
General Offenses
13
(C) No person(s) shall use or operate sound producing, amplifying or reproducing
equipment, as defined in CCT 130.08(2)(a), on public property or in a public right of way so as to be
plainly audible 50 feet or more from such device without a right of way permit issued by the Chief of
Police/City Manager under this Chapter. The Chief of Police or City Manager shall issue a right of way
permit to produce amplified sound if he or she finds that an applicant’s application satisfies the
requirements listed in CCT 130.21(C)(1-2). The Chief of Police or City Manager may revoke or
modify permits issued under this Chapter if he or she finds that the applicant has violated any
conditions of the right of way permit or provisions of this Chapter. Applicants for right of way permits
to produce amplified sound shall complete and submit a right of way permit application on a City form
that demonstrates compliance with the following standards:
1) The applicant will not produce any sound that injures or endangers the health or safety
of a human, disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or injures or endangers
personal or real property.
2) The applicant will direct sound away from any nearby noise sensitive units, including,
but not limited to, residential properties, healthcare facilities, religious facilities, libraries, and
schools.
(Ord. 1311, passed 4-18-2016; Ord. 1347, passed 6-3-2019)
' 130.22 POSTED NOTICES.
No person shall affix a placard, sign, bill or poster upon personal or real property, private or
public, without first obtaining permission from the owner thereof and the city and from any other
proper public authority, if applicable.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010)
' 130.23 HAULING.
No person shall haul sand, gravel, rock, wood or other substance in any vehicle or conveyance that
is so constructed or in a condition as to allow the sand, gravel, rock, wood or other substance to fall on
and litter the public streets of the city.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
' 130.35 NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH.
(A) No person responsible shall cause or permit on property owned or controlled by him or her a
nuisance affecting public health.
Tillamook - General Offenses
14
(B) The following are nuisances affecting public health and may be abated as provided in this
chapter:
(1) Cesspools. Cesspools or septic tanks, which are in an unsanitary condition or which
cause an offensive odor;
(2) Debris. No person responsible shall allow the accumulation of debris, rubbish, manure
and other refuse that are not removed within a reasonable time. An accumulation is any amount greater
than one pound in weight or one cubic foot in volume;
(3) Food. No person responsible shall offer for human consumption any decayed or
unwholesome food;
(4) Odor. No person responsible for premises shall cause an offensive odor or allow the
premises to be in an unsanitary condition;
(5) Privies. No person responsible shall allow open vaults or privies within the city, except
those allowed or maintained in connection with formally permitted construction projects and in
accordance with local, state and federal law, specifically including the State Health Division
regulations;
(6) Stagnant water. No person responsible shall allow or maintain stagnant water or other
condition affording a breeding place for mosquitoes and/or other insect pests. This section shall not
apply to commercial animal husbandry or insectarium operations which are in compliance with all
applicable local, state and federal laws;
(7) Surface drainage. Drainage of liquid wastes from private premises; and
(8) Water pollution. No person responsible shall pollute any surface or subsurface water,
well, spring, stream or drainage ditch.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.36 CREATING A HAZARD.
No person responsible shall create a hazard by:
(A) Maintaining or leaving in a place accessible to children a container with a compartment of
more than one and one-half cubic feet capacity and a door or lid which locks or fastens automatically;
(B) Maintaining or leaving access to a well, cistern, cesspool, excavation or other hole of a depth
of four feet or more and a top width of 12 inches or more unsecured by failing to cover, fence or install
other suitable protective measures to prevent harm; or
(C) Failing to adequately secure against access by, or injury or death to, minors to:
General Offenses
15
(1) Equipment or other devices dangerous to minors;
(2) Lumber, logs or pilings placed or stored in a manner dangerous to minors; or
(3) Any excavation dangerous to minors.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.37 OFFENSIVE LITTERING.
(A) No person responsible shall:
(1) Discard, drain or in any manner deposit any rubbish, trash, garbage, debris, sewage from
any source or other refuse or pollutant of any kind upon the land of another or upon any public way
without permission of the owner and without complying with all applicable local, state and/or federal
laws; or
(2) Permit any rubbish, trash, garbage, debris, tobacco product or paraphernalia (whether or
not lit or burning) or other refuse to be thrown, or fall or be blown from a vehicle which he or she is
operating; except that this division (A)(2) shall not apply to a person operating a vehicle transporting
passengers for hire subject to regulation by the Interstate Commerce Commission or the Public Utility
Commissioner of the state, or a person operating a school bus.
(B) As used in this section, PUBLIC WAY includes but is not limited to roads, streets, alleys,
lanes, trails, beaches, parks and all recreational facilities operated by the city, state or county for use by
the general public.
(C) No person shall drop, spill, deposit or place in any manner whatsoever any sawdust, log fuel
or other small wooden matter, grass or lawn clippings or any other solid matter which may be blown or
scattered by the wind or which may be carried or washed by the rain or surface waters into the storm
sewers, upon any paved street or upon any sidewalk, without immediately disposing of and taking care
of the same in such a manner as to wholly prohibit the same from being scattered or blown by the wind
or washed or carried by the rain or surface waters into the storm sewers.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.38 TRASH, RUBBISH.
No person responsible shall allow:
(A) Trash to be kept outdoors and visible to any member of the public within the city;
(B) Rubbish or trash to be deposited on or remain on any public right-of-way, street, road,
highway or alley within the city, or on any private property within view from any premises open to the
public or public way; or
Tillamook - General Offenses
16
(C) Junk or trash to be kept outdoors on any street, lot, private property or premises or in any
building that is not wholly or entirely enclosed, except for doors used for entry and exit. JUNK
includes all motor vehicles not functioning, licensed and insurable, motor vehicle parts, old machinery,
old machinery parts, appliances or parts thereof, metal scrap, glass, paper, lumber or wood or other
waste or discarded material. This section does not apply to a licensed business which maintains or sells
these described items.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.39 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.
(A) No person shall place, or allow to remain, an inoperable motor vehicle on public or private
property within view for a period greater than 24 hours.
(B) An inoperable motor vehicle (IMV) is not within view where it is:
(1) Placed within a legally permitted structure; or
(2) Covered by a commercially available vehicle cover specific to the make and model of the
motor vehicle being covered. However, tarps and/or plastic sheeting are not commercially available
vehicle cover specific to the make and model of the motor vehicle being covered.
(C) INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE (IMV) means any motor vehicle which is not currently
lawfully registered, insured as required by state law or in immediate legal operating condition.
(D) No person shall place more than two inoperable motor vehicles on public or private property
even when the IMVs are not within view as defined in division (B) above.
(E) Any inoperable motor vehicle placed outside a structure shall be located entirely on real
property owned and/or controlled by the vehicle owner, as proven by a recorded deed or mortgage, a
written lease or rental agreement and/or the written consent of the real property owner.
(F) This section does not apply to the following, non-exclusive list of city-registered businesses:
(1) Licensed auto repair or dismantling businesses;
(2) Licensed motor vehicle dealers;
(3) Licensed motor vehicle dismantling businesses;
(4) Junk dealers; or
(5) Any lawful business requiring for a business purpose the placement of inoperable motor
vehicles.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
General Offenses
17
Cross-reference:
Abandoned vehicles, see Chapter 73
Discarded vehicles, see Chapter 94
' 130.40 GRAFFITI.
Graffiti not only damages property but creates a visual blight. When graffiti is allowed to remain
on property and is not promptly removed, it invites additional graffiti and criminal activity. No person
may cause graffiti to exist on private property or the public right-of-way directly abutting the property.
Graffiti which has been applied to property and is visible from any public right-of-way, from any other
public or private property, or from any premises open to the public must be removed or covered by the
person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of the property within 14 days of the
graffiti’s initial existence at the site. Failure to remove or cover the graffiti within the specified time
period is a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.41 OFFENSES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
Where permitted by state law, an act made unlawful by this chapter shall constitute an offense
when committed on any property owned or leased by the city, even though outside the corporate limits
of the city.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.42 SOLICITING OR CONFEDERATING TO VIOLATE ORDINANCES.
No person shall conspire with another to violate a provision of this chapter or any other ordinance
of the city.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.43 ATTEMPT TO COMMIT OFFENSES.
A person who shall attempt to commit any of the offenses mentioned in this chapter or any
ordinance of the city, but who for any reason is prevented from completing the act, shall be deemed
guilty of attempt of that specific ordinance. ATTEMPT means any overt act constituting a substantial
step toward completing an offense.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
ABATEMENT
Tillamook - General Offenses
18
' 130.55 ABATEMENT GENERALLY.
Abatement is a judicial remedy in addition to any fine, fee or other available judicial remedy for
any violation of this chapter. ABATEMENT means the destruction, extinguishment, removal,
stoppage, suppression or otherwise rendering harmless by any reasonable means of that which causes a
nuisance. The city may issue a citation and/or the city may issue a written warning in advance of a
possible citation to the person responsible to fix or abate the alleged nuisance within a certain time.
Abatement also refers to this discretionary warning process by the city to a person responsible for a
violation of this chapter that a citation is imminent if the nuisance is not abated. However, an
Aabatement warrant@ as described in ' 130.58 shall issue only after a judge issues an order or
judgment for an offense of a city ordinance or other law.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010)
' 130.56 CITATION OR WARNING; PROCEDURE.
(A) When the city learns that a nuisance exists, the city shall cause to be delivered to the person
responsible for the location of the nuisance:
(1) A citation; or
(2) A written warning notice directing the person responsible to abate the nuisance by a
certain time.
(B) The written warning notice to abate a nuisance shall contain:
(1) A description of the real property by street address, common description or legal
description, on which the nuisance exists;
(2) A description of the nuisance;
(3) A direction to abate the nuisance within 14 days from the date of receiving the notice;
(4) A statement that failure to abate a nuisance may cause the person responsible be cited into
Municipal Court with possible imposition of a fine, as well as abatement costs;
(5) A statement that the person responsible may protest the order to abate by giving notice to
the city within 14 days from the date of actual or constructive receipt of the notice; and
(6) A statement that the person responsible may make request to the city for an extension of
time to abate the nuisance, not to exceed 30 days from date of receipt of the original notice.
(C) The city upon sending out notice under division (B) above shall also cause a report to be filed
in the Police Department documenting all action occurring with this nuisance.
(D) An error in the name or address of the person responsible shall not make the notice void where
General Offenses
19
the person responsible receives actual or constructive notice here.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.57 ABATEMENT BY THE PERSON RESPONSIBLE.
(A) Within 14 days after receipt of mailing of a warning notice, as provided in ' 130.56, the
person responsible shall abate the nuisance or prove to the city no nuisance exists.
(B) A person responsible may contest that no nuisance exists by filing with the city within 14 days
a written statement describing in detail the basis, reasons and facts for denying the nuisance exists.
This statement shall be received within 14 days from the date of receipt of the notice. The person
responsible may request an extension from the city at any time within the original 14 days provided for
nuisance abatement.
(C) The city shall have 14 days to respond in writing. The response shall indicate either:
(1) The nuisance no longer exists and no further action is required;
(2) The city may allow an extension to abate, not to exceed 30 days; and/or
(3) The nuisance still exists. If the nuisance still exists, then the city shall notify the person
responsible to abate the nuisance immediately and shall issue a citation as soon as practicable.
(D) Once the final date allowed to abate has passed and the city determines the nuisance has not
been abated, the city shall then cite the person responsible into Municipal Court.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010)
' 130.58 NUISANCE ABATEMENT; WARRANT.
(A) Abatement. If following the time limit set by the Court any nuisance has not been abated, the
city may apply to the Court for an abatement warrant to cause the nuisance to be Aseized,@ removed
and abated, including disposal in an approved manner.
(B) Warrants. When the city is unable within a reasonable time to secure permission to enter
private property to seize and abate the nuisance, a Municipal, Justice or Circuit Court Judge shall issue
a nuisance abatement warrant, unless not otherwise allowed by law.
(C) Procedure for issuance of a nuisance abatement warrant.
(1) Examination. Before issuing a nuisance abatement warrant, the Judge may examine the
available evidence and/or receive additional evidence, including without limitation witnesses’
testimony, e.g., applicant, a citizen complainant, city’s officer and/or any other witness, under oath for
the purpose of determining whether or not a responsible person has complied with a judicial order or
judgment.
Tillamook - General Offenses
20
(2) Issuance. If the Judge determines a prior order or judgment to abate remains unsatisfied
in whole or part, the Judge shall issue the abatement warrant particularly describing the person or
persons authorized to execute the warrant, the property to be entered, a statement of the general types
and estimated quantity of the items to be removed or conditions abated, and the scope, time, place and
manner of the abatement. The warrant shall contain a direction that it be executed either on any day of
the week between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., or where the Judge has specially determined
upon a showing that it cannot be effectively executed between those hours, that it be executed at any
additional or other time of the day or night.
(3) Police assistance. In issuing a nuisance abatement warrant, the Judge may authorize any
peace officer, as defined in state statutes, to enter the described property to remove any person or
obstacle and to assist and/or protect the representative of the city in any way necessary to enter the
property and remove and abate the nuisance.
(D) Execution of nuisance abatement warrants.
(1) Occupied property. Except as provided in division (B) of this section, in executing a
nuisance abatement warrant, the person authorized to execute the warrant shall, before entry into the
occupied premises, make a reasonable effort to present the person’s credentials, authority and purpose
to an occupant or person in possession of the property designated in the warrant; and give the occupant
or person in possession of the property a copy of the warrant.
(2) Unoccupied property. In executing a nuisance abatement warrant on unoccupied
property, the person authorized to execute the warrant need not inform anyone of the person’s authority
and purpose, as prescribed in division (D)(1), but may promptly enter the designated property if at the
time it is reasonably believed to be in that condition. In this case, a copy of the nuisance abatement
warrant shall be conspicuously posted on the property, e.g., without limitation the main entrance, and
subsequently mailed by first-class United States mail, postage prepaid to the owner of record of the
property.
(3) Return. A nuisance abatement warrant must be executed within five working days of its
issue and returned to the Judge by whom it was issued within ten working days from its date of
execution. After the expiration of the time prescribed by this division (D), the warrant unless executed
is void.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010)
' 130.59 PROTECTION OF THINGS SEIZED; LIABILITY OF AGENCY; DISPOSAL OF
NUISANCE PROPERTY REMOVED.
(A) Where the city seizes property, the city shall take reasonable steps to safeguard and protect the
things seized against loss, damage and deterioration.
(B) Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, the city is not liable for loss, damage or
deterioration resulting from any reasonable actions taken to secure or develop evidence of an ordinance
violation, crime or offense.
General Offenses
21
(C) The city may cause the nuisance items removed pursuant to the nuisance abatement warrant to
be disposed of in an approved manner whenever the city finds that the fair and reasonable value of the
items at resale would be less than the cost of storing and selling the items. In making the above
determination, the City Manager may include in the costs of sale the reasonable cost of removing the
items to a place of storage, of storing the items for resale, of holding the resale including reasonable
staff allowances, and all other reasonable and necessary expenses of holding the sale.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010)
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see O.R.S. 133.537
' 130.60 ORDER OF ABATEMENT; CANCELLATION.
(A) Except as provided in division (B) of this section, if the existence of the nuisance is
established in the action, an order of abatement shall be entered as part of the general judgment in the
case.
(B) The Court, if satisfied of an owner’s good faith, shall enter no order of abatement as to that
owner if the Court finds that the owner:
(1) Had no knowledge of the existence of the nuisance or has been making reasonable efforts
to abate the nuisance;
(2) Has not been guilty of any contempt of court in the proceedings; and
(3) Will make best efforts to immediately abate any nuisance that may exist and prevent it
from being a nuisance for a period of one year thereafter.
(C) If an order of abatement has been entered and an owner subsequently meets the requirements
of this section, the order of abatement shall be canceled as to that owner.
(D) The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements are enforced
and shall bear interest at the rate of 9% per annum. The interest shall commence to run from the date
of the entry of the lien in the lien docket. In addition, the lien may be foreclosed by a suit in Circuit
Court in the same manner as for the foreclosure of liens under O.R.S. 88.010 et seq. Where necessary,
a Alien@ here shall be substituted for Amortgage@ or Apurchase money mortgage@ under those statutes
to allow the foreclosure.
(E) An error in the name of the person responsible shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure
to receive the notice of the proposed assessment render the assessment void; but it shall remain a valid
lien against the property.
Tillamook - General Offenses
22
(F) Further, the Amunicipal general judgment with money award@ lien may be recorded in the
records of the County Clerk and/or the County Circuit Court to attach to real property of any
responsible person or persons.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010)
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see O.R.S. 105.580
' 130.61 COSTS OF SECURING OR ABATING PROPERTY AS LIEN; PRIORITY OF LIEN;
FILING NOTICE OF PENDENCY.
(A) Any costs associated with securing the property under '' 130.55 through 130.62, inclusive,
shall constitute a lien against the property declared to be a nuisance from the time a notice specifying
the costs is filed of record.
(B) Any costs incurred by the city to secure a property that is a nuisance shall constitute a lien
against the property declared to be a nuisance from the time a notice specifying the costs is filed of
record.
(C) A notice of pendency of an action may be filed pursuant to O.R.S. 93.740 with respect to any
action filed under '' 130.55 through 130.62, inclusive.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010)
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see O.R.S. 105.585
' 130.62 COLLECTION.
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude or prevent the city from referring its judgments under this or
any other city ordinance to a public or private, commercial or otherwise, collection agency or process.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-6-2010)
' 130.99 PENALTY.
Unless otherwise indicated, any offense under this chapter is classified as a violation punishable by
a fine set by resolution. Penalties not set by resolution shall be $250.00 per violation.
(Ord 1315, passed 6-6-2016)
Drugs
23
Tillamook - Land Usage
2
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODES
Section
150.01 State Building Codes adopted
150.99 Penalty
' 150.01 STATE BUILDING CODES ADOPTED.
(A) Standards applicable to building. In addition to compliance with this and other ordinances of
the city, building and related activities shall comply with provisions of the State Structural Specialty
Code and Fire and Life Safety Code, and the State Mechanical Specialty Code and Mechanical Fire and
Life Safety Code, as adopted by the Director of the State Department of Commerce and the State Fire
Marshal, as these codes are now or hereafter constituted.
(B) City code administration. The city shall provide for the administration of a plan checking,
permit and inspection program for structural work, but not for electrical, mechanical, or plumbing work.
This city program is applicable to public as well as private building. Full authority and code
administration duties are outlined within the current IGA for Building Inspection Services (Agreement
489, passed 7-16-2014) as noted in CCT TSO II.
(C) Violations and penalties.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or
structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of
this section.
(2) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of an offense, and the person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this section is
committed, continued or permitted; and, upon conviction of the violation, the person(s) shall be punished
as set forth in ' 150.99.
Ord. 1301, passed 4-20-2015
Building Codes
3
' 150.99 PENALTY.
(A) Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is
prescribed shall be subject to ' 10.99.
(B) Building codes. Any person violating ' 150.01, upon conviction of the violation, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or by both
the fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 1301, passed 4-20-2015)
4 Tillamook - Land Usage
CHAPTER 151: DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
151.01 Street naming
Development Criteria for Floodplain Areas
151.16 Building and filling restrictions in the floodplain
151.19 Retention of agricultural practices
Building Demolition and Movement
151.20 Site work of buildings demolished by fire or mechanical means 151.21
Moving of buildings
151.99 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 151.01 STREET NAMING.
(A) Naming of streets and avenues. There shall be a uniform system of naming and designating all
avenues in the city by designating the avenues commencing with the west boundary of the city and
running thence eastward.
The presently designated Seventh Avenue West shall be and is hereby named Ash
Avenue; the presently designated Sixth Avenue West shall be and is hereby named
Birch Avenue; the presently designated Fifth Avenue West shall be and is hereby
named Cedar Avenue; the presently designated Fourth Avenue West shall be and is
hereby named Douglas Avenue; the presently designated Third Avenue West shall be
and is hereby named Elm Avenue; the presently designated Second Avenue West shall
be and is hereby named Fir Avenue; the presently designated First Avenue West shall
be and is hereby named Grove Avenue; the presently designated Stillwell Avenue shall
Development Regulations
be and is hereby named Stillwell Avenue; the presently designated First Avenue East shall
be and is hereby named Ivy Avenue; the presently designated Second Avenue
East shall be and is hereby named Main Avenue; the presently designated Third
Avenue East shall be and is hereby named Pacific Avenue; the presently designated
Fourth Avenue East shall be and is hereby named Laurel Avenue; the presently
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH]
5
designated Fifth Avenue East shall be and is hereby named Madrona Avenue; the
presently designated Sixth Avenue East shall be and is hereby named Nestucca
Avenue; the presently designated Miller Avenue shall be and is hereby named Miller
Avenue; the presently designated Park Avenue shall be and is hereby named Park
Avenue; the presently designated Del Monte Avenue shall be and is hereby named Del
Monte Avenue; the presently designated Manor Avenue between the presently
designated West Sixth Street and the presently designated West Ninth Street shall be
and is hereby named Manor Place; that certain avenue between the presently
designated East First Street and the presently designated East Third Street shall be and
is hereby named Ocean Place; that certain avenue between the presently designated
East First Street and the presently designated East Third Street presently designated
Goodspeed Avenue shall be and is hereby named Goodspeed Place.
(B) Numbering of buildings. There shall be a uniform system of numbering all houses, stores
and other buildings, except sheds and outbuildings, erected or to be erected within the city limits, by
placing on the door or door frame of the main entrance to the buildings, or as near thereto as practicable,
the number assigned thereto, as hereinafter provided, which numbers to be painted on the building, or on
metal or glass, or by a metallic figure used at the option of the owner. The figure designating the number,
whether painted or otherwise, may be artistic as long as legible and shall not be less than three inches in
height. Once assigned, the property owner is required to post the house number in a conspicuous place
visible from the street.
(C) Bases for numbering. The base for numbering houses west to east shall be the west city
limits, the north to south shall be Front Street, and the numbering east from the west city limits shall be
in regular order commencing with 1,000 and adding 100 numbers per block for each block added in
distance from the west city limits to the east city limits.
(D) East and west numbering. On streets running east and west, the numbers on the north
side of the street shall be even numbers; those on the south side of the street shall be odd numbers; those
on the north side to run from two to 16 inclusive; and those on the south side from one to 15 inclusive.
(E) North and south numbering. On all avenues and places running north and south, the
numbering shall commence on Front Street and continue to the south city limits. The numbers on the
west side shall be even and the numbers on the east side odd, and the numbering shall be from two to 16
inclusive on the even and one to 15 inclusive on the odd.
(F) Effective date. All houses or buildings now erected shall be numbered as herein provided
on or before December 31, 1951, and all houses or buildings hereafter erected shall be numbered before
being occupied.
(G) Penalty. The owner of any house or building required by this section to be numbered,
who shall fail, refuse or neglect to comply with the provisions of this section, shall be subject to the
provisions of ' 151.99.
(Ord. 1283, passed 12-16-2013, Ord. 1285, passed 3-3-2014) Penalty, see ' 151.99
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH]
6 Tillamook - Land Usage
DEVELOPMENT CRITERIA FOR FLOODPLAIN AREAS
' 151.16 BUILDING AND FILLING RESTRICTIONS IN THE FLOODPLAIN.
(A) The city recognized that a large number of acres within the city limits is within a
floodplain. The City Council, therefore, desires that further building regulations be placed on
development in flood areas in order to reduce losses from flooding and dictate wise use of buildable
floodplain land.
(B) In the supplement to the city flood management regulations adopted through the city
zoning ordinance, the following development regulations shall apply:
(1) Prior to the issuance of a building permit or development permit for any development within
a floodplain area as designated on NFIP maps, a development plan must be approved by the City Planning
and Zoning Commission. This development plan shall be submitted as adopted in CCT 153.020and shall
comply with all proposed standards specified in the flood hazard overlay zone section of the zoning code.
Should the proposed development plan include any filling, excavation or moving of soil, it must conform
CCT 053.020. The aforesaid evaluation shall be stamped and signed by a registered professional engineer
licensed by the State Board of Engineering Examiners and qualified to conduct hydrologic and hydraulic
evaluations. The city may engage, at the developer’s expense, a registered engineer to review proposals
and reports submitted by developers as well as make recommendations to the city on the development
plan’s flood hazard impacts. (Ord. 1283, passed 12-2-2013)
' 151.19 RETENTION OF AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES.
(A) It is recognized that, through annexation, many pre-existing, nonconforming uses will
remain. These nonconforming uses are subject to regulations as specified in the city zoning ordinance.
(B) For agricultural farming practices within or adjacent to a newly annexed parcel of land,
the additional following policies shall be recognized.
(1) Much of the property adjacent to Highway 101 North city limits is designated by
the county
for agricultural use. It shall be the policy of the city to protect agricultural operations from potential
conflicts arising from highway commercial activities. Accepted agricultural practices adjacent to or
within the city may create noise, dust, odors or other inconveniences for the owners or users of the
commercial properties. However, the city does not consider it the agricultural operator’s responsibility
to modify accepted practices to accommodate highway commercial areas. The city expects that the
owners of the highway commercial property shall not allow activities on their properties which create
Development Regulations
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH]
7
management difficulties, fire hazards or increased costs for adjacent agricultural operations, and shall not
hold agricultural operators or the city responsible for noise, dust, odors or other inconveniences resulting
from accepted agricultural practices.
(2) On existing agricultural parcels within city boundaries, any change to more intense
farming activities shall require prior approval by the City Planning Commission through an
appropriate public hearing process. An example of a more intense activity would be the
converting of a dairy practice into a hog farm or animal feed lot. The Commission shall have the
responsibility to interpret the allowability of other similar uses.
(Ord. 1283, passed 12-2-2013)
BUILDING DEMOLITION AND MOVEMENT
' 151.20 SITE WORK OF BUILDINGS DEMOLISHED BY FIRE OR MECHANICAL
MEANS.
(A) Building wholly or partially destroyed. Any building within the limits of the city that is
wholly or partially destroyed by fire or is partially torn down or dismantled, or is demolished by any
means shall not be permitted to be or become a public nuisance.
(B) Site work required. Within 60 days of the partial or total dismantling or demolition or
burning of a building, the following requirements shall be met:
(1) All unsalvageable building materials shall be removed to an approved site;
(2) All unburned materials and trash shall be removed to an approved site;
(3) Any basement excavations, pits or trenches shall be filled or properly fenced;
(4) All sewer lateral connections shall be properly capped and located for future use;
(5) Salvageable materials must be neatly stacked for storage during the 60-day period
following the demolition or burning of a building and shall be removed from the premises (site
of the demolished or burned building) within the 60-day period; and
(6) Site shall be graded to a uniform gradient.
(C) Public nuisance. Failure to comply with all of the requirements of division (B) above
shall be deemed a public nuisance.
(D) Violation. Any person who is the owner of land, or who is in possession of land on which
there exists a demolished or burned building which is a public nuisance in violation of this section, shall,
upon conviction be subject to the penalties provided in a Class B infraction as provided in state law.
(Ord. 1144, passed 4-1-1996) Penalty, see ' 150.99
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH]
8 Tillamook - Land Usage
' 151.21 MOVING OF BUILDINGS.
(A) Moving of buildings; bond.
(1) Before a building may be moved, the person, firm, association or corporation moving
the
building shall file with the Recorder a surety bond in favor of the city in an amount specified by the City
Manager. The surety bond shall be conditioned upon faithfully performing the obligations imposed by
this section. In lieu of a bond an insurance certificate shall be filed with the City Manager subject to his
or her approval.
(2) Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation which shall move any building
along and upon any street or alley within the corporate limits of the city shall move the same in a manner
as to do the least possible damage to the streets, alleys, crosswalks, sidewalks and private property of all
kinds within the city. In case of any damage to private property by reason of the use of any street or
alley, the person, firm, association or corporation which shall have charge of the moving of any building
causing the damage shall be responsible to the owner of the damaged property therefor.
(3) A building permit shall be obtained from the Building Official prior to moving a
building, and the moved building shall meet the requirements of the Uniform Building Code in effect at
the time the building is moved.
(B) Disturbance of wires or poles. Whenever in the moving of any building upon any street
or alley of the city it shall be necessary or expedient to cut, break or take down any telegraph, telephone
or electric light wire or pole lawfully erected within the city, the person, firm, association or corporation
moving the building shall, 24 hours before cutting, breaking or otherwise molesting any telegraph,
telephone or electric light wire or pole, notify the owner thereof or his or her agent or representative
within the city of the necessity of the breaking, cutting or removal; and if the owner, during the period
of 24 hours, fails to take action that will permit the passage of the building, then the person, firm,
association or corporation moving the building may himself, herself or themselves cut, break or remove
the wire or pole, doing no unnecessary damage thereby; and after the passage of the building, the person,
firm, association or corporation shall at his, her, its or their own expense immediately repair or restore
the wire or pole. In the event of failure to make the repair immediately after the passage of the building
beyond the point of obstruction, upon conviction thereof, the person or persons at fault shall be fined as
set forth in ' 150.99.
(C) Damage to sidewalks or crosswalks. In case of damage to any sidewalk or crosswalk
within the city by reason of the moving of a building, the person, firm, association or corporation moving
the building shall, within 24 hours after the building has passed the point of the damage, repair and restore
the sidewalk or crosswalk to its former condition; and in default thereof, the person or persons at fault
shall, on conviction thereof, be fined as set forth in ' 150.99.
(1977 Code, ' 7-1) (Ord. 138, passed 10-6-1902; Ord. 729, passed 8-3-1959; Ord. 865, passed
3-2-1977; Ord. 1039, passed 11-21-1983) Penalty, see ' 150.99
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH]
9
(D) Intergovernmental Agreement for Building Code Services. The City and Tillamook County have
entered into an agreement for Building Code Services and regulation of Oregon Building Code. (TSO II,
Agreement 489, passed 7-16-2014).
Building Codes
' 151.99 PENALTY.
(A) Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to ' 10.99.
(B) House numbering. Any person violating the provisions of provisions of 151.01, shall,
upon conviction thereof before the City Recorder, be subject to a fine of not less than $1 or more than $5
for each day’s neglect or refusal. (1977 Code, ' 8-2)
(C) Moving of buildings.
(1) Disturbance of wires or poles. Any person violating ' 150.02(B) shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined in the sum of not less than $100 nor more than $250.
(2) Damage to sidewalks or crosswalks. Any person violating ' 150.02(C) shall, on
conviction thereof, be fined not less than $100, and not more than $400.
(1977 Code, ' 7-1)
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH]
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 1
CHAPTER 153: ZONING CODE - TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION
153.001 Title, Purpose and Compliance
153.002 Establishment of Zoning Districts and Zoning Map
153.003 Application Procedures and Fees
Zone District and Overlay District Descriptions
153.010 Open Space District (O)
153.011 Single-Family Residential District (R-7.5)
153.012 Single-Family and Duplex Residential District (R-5.0)
153.013 Multiple Use Residential District (R-0)
153.014 Neighborhood Commercial District (N-C)
153.015 Highway Commercial District (H-C)
153.016 Central Commercial District (C-C)
153.017 Light Industrial District (L-I)
153.018 General Industrial District (G-I)
153.019 Public & Semi-Public District (P&S-P)
153.020 Planned Unit Development District (PUD)
153.030 Airport Overlay Zone (AO)
153.031 Hazard Overlay Zone (HO)
153.032 Town Center Overlay Zone (TC)
153.033 Hoquarton Waterfront Overlay (HWO)
153.034 Health Care Overlay Zone (HCO)
153.035 Water Resource Protection Overlay Zone (WRPO)
153.036 Definitions
153.037 Estuary /Shoreland Overlay Zone (SO)
153.038 Flood Hazard Overlay Zone (FHO)
Interpretations, Special Standards, Regulations, and Procedures
153.050 Interpretations and Exceptions
153.051 Site Development Standards
153.052 Provisions Applying to Special Uses
153.053 Sign Standards and Requirements
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 2
153.054 Off-Street Parking and Loading
153.055 Design and Landscape Standards
Land Use Actions
153.070 Conditional Use Permits
153.071 Amendments
153.072 Land Divisions (Partitions, Subdivision)
153.073 Site Plan Review
153.074 Non-Conforming Uses
153.075 Variances
153.076 Appeals, General
153.077 Revocation of Permits or Variances
Enforcement
153.099 Enforcement and Penalty
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 3
§153.001 TITLE, PURPOSE & COMPLIANCE
1. Title.
This Code shall be known as the "Zoning Code" of the City of Tillamook, Oregon. It is part
of the City Development Code.
2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Code is to further the objectives and goals of the Comprehensive Plan
and to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Tillamook
through orderly community development and planning with considerations for: desirable
concentrations of population; protection of property values; aesthetics and enhancement of
the appearance of the community; limitation of dangerous or offensive trades or industries;
maintenance of adequate open space for light and air and emergency access; the provisions
for access and privacy; facilitation and the adequate provision of community utilities and
facilities such as transportation, power, water, sewage, fire, police, schools, parks and other
public requirements.
3. Compliance with Code Provisions.
A parcel may be used and a structure or part of a structure constructed, reconstructed,
remodeled, occupied or used only as this Code permits. Where this Code imposes greater
restrictions than those imposed or required by other rules or regulations or ordinances, the
provisions of this Code shall control.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 4
§153.002 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAPS
1. Classification of Zoning Districts.
For the purposes of this Code, the City is divided into underlying zoning districts
designated as follows:
Map Symbol & Zoning Code
Zoning District
Open Space
Residential - Single Family
Residential - Single Family & Duplex
Residential - Multiple Use
Commercial - Neighborhood
Commercial - Highway
Commercial - Central
Industrial - Light
Industrial - General
Public & Semi-Public
Abbreviated Designation
O
R-7.5
R-5.0
R-O
C-N
C-H
C-C
I-L
I-G
P&SP
Reference Section
153.005
153.006
153.007
153.008
153.009
153.010
153.011
153.012
153.013
153.014
Additionally, the City is divided into the following overlay zoning districts:
Map Symbol & Zoning Code
Overlay Zoning District
Airport Overlay
Hazard Overlay
Town Center Overlay
Water Resource Protection Overlay
Estuary/Shoreland Overlay
Flood Hazard Overlay
Abbreviated Designation
AO
HO
TC
WRP
ESH
FHO
Reference Section
153.015
153.016
153.017
153.018
153.019
153.020
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 5
2. Application of Regulations to Districts Generally
Except as otherwise provided in this Code,
A. No building or part thereof or other structure shall be erected, altered, added to or
enlarged, nor shall any land, building, structure or premises be used for any purpose or in
any manner other than is included among the uses hereinafter listed as permitted in the
district in which such building, land or premises is located.
B. No building or part thereof or structure shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally
altered to exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the district in which such
building is located.
C. No building or part thereof or structure shall be erected, nor shall any existing building
be altered, enlarged or rebuilt or moved into any district, nor shall any open space be
encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the yard, setback,
building location, site area and coverage requirements hereinafter prescribed with the
district in which such building or open space is located.
D. No yard or other open space provided about any building or on any building lot for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this Code shall be considered as providing
a yard or other open space for any other building or any other building lot.
E. The requirements of an overlay district shall apply to those areas of the underlying
zoning district that are located in an overlay district.
3. Zoning Map
A. The location and boundaries of zones designated in this section are hereby established
as shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map of the City of Tillamook City" dated with
the
effective date of this Code, and reflect revised Flood Hazard Overlay Zones as
designated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal
Insurance Administration, and signed by the Mayor and City Recorder, and hereinafter
referred to as the "Zoning Map."
B. The signed copy of said zoning map shall be the "official map" of the city of Tillamook
zoning districts and maintained on file in the office of the Recorder and is hereby made
a
part of this Code. Any revisions or replacements of said map, when duly entered, signed
and filed with the City Recorder as authorized by this section are a part of this Code.
C. When the zoning of any area is changed by the City Council in the manner prescribed by
this Code, the City Manager shall cause the official zoning map to be revised so that it
accurately portrays said change, provided that failure to so revise the said map shall not
affect the validity of any zone change. The Council may from time to time direct the City
Manager to replace the official zoning map, or a portion thereof, with a map, which
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 6
includes all lawful changes of zone and city boundaries to date. Such map, or portion
thereof, filed
as a replacement, shall bear the number of the Code authorizing same and shall bear
dated, authenticating signatures of the Mayor and City Recorder. Any map or portion
thereof thereby replaced shall be retained in a separate file by the City Recorder.
4. Interpretation of District Boundaries.
In making a determination where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of any of the
aforesaid districts as shown on said zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
A. District boundaries shall follow the outside boundaries of public streets, alleys, or highways.
B. Vacation of public ways: Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated in the
manner authorized by law, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or
public way shall be automatically extended to the center of the former right-of-way and
all of the area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all
regulation of the extended districts.
C. Where boundaries approximately follow property lines: Where district boundaries
are indicated as approximately following property lines, such property lines at the
date of
adoption of this Code shall be construed to be said boundaries. If a district boundary
divides a platted lot into two or more districts, the entire lot shall be placed in the district
that accounts for the greater area of the lot by the adjustment of the district boundary,
provided that the boundary adjustment is for a distance of less than 20 feet. If an
adjustment of more than 20 feet is required, the change in the district boundary shall be
treated as a change of zone.
5. Zoning of Annexed Areas
A. City Zoning regulations and Zoning Districts shall apply to all of the area within the
City Urban Growth Boundary.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 7
§153.003 APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND FEES
1. Application for Land Use Action.
A. Initiation. An application for a land use action may be initiated by the owner(s) of the
property involved or an authorized agent of that owner(s). It may include the following:
Conditional Use Permit, Land Partition, Site Plan Review, Variance, Zoning
Code/Comprehensive Plan Amendments and/or Zone Change. An application for a change
of zone may also be initiated by the Council or the Commission, in accordance with the
provisions of subsection 2 below. Applications submitted by or on behalf of a public entity
or public, utility having the power of eminent domain with respect to the property subject to
the application, are not subject to the ownership requirement. Authorization to act as an agent
shall be in writing and filed with the application. Such applications shall be filed on the
appropriate form provided by the Planning Department. When any such application requires
the submission of a site plan, the site plan shall be submitted in a form as described within
§153.073.
1. Each land use action’s requirements are listed separately in the following sections of
this chapter:
a. Conditional Use Permit – §153.070.
b. Land Partition – §153.072.
c. Site Plan Review – §153.073
d. Determination or alteration of a Non-Conforming Use or Structure – §153.074
e. Variance – §153.075.
f. Zone Change/Amendment – §153.071.
2. Administrative actions are listed in subsection 15 of this section.
3. A Land Use Action does not include the following:
a. Single-family detached dwellings;
b. Manufactured homes on individual lots;
c. A duplex, which is not being reviewed as part of any other development;
d. Minor modifications;
e. Home occupations
B. Consolidated Application Procedure. If a proposed development requires more than one
application for a permit or other land use request, the applicant may choose to apply for all
necessary applications at once. The Planning Commission or City Council may consolidate
their review of all necessary applications. This consolidated application procedure shall be
subject to the requirements of subsection 16, Final Application for Permit or Zone Change
Request.
2. Initiation by Planning Commission/City Council.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 8
The Commission and/or Council may initiate proceedings to rezone land by motion and
conduct a public hearing in accordance with all applicable provisions of this Code. If the
Council shall initiate such proceedings, the matter of the proposed change of zone shall first
be referred to the Commission which shall then conduct proceedings as hereinafter provided.
If the Commission and/or Council initiate proceedings for a change of zone, they shall so
advise the Planner, who shall set a date for public hearing before the Commission.
3. Ownership List.
The applicant shall file with such applications a list of the names, addresses, and tax lot
numbers of all owners of property situated within the following radii, including public rightsof-
way, of the external boundaries of the property affected by the application:
A. Four hundred feet for Annexations, Zone Changes, and UGB/Comprehensive Plan Map
Amendments;
B. Two hundred fifty feet for all other actions covered by Code unless otherwise proscribed by
State Law;
Such names, addresses, and tax lot numbers shall be those listed on the last preceding tax roll of
the Assessor of Tillamook County. The applicant shall also file with the application an
affidavit attesting to the validity of said ownership list.
5. Hearing Date.
Upon receipt of a valid and complete application and fee as required in subsection 9 herein, the
Planner shall, within thirty (30) days of determination of completeness set a date for public
hearing at the next available Planning Commission hearing, unless the applicant requests a
hearing at a later date, and provide notice as required within subsection 12 herein.
6. Application for Vacation.
A. Procedure. Whenever any person desires to vacate all or part of any public square, or other
public place, plat, street or similar area, such person shall file an application for vacation
with City on forms provided by the Planning Department. Such forms shall conform to the
requirements of ORS 271.080 (1). Attached to such application shall be forms reflecting
the consent of the owners of all abutting property and of not less than two-thirds in area of
the real property affected thereby as defined in ORS 271.080 (2) and described below (C2).
Such consent shall be in writing and duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take
acknowledgments of deeds.
1. The City shall review, under ORS 271.080 - 271.230, proposals for the vacation of public
easements or rights-of-way which provide access to or along the estuary. The following
requirements shall be met.
a. Petitioner first consults with Public Works and Planning.
b. Petitioner initiates vacation and submits the required fee to initiate process and
petition (letter) which includes
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 9
1. Description of the ground proposed to be vacated; 2.
Map and legal description of ground to be vacated; 3.
Reason for the vacation; and
4. Proposed use for vacated property
c. Petitioner will be provided a map delineating the required 200 x 400 foot area
required for the consent of property owners. Absolute consent of all property owners
that are adjacent to the property to be vacated is required. In addition, the consent of
the owners of all abutting property and of not less than two-thirds in area of the real
property affected thereby. The real property affected thereby shall be deemed to be
the land lying on either side of the street or portion thereof proposed to be vacated and
extending laterally to the next street that serves as a parallel street, but in any case not
to exceed 200 feet, and the land for a like lateral distance on either side of the street
for 400 feet along its course beyond each terminus of the part proposed to be vacated.
Where a street is proposed to be vacated to its termini, the land embraced in an
extension of the street for a distance of 400 feet beyond each terminus shall also be
counted. In the vacation of any plat or part thereof, the consent of the owner or
owners of two-thirds in area of the property embraced within such plat or part thereof
proposed to be vacated shall be sufficient, except where such vacation embraces street
area, when, as to such street area the above requirements shall also apply. The consent
of the owners of the required amount of property shall be in writing. (Note: The
“absolute consents” can be considered as part of the two-thirds)
d. Petitioner will bring signed Consents to Vacate to the City for review.
e. A date will be set for petition on Council agenda for public hearing.
f. City will notify Petitioner of date Council will hear petition and Public Hearing.
g. City will publish Public hearing notice two consecutive weeks prior to Public
Hearing.
h. City will prepare two signs (consisting of public hearing notice and map)at least 14
days prior to public hearing but not more than 5 days after first publication
announcing public hearing. Signs to be posted by City at each end of proposed
vacation.
i. If Council does not deny petition at Public hearing, a motion may be made for a first
reading of vacation Code after public hearing. The Code authorizing vacation shall
be prepared for first and second reading by Council.
j. Deed of Dedication shall be prepared and adopted with the Code authorizing
vacation, and the original Code (and Deed) shall be sent to County Clerk for
recording.
B. Hearing Date. Upon receipt of a valid and complete application and fee, the Planning
Department shall set a date for public hearing upon the application before the City Council.
C. Maintenance of Public Access to Estuaries
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 10
1. Existing public ownerships, rights-of-way, and similar public easements, which
provide access to or along the estuary shall be retained or replaced if sold, exchanged
or transferred. Rights-of-way may be vacated to permit redevelopment of existing
developed shoreland areas provided public access across the affected site is retained.
2. The City shall review, under the provisions of ORS 271.300 -27l.360, proposals for
the sale, exchange or transfer of public ownership, which provide access to or along
the estuary. A public hearing shall be held to review such proposals.
7. Application for Annexation.
A. Procedure. Whenever any person seeks to extend the boundaries of the City through
annexation, such person shall file an application for annexation on forms provided by the
Planning department. The applicant will be required to meet the land use criteria, and
submit the appropriate fee, listed under 'Annexation' in subsection 9 below.
B. Consent Petition. If the applicant desires to negate the need for an election as provided in
ORS 222.170 (1) said application shall contain the written consent to annexation of more
than half of the owners of land in the territory to be annexed, who also own more than half
of the land in such territory and who own real property therein representing more than half
of the assessed value of the real property in said territory.
C. Initiation by Council. A proposal to annex unincorporated territory surrounded by the City
may be initiated by the Council. Such initiation shall be by resolution subject to
referendum.
D. Hearing Date. Upon receipt of a valid and complete application and fee or resolution by
the Council, the City Manager shall set a date for public hearing upon the application
before the appropriate body.
8. Improper Application. If it is determined by the Planner that any of the aforementioned
applications do not provide the desired information nor have attached thereto other pertinent
data requested, the application may not be accepted.
9. Application Fees and Required Submittals. The application fees as set by resolution of the City
Council and application submittals are required to defray costs incidental to the proceedings
and shall accompany each respective land use request. Such fees shall be paid at the time of
the filing of each application and shall not be refundable. Ten copies of the applicable land use
information shall be submitted on one or more sheets of paper measuring a minimum of 11” x
17” and shall be drawn to a minimum scale of 1 inch equals 10 feet (1”=10’). A copy of the
proposed drawing and applicable land use information shall also be submitted by PDF for
electronic circulation.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 11
Required Submittals: the following information is required, as listed above, for all land use actions,
handled administratively and brought before the Planning Commission, within the Urban Growth
Boundary of the City of Tillamook
Request Required Land Use Criteria
Annexation A, B, C, D
Appeals* Not Applicable
Change of Zone A, B, C, D, P
Conditional Use All
Site Plan Review All (except P)
Flood Hazard Permit A, B, C
Urban Growth Boundary Amend. A, B, C, D, P
Right-of-Way Vacation A, B, C, D, E, F
Variance A - L
Partition A, B, C, D, E. F, O
Planned Unit Development All (except P)
Subdivision All (except P)
A. A list of the names, addresses, and tax lot numbers of all property owners situated within the
distances listed under subsection 3 of this section.
B. A drawing of the affected area shall contain the date of preparation, a NORTH arrow, and
written and graphic scale.
C. A written statement of the intended use of the property, and a written response to the standards
and criteria listed separately for each of the land use actions (e.g. for a Site Plan Review, the
criteria listed in §153.073), and include the site plan procedures listed separately for each land
use action.
D. Statement of utility availability.
E. Location, dimensions and names of adjacent streets and proposed internal streets showing
center line radii and curb return radii.
F. The size and location of all existing and proposed public and private utilities, easements, or
rights-of-way.
G. The building envelope, size, setback dimensions and height of all proposed structures which
are to be retained on the site.
H. Existing site specific physical features including drainage ways, ponding areas and structures,
with indication as to which are to be retained. Adjacent properties and their physical features
within 50 feet of the property line shall be identified, including setback dimensions of adjacent
structures.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 12
I. The location of all existing trees and shrubs and those which are to be retained on the property,
the location and dimensions of landscaped areas, location of proposed plant material and
ground cover and other pertinent landscape features.
J. The proposed layout of the parking lot including location and dimension of parking spaces,
curb islands, internal planter strips, maneuvering aisles, and access driveways with indication
of direction of travel.
K. Statement of maintenance responsibility for all improvements shown on the site plan.
L. Site data including:
1. Total area of the property (square feet).
2. Building coverage (square feet), setback and dimensions.
3. Parking and other impervious surface coverage (square feet).
4. Parking lot landscape area (square feet).
5. All other landscape area coverage (square feet).
6. Number and type of parking stalls provided.
7. Number of units as appropriate.
8. Existing and proposed gross floor area (square feet).
M. Finished floor elevation related to curb, street or other established grade or bench mark, and
drainage pattern. All lots shall show grading and drainage with existing grades or contours and
finished grades or contours clearly indicated.
N. Location of all fencing used to divide properties.
O. A legal description of the property. If the property is part of a recorded plat, a reference to the
plan may be used.
P. Transportation System Plan Compliance.
1. Review of Applications for Effect on Transportation Facilities. When a development
application includes a proposed comprehensive plan amendment or land use regulation
change, the proposal shall be reviewed to determine whether it significantly affects a
transportation facility, in accordance with Oregon Administrative Rule (OAR) 660-012-
0060 (the Transportation Planning Rule – “TPR”). “Significant” means the proposal
would:
a. Change the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation
facility. This would occur, for example, when a proposal causes future traffic to
exceed the capacity of “collector” street classification, requiring a change in the
classification to an “arterial” street, as identified by the City of Tillamook
Transportation System Plan (“TSP”); or
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 13
b. Change the standards implementing a functional classification system; or
c. Allow types or levels of land use that would result in levels of travel or access
that are inconsistent with the functional classification of a transportation facility;
or
d. Reduce the performance standards of the facility below the minimum acceptable
level identified in the TSP.
2. Amendments That Affect Transportation Facilities. Amendments to the comprehensive
plan and land use regulations which significantly affect a transportation facility shall assure
that allowed land uses are consistent with the function, capacity, and level of service of the
facility identified in the TSP. This shall be accomplished by one of the following:
a. Amending the TSP to ensure that existing, improved, or new transportation
facilities are adequate to support the proposed land uses consistent with the
requirements of the TPR; or,
b. Altering land use designations, densities, or design requirements to reduce
demand for automobile travel and meet travel needs through other modes of
transportation.
c. Traffic Impact Study. A Traffic Impact Study shall be submitted with a plan
amendment or land use district change application.
Q. The location of all pedestrian and bicycle circulation areas and bicycle racks/storage, including
sidewalks, internal pathways, pathway connections to adjacent properties and any bicycle lanes
or trails.
10. Pre-Application and Post-Application Meetings.
A. A pre-application meeting shall be scheduled prior to the submittal of the land use
application. The pre-application meeting shall be coordinated by the City Planner. A plan
review committee meeting shall be conducted after the submittal of the land use application,
but prior to public notice and may include participation by City Public Works, Fire District,
Police Department, and other appropriate agencies (including State and Federal) that need to
be involved.
B. A post-application meeting shall follow the submission and approval of a land use
application, but shall be scheduled prior to the construction and/or submission of a Zoning
Clearance Permit.
11. Rehearing. The Council, Commission, or Planning Department, shall not consider any
application involving a lot, parcel, or structure which has been the subject of the same
application within twelve (12) months following final action on such application, unless
substantial new evidence is submitted which could not reasonably have been presented at the
previous meeting.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 14
NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
12. Public Hearings. Unless otherwise required by this Code, any hearing before the
Commission or Council required by any provision of §153.003 to §153.099 shall be in a
public hearing held in accordance with the notification and procedure requirements
hereinafter provided. Hearings on land use and limited land use actions shall include findings
that describe the applicable
substantive criteria listed in the applicable section(s) of this Code which will be used to
review the land use action.
A. Testimony at the hearing must be directed towards the criteria, and other city and state land
use standards that apply, which will be used to review the land use action; B. Failure
to address a criterion precludes an appeal based on that criterion.
The general public has a right to have members free from pre-hearing or ex-parte contacts on
matters heard by them. It is recognized that a contravening public right is free access to public
officials on any matter. Members of the hearing body shall place on the record the substance of any
written or oral ex-parte communications concerning a decision or action at the first hearing on the
decision or action which occurs after the communication was made. Parties shall be given the right
to rebut the substance of the communication. If such contacts have impaired the member's
impartiality or ability to vote on the matter, the member shall so state and shall abstain therefrom.
13. Notice of Hearings. Upon fixing the time of public hearing before the Commission, the
Planner shall cause notice of such hearing to be given by mail, posting, publication, or
broadcast as required by the provisions of subsections 11 and 12 herein. In case of
public hearing before the Council, the City Recorder shall cause such notice to be given
in accordance with the provisions of subsections 11 and 12 herein.
A. Notice of a public hearing shall include the following information:
1. The name of the applicant;
2. The date, time, and location of the hearing;
3. A description of the location of the property for which a permit or other land use action
is pending, including the street address and the subdivision lot and block designation,
or tax lot number. (This information is required only for quasi-judicial actions.)
4. A concise description of the proposed development action;
5. A general description of the applicable comprehensive plan and zoning code
criteria which apply to the proposal.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 15
6. A statement that a failure to raise an issue in person or by letter precludes appeal and
that failure to specify to which criterion the comment is directed precludes appeal
based on that criteria.
7. A statement describing where the complete application, criteria and other
relevant information is available for review, and how written comments may be
submitted.
B. Notice of any hearing shall be given to the applicant and to property owners required to
be notified not less than twenty (20) days prior to the hearing and as follows:
1) By first class mail to applicant and all property owners as shown on the ownership list
filed with the application. However, failure to receive such notice shall not
invalidate any of the proceedings involved.
C. Each notice of a public hearing on a zone change for property which includes all or part of
a mobile home park shall be sent by first class mail to each existing mailing address for
tenants of the mobile home park at least 20 days but not more than 40 days before the date
of the first hearing on the application. The city may require the applicant for the zone
change to pay the costs of the notice.
D. Mailed notice to the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) for all land use
requiring a public hearing with the Planning Commission or City Council of land use
applications related to property within 500 feet of a state highway or that impact
State facilities.
E. Mailed notice to the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) for the following
public hearings; subdivisions and partitions and any land use application affecting private
access.
14. Posting Notices. The City Planner shall require that affected applicants post notices of public
hearings to be held by the Council or Commission for any land use action by posting a sign in
a manner clearly visible on the subject property within 10 feet of whatever boundary line of
such land abuts each public road or street. If a public road abuts thereon, then such sign shall
face in such a manner as may be most readily seen by the public. The template for such signs
shall be provided to affected applicants by the Planner.
15. Administrative Notice.
A. Types of land use requests eligible for administrative review:
1. Conditional Use Permits involving one of the following issues:
(a) Signs according to §153.032 and §153.053 of this code;
(b) Modifications of an existing conditional use permit.
[Note: if the exterior structural addition, extension or relocation of, or to, an
existing structure conditionally approved, or the proposed accessory uses and
buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted or approved conditional use, does
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 16
not equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
improvement or repair is started, Conditional Use approval is not required].
2. Partitions/Property Line Adjustments/Flag Lot Development.
3. Site Plan Reviews for:
a. Conversions of residences to commercial uses.
b. Expansion of existing commercial, industrial, or public facility uses and structures if the
expansion is less than 50% of the existing structure or less than 10,000 square feet (whichever
is smaller) and exceeds 50% of the market value before improvement or repair is started.
[Note: if the exterior structural addition, extension or relocation of, or to, an existing structure,
or the proposed accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted or
approved conditional use, does not equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure
before the improvement or repair is started, Site Plan Review approval is not required].
c. Previously approved site plan reviews that are null and void and no changes are proposed.
4. Variances involving one of the following:
a. Deviation from the minimum building setback of not more than twenty percent (20%).
b. Deviation from the building height limitation of not more than ten percent (10%).
c. Deviation from any other zoning requirements of not more than ten percent (10%) (i.e.
required % of area, required coverage, required density, sign requirements, lot requirements,
off-street parking requirements).
d. Deviation from a residential accessory dwelling living area of not more than five percent (5%).
e. Expansion of a conditional or nonconforming use by not more than twenty percent (20%) of
the gross building volume.
5. Time Extensions on the following land use actions:
a. Tentative Land Partitions
b. Preliminary Subdivision/PUD Plat Approval
c. Conditional Use Permits
d. Site Plan Reviews
e. Variances
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 17
B. A property owner may initiate an administrative land use request by filing an application
with the Planning Department. The Planning Department may require other drawings or
information necessary for a complete understanding of the proposal and its relationship to
surrounding properties. An application will not be considered complete for purposes of
any time limitations until all requested information is received by the Planning
Department. An application will not be accepted until all fees are paid according to the
provisions of subsection 9.
C. The Planner shall, within thirty (30) days of receipt and acceptance of an application for a
land use request act administratively according to the procedure set forth in A through J or
shall refer the application to the Planning Commission for a public hearing and decision.
The application shall be referred to the Planning Commission if the Planner decides that
the land use request would have significant impacts that extend beyond areas of notice per
subsection 3. If the Planner elects to refer the application to the Planning Commission, it
shall be set for a public hearing at the next available Planning Commission hearing, unless
the applicant requests a hearing at a later date.
D. At the time the Planner acts administratively based on the requests set forth in Section 4
(14) (A), he or she shall cause notice of the application for a land use request to be mailed
by First Class Mail to the following persons:
1. the applicant;
2. all owners of adjacent property per subsection 3 of section 153.003
3. such other persons, agencies or departments as the Planner deems appropriate.
E. No land use request approval shall be invalidated because of failure to receive the
notice provided for in D hereof.
F. The notice sent pursuant to ‘D’ shall be mailed within ten (10) days of receipt of a
complete application. The notice shall state the general nature of the request and that there
is a right to respond with comments or objections in writing within ten (10) days of
mailing. The notice shall also say that only those persons who respond in writing will
receive a copy of the written decision and have a right to appeal that decision to the
Planning Commission.
G. In addition to the notice by mail provided to the persons listed in subsection ‘D’ above,
notice of a land use request application shall be posted on the property within 24 hours
from the time the notice is mailed. The posting shall inform the public of the general
nature of the request and announce that written comments and objections will be accepted
by the Planning Department for ten (10) days from the date of posting. The notice shall
also say that only those persons who respond in writing will receive a copy of the written
decision and have a right to appeal that decision to the Planning Commission.
H. After any written comments or objections are received and the period of time for public
input has passed, the Planner shall have ten (10) days to prepare a written decision
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 18
approving, disapproving, or approving with conditions the application for a land use
request. The Planner shall consider in making the decision all written comments, the
information in
the application and the applicable criteria of the Code.
I. The applicant and all persons who submitted written comments in response to the mailed or
published notice shall be considered parties to the written decision and shall be entitled to
written notice of the decision within ten (10) days of the date of the decision. Any party
may appeal the decision of the Planner to the Planning Commission in accordance with
§153.076. Only those who are considered to be parties that have standing to make an
appeal of an administrative decision made pursuant to subsection 13 may do so.
J. Copies of all on administrative actions shall be provided to Planning Commission
members for their review.
Final Action of Application for Permit or Zone Change Request.
The following section shall apply to all applications for permits or zone change requests, except
those which involve an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan or zoning codes, or the adoption
of a new land use regulation.
A. The City shall take final action on an application for a permit or zone change requests,
including resolution of all local appeals, within 120 days after the application is
deemed complete. This 120 day period may be extended for a reasonable period of
time at the request of the applicant.
B. If an application for a land use request is incomplete, the City shall notify the applicant of
the additional information required within 30 days of the receipt of the application. The
applicant shall be given 180 days to submit the additional information. The application
shall be deemed complete upon receipt of the additional information required. If the
applicant refuses to submit the required additional information, the application shall be
handled administratively for action with the issues related to incompleteness noted.
C. If the application was complete when first submitted, or the applicant submits the requested
additional information within 180 days of the date the application was first submitted, the
City's approval or denial of the application shall be based upon the standards and criteria
that were applicable at the time the application was first submitted.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 19
§153.010 OPEN SPACE LAND USE, OR OS DISTRICT
1. Purpose. To maintain, preserve, conserve and otherwise continue in existence desirable and
appropriate uses of open space lands in the more undeveloped sections of the City in order to
assure continued public health by counteracting pollutants and to assure the use and enjoyment
of natural resources and scenic beauty for the economic and social well-being of the city and
its citizens.
2. Uses Permitted Outright. The following uses are permitted in the OS District:
A. Open Space.
B. Signs permitted as per §153.053 of this development code.
C. City Park Facilities, Improvements and Projects as identified in the City Parks
and Recreation Master Plan
1) Normal operation, maintenance;
2) Installation/Replacement of improvements within the existing city parks;
3) Landscaping as part of a park facility;
D. Urban Farming, gardening, horticulture , field crops, orchards, berries, nursery or
flower stock and other agricultural uses for subsistence or commercial purposes; as
described in §153.052 of this development code.
3. Uses permitted through the Conditional Use Permit process. The following conditional uses
may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as per the provisions of §153.070 of
this development code:
A. Commercial facilities incidental to the operation of a use permitted outright.
B. Indoor Recreational Facilities – tennis courts, gymnasiums, swimming pools.
C. Land Filling, not including the dumping of garbage, refuse, or like material.
D. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a use permitted outright.
E. Park projects and/or recreational uses that are not designated improvements in the
Parks and Recreation Master Plan;
4. Height Regulations. None.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 20
5. Lot Requirements and Design. The following lot requirements and design standards shall
be observed.
A. Site and Building Design.
1) Parking lots are located on the subject property in such a manner for
reduced interrupted pedestrian circulation and safety and site appearance.
2) Site entrances shall be oriented towards the street for pedestrian circulation, safety
and crime prevention except if conditions such as lot size, shape, topography or other
circumstances apply to the property.
3) Permanent solid waste containers and receptacles shall be screened away from
public view.
4) Address numbers on buildings shall be oriented towards the street for
clear identification of the building.
5) The property is able to be surveilled from the street for security and safety
wherever possible.
B. Landscaped areas. A minimum 50% of each lot shall be maintained as landscaped area
for any type of development.
6. Off-Street Parking. As required in §153.054 of this development code.
7. Other Required Conditions.
A. All conditional use permits are required to be taken through the site plan review process
as listed in §153.073 of this development code.
B. New development or substantial remodel is subject to the site development standards
and requirements as listed in §153.051, the design and landscaping standards as listed in
§153.055 and the site plan review process as listed in §153.073 of this development
code.
C. All alterations of non-conforming uses or structures are required to be taken through
the review process as described in §153.074 of this development code.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 21
§153.011 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL, OR R-7.5 DISTRICT.
1. Purpose. To encourage, accommodate, maintain and protect a suitable environment for
family living. The R-7.5 District is intended to provide for single-family residential homes at
urban standards in areas with community services.
2. Uses Permitted Outright. The following uses are permitted in the R-7.5 District:
A. Detached Single-family dwellings, including manufactured homes subject to the
applicable requirements of §153.052 of this development code.
B. Duplex on corner lots with 7,500 square feet minimum lot area.
C. Accessory uses are permitted as follows:
1) Rooming and boarding of not more than two persons.
2) Guest houses, not rented or otherwise conducted as a business.
3) Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures
customarily appurtenant to a permitted use.
4) Signs according to §153.053 of this development code.
5) Home occupations subject to the requirements of §153.052 of this development code.
D. Attached single-family dwellings with 3,750 square feet of minimum lot area per
dwelling; provided one dwelling is on a corner lot, and not more than two dwellings are
attached consecutively.
E. Accessory dwellings, subject to all of the following standards:
1) Compliance with the Oregon Structural Specialty Code;
2) The accessory dwelling does not exceed 800 square feet of living area;
3) Not more than one accessory dwelling unit per lot;
4) One off-street parking space provided (i.e., in addition to any off-street parking
required for other uses on the same lot);
5) Exterior siding and roofing must be similar in color, material and appearance to
that used on the primary dwelling. Different siding or roofing may be approved by
the Planning Commission if it finds that the proposed design is more compatible
with surrounding residences;
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 22
6) Utility connections and metering comply with applicable city standards and those
of utility providers.
F. Residential Care Home (as required by ORS 197.665).
G. Residential Care Facilities, subject to the licensing requirements under ORS 197.660-670.
3. Uses permitted through the Conditional Use Permit process. The following conditional uses
may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as per the provisions of §153.070 of
this development code:
A. Any Public Facility as defined in this development code subject to the requirements of
§153.052 (subsection 6, Cemetery, Crematory, Mausoleum, Columbarium; subsection 7,
Churches, Hospitals or Other Religious or Charitable Institutions; subsection 10,
Community Buildings, Social Halls, Lodges, Fraternal Organizations and Clubs;
subsection 22, Nursery School, Kindergarten and Child Care Centers) of this development
code.
B. Planned Unit Developments subject to the provisions of §153.052 of this
development code.
C. Rear lot development subject to Site Plan Approval as provided in §153.073
and partitioning in §153.052 of this development code.
D. Duplexes on an interior lot with a minimum 7,500 square feet, except as permitted
by section 2.C, above.
E. Bed and breakfast establishments consistent with §153.052 of this development code.
4. Height Requirements. No building or structure shall be hereafter erected, enlarged or
structurally altered to exceed a height of 35 feet. For exceptions, see §153.073(3) of
this development code.
5. Lot – Requirements and Design. The following lot requirements and design standards shall
be observed and apply to all new development.
A. Lot Area: Each lot shall have a minimum area of 7,500 square feet, except as per
subsection 2D. A lot for a duplex shall have a minimum area of 7,500 square feet. The
Planning Commission may approve smaller or larger lots as provided by subsection "B"
below. The maximum lot area standard shall not apply to lots of record, as defined by
§153.003, or to lots approved with a shadow plan (future land division plan) according to
§153.003.
B. Lot Area Exception: An exception to the minimum lot area standard in "A" may be
approved as part of a subdivision or partition application when all of the following
standards are met:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 23
1) The average area of all lots and open space tracts created through the subject land
division, excluding required public park land dedications, surface water management
facilities and similar public use areas, shall be no less than 7,500 square feet;
2) As a condition of granting the exception, the city will require the owner to record a deed
restriction with the final plat that prevents the re-division of over-sized lots (e.g., lots
with seven thousand five hundred square feet of area and larger), when such re-division
would violate the average lot size provision in subsection B.1. All lots approved for use
by more than one dwelling shall be so designated on the final plat.
C. Lot Width: Each lot for an attached dwelling shall have a minimum width of 30 feet, each
lot for a detached dwelling shall have a minimum width of 50 feet, except that the lot width
may be reduced further for rear lot developments, in accordance with §153.051 and
§153.072.
D. Front Yard: The front yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. Corner lot
front yard setbacks may have one side less than twenty (20) feet, but must have a minimum
of fifteen (15) feet. The front yard setback may be reduced to ten (10) feet for a covered
porch or enclosed patio.
E. Side Yard: There shall be a minimum side yard of six (6) feet. The portions of buildings or
structures that are above the 15-foot height, measured from ground level must be inset an
additional one-half foot for each foot of height exceeding fifteen (15) feet.
F. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than six (6) feet. The
portions of buildings or structures, which are above the 15-foot height, must be inset an
additional one-half foot for each foot of height exceeding fifteen (15) feet.
G. The required setbacks on one or more of the side or rear yards may be eliminated where
construction of two or more principal uses to be located on adjoining lots is designed to
utilize common wall construction. Any such development shall submit a site plan for
approval pursuant to §153.051 and shall be subject to the following standards:
1) The common wall shall be a firewall and shall be a kind of construction that will ensure
fire protection as per the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the State.
2) Common-wall, single-family structures shall be required to provide a sound transmission
class rating of not less than fifty as per the Uniform building Code as adopted by the
State. The building technique used to achieve the barrier rating shall be the responsibility
of the general contractor and will be accepted upon inspection if it meets the code
requirements and is supported by proof of meeting sound emission controls as specified.
H. Site and Building Design.
1) Site and building design shall meet the requirements listed in §153.055, Design
and Landscaping Standards and the following:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 24
a) Address numbers on buildings are oriented towards the street for clear
identification of the building.
b) Buildings and their entrances shall be oriented towards the street for pedestrian
circulation, safety and crime prevention except if conditions such as lot size, shape,
topography or other circumstances over which the applicant has no control apply to
the property.
2) Building Sites:
a) Size and Shape. The size, shape, width and orientation of building sites shall
be appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated, and shall be
consistent with the residential lot size provisions of the Zoning Code.
b) Through lots and Parcels. Through lots and parcels shall be avoided except where
they are essential to provide separation of residential development from major
arterial or adjacent non-residential activities or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography and orientation.
c) Large Building Sites. In dividing tracts into large lots or parcels which at some
future time are likely to be redivided, the Planning Commission may require that
the blocks be of such size and shape, be so divided into building sites and contain
such site restrictions as will provide for extension and opening of streets at intervals
which will permit a subsequent division of any tract into lots or parcels of smaller
size.
6. Off-Street Parking. Off-Street parking shall be provided as required in §153.054 of
this development code.
7. No more than two (2) dwelling units shall be allowed on a piece of property in this zone.
8. Other Required Conditions.
A. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit the use of vacant property or
prohibit the secondary/accessory use of the subject property for gardening or fruit raising
for subsistence or commercial purposes.
B. §153.052 of this development code, Provisions Applying to Special Uses, shall apply where
applicable.
C. All conditional use permits are required to be taken through the site plan review process as
listed in §153.073 of this development code.
D. New development or substantial remodel of the following is subject to the site development
standards and requirements as listed in §153.051, the design and landscaping standards as
listed in §153.055 and the site plan review process as listed in §153.073 of this
development code.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 25
1) Residential Care Facilities, subject to the licensing requirements under ORS
197.660670.
E. All alterations of non-conforming uses or structures are required to be taken through the
review process as described in §153.074 of this development code.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 26
§153.012 SINGLE-FAMILY & DUPLEX RESIDENTIAL, OR R-5.O DISTRICT.
1. Purpose. To encourage, accommodate, maintain and protect a suitable environment for
family living at urban standards in areas with community services.
2. Uses Permitted Outright. The following uses are permitted in the R-5.0 District:
A. Any Use Permitted Outright in a Single-Family Residential, R-7.5 Zone, subject to
the standards in this section.
B. Attached single-family dwellings with 2,500 square feet minimum lot area, provided
that not more than four dwellings are attached consecutively;
C. Duplex with 5,000 square feet minimum lot area.
D. Christmas Tree Sales Lot subject to the requirements of §153.052 of this
development code.
E. Triplexes with 7,500 square feet minimum lot area.
F. Fourplexes with 10,000 square feet minimum lot area.
G. Residential Care Facilities, subject to the licensing requirements under ORS 197.660-670.
4. Conditional Uses. The following may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as
per §153.070 of this development code:
A. Any Conditional Use permitted in a Single-Family, R-7.5 zone, except as
otherwise provided under subsection 2,"Permitted Uses".
B. Housing for the Elderly or Handicapped subject to the requirements of §153.052 of
this development code.
5. Height Requirements. No building or structure shall be hereafter be erected, enlarged or
structurally altered to exceed a height of 35 feet..For exceptions, see §153.050 of this
development code.
6. Lot - Requirements. The following lot requirements shall be observed.
A. Lot Area: Each lot shall have a minimum area of 5,000 square feet unless otherwise
allowed or required under 2.B, 2.D, 2.E, or 2.F. The Planning Commission may
approve smaller or larger lots as provided by subsection "B" below.
B. Lot Area Exception: An exception to the minimum lot area standard in "A" may
be approved as part of a subdivision or partition application when all of the
following standards are met:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 27
1) The average area of all lots and open space tracts created through the subject land
division, including public parkland dedications and similar public use areas, shall be
no less than 5,000 square feet. The average lot area does not include stormwater
facilities and similar utilities;
[Note: This provision provides an incentive for building on smaller lots when
developments include open space.]
2) As a condition of granting the exception, the city will require the owner to record a
deed restriction with the final plat that prevents the re-division of open space tracts and
oversized lots, when such re-division would violate the average lot size provision in
subsection B.1.
C. Lot Width: Each lot for an attached dwelling shall have a minimum width of thirty (30)
feet, each lot for a detached dwelling shall have a minimum width of fifty (50) feet,
except that the lot width may be reduced further for rear lot developments, in accordance
with §153.072 and §153.052 of this development code.
D. Front Yard: The front yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. Corner lot
front yard setbacks may have one side less than twenty (20) feet, but must have a
minimum of ten (10) feet. The front yard setback may be reduced to ten (10) feet for a
covered porch or enclosed patio.
E. Side Yard: There shall be a minimum side yard setback of five (5) feet, except for
attached dwellings with common walls as provided in "H", below. The portions of
buildings or structures, which are above the 15-foot height, must be inset an additional
one-half foot for each foot of height exceeding fifteen (15) feet.
F. Rear Yard. There shall be a minimum rear yard setback of five (5) feet, except for
attached dwellings with common walls as provided in "H", below. The portions of
buildings or structures, which are above the 15-foot height measured from ground level,
must be inset an additional one-half foot for each foot of height exceeding fifteen (15)
feet.
G. A legally created lot having an area of less than 5,000 square feet of record at the time of
passage of this development code may be occupied by one detached or attached singlefamily
dwelling and its accessory uses provided yard requirements of this section are
observed.
H. The required setbacks on one or more of the side or rear yards may be eliminated
where construction of two or more principal uses to be located on adjoining lots is
designed to
utilize common wall construction. Any such development shall submit a site plan
for approval pursuant to §153.073 of this development code and shall be subject to
the following:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 28
1) The common wall shall be a firewall and shall be a kind of construction that will ensure
fire protection as per the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the State.
2) Common-wall, single-family structures shall be required to provide a sound
transmission class rating of not less than fifty as per the Uniform building Code as
adopted by the State. The building technique used to achieve the barrier rating shall be
the responsibility of the general contractor and will be accepted upon inspection if it
meets the code requirements and is supported by proof of meeting sound emission
controls as specified.
I. Site and Building Design.
1) Site and building design shall meet the requirements listed in §153.055, Design and
Landscaping Standards and the following:
a) Address numbers on buildings are oriented towards the street for clear identification
of the building.
b) Buildings and their entrances shall be oriented towards the street for pedestrian
circulation, safety and crime prevention except if conditions such as lot size, shape,
topography or other circumstances over which the applicant has no control apply to
the property.
c) Vehicle/Pathway Separation for buildings larger than a duplex. Where pathways
are parallel and adjacent to a driveway or street (public or private), they shall be
raised 6 inches and curbed, or separated from the driveway/street by a 5-foot
minimum strip with bollards, a landscape berm, or other physical barrier. If a raised
path is used, the ends of the raised portions must be equipped with curb ramps.
d) Parking lots, for buildings larger than a duplex, are located at the side or rear of (or
under) buildings for reduced interrupted pedestrian circulation and safety and site
appearance.
e) Garages accessed by the alley may be provided for attached housing, duplexes,
triplexes, and fourplexes to reduce the dominance of the garage and automobile
presence on the property, and improve attractive and pedestrian-friendly
streetscapes.
1) Building Sites:
a) Size and Shape. The size, shape, width and orientation of building sites shall
be appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated, and shall be
consistent with the residential lot size provisions of this section.
b) Through lots and Parcels. Through lots and parcels shall be avoided except where
they are essential to provide separation of residential development from major
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 29
arterial or adjacent non-residential activities or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography and orientation.
c) Large Building Sites. In dividing tracts into large lots or parcels which at some
future time are likely to be redivided, the Planning Commission may require that
the blocks be of such size and shape, be so divided into building sites and contain
such site restrictions as will provide for extension and opening of streets at
intervals which will permit a subsequent division of any tract into lots or parcels of
smaller size.
J. For exceptions to lot requirements see §153.050 of this development code.
7. Off-Street Parking. Off-Street parking shall be provided as required in §153.054 of
this development code.
8. Other Required Conditions.
A. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit the use of vacant property or
prohibit the secondary/accessory use of the subject property for gardening or fruit raising
for subsistence or commercial purposes.
B. §153.052 of this development code, Provisions Applying to Special Uses, shall apply
where applicable.
C. All conditional use permits are required to be taken through the site plan review process
as listed in §153.073 of this development code.
D. New development or substantial remodel of the following is subject to the site
development standards and requirements as listed in §153.051, the design and landscaping
standards as listed in §153.055 and the site plan review process as listed in §153.073 of
this development code.
1) Triplexes with 7,500 square feet minimum lot area.
2) Fourplexes with 10,000 square feet minimum lot area.
3) Residential Care Facilities, subject to the licensing requirements under ORS
197.660-670.
E. All alterations of non-conforming uses or structures are required to be taken through the
review process as described in §153.074 of this development code.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 30
§153.013 MULTIPLE USE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT, OR R-O DISTRICT
1. Purpose. This district is intended to provide for high density multiple family developments in
locations close to shopping and services, transportation or public open space, and in
appropriate locations to provide a transitional use area between residential areas and other less
restrictive districts. The allowance of small-scale commercial services and retail is intended to
encourage compatible mixed use development that is transportation-efficient, and enhances the
function of this district.
2. Uses Permitted Outright. The following uses are permitted in the R-0 District:
A. Any Use Permitted Outright in a Single Family and Duplex Residential R-5.0 Zone,
subject to the standards in this R-0 zone.
B. Accessory uses and structures are permitted as follows:
1) Off-street parking lots when appurtenant to a permitted use, subject to the provisions
of §153.054.
2) Necessary and incidental services such as a dining room, barbershop, beauty shop,
hobby shop, etc., included within apartment buildings provided that the facilities
are used by the services rendered to only tenants of the building and their guests.
C. Rooming and boarding houses, including Bed and Breakfast establishments that
are consistent with §153.052 of this development code.
D. Multiple-family dwellings, triplexes, apartment houses and manager's office.
E. Residential Care Facilities, and the licensing requirement in ORS 197.660-670.
4. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a
Conditional Use Permit as per §153.070 of this development code:
A. Any Conditional Use permitted in a Single-Family and Duplex Residential, R-5.0
Zone, except as otherwise provided by subsections 2 & 3, above.
B. Commercial Retail, not exceeding 3,000 square feet per use. All activities and uses shall
be fully enclosed within a building, except that limited outdoor display along the
sidewalk shall be permitted provided that such display does not exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the front building façade and the display does not conflict with Americans with
Disabilities Act requirements.
C. Commercial Services, not to exceed 3,000- square feet per use. All activities and
uses shall be fully enclosed within a building.
D. Residential uses in conjunction with another permitted or conditional use.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 31
E. Nursing Homes/ Housing for the Elderly or Handicapped subject to the requirements
of §153.052 of this development code.
F. Hospital, laboratory, orthopedic supply house, sanitarium, (except animal hospital
and clinic.
G. Pharmacy within 400 feet of a hospital or clinic and containing less than 5,000 square
feet of floor area.
H. Club, lodge and fraternal organizations except those carried on as a business for profit.
I. Manufactured Dwelling Parks subject to the requirements of §153.052 of this
development code.
J. Recreational Vehicle Parks subject to the requirements of §153.052, and the following:
1) Public recreational and accessory uses intermingled with the development.
2) Recreational vehicle storage for use by residents of a Recreational Vehicle
Park development within which the storage facility is located.
K. Mortuaries.
L. Recreational and accessory commercial uses intermingled with a residential
development (including but not limited to ball fields, golf courses, other recreational
uses, and uses accessory to such uses including but not limited to restaurants associated
with such recreational use or uses, club house, driving range, putting greens, pro shop,
meeting facilities, swimming pools, tennis and basketball courts, snack shop, walking
paths and jogging/bike trails).
M. All conditional use permits are required to be taken through the site plan review process
as listed in §153.073 of this development code.
5. Height Requirements. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, enlarged or
structurally altered to exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet. For exceptions, see §153.050
of this development code.
6. Lot - Requirements and Design. The following lot requirements and design standards shall
be observed and apply to all new development.
A. Lot Area: Each lot shall have a minimum area of 1,452 square feet unless otherwise
allowed or required. The residential density standards of subsection B, below, shall
be met.
B. Minimum and maximum residential density: New development shall achieve an overall
density between 8 units per acre and 60 units per acre. Density is calculated by
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 32
dividing the number of dwelling units by the property area in acres (minus area
required for street right-of-way). Decimals are rounded to the nearest whole number.
C. Lot Width:
1) Each lot for an attached dwelling or business shall have a minimum width of
twenty (20) feet;
2) Each lot for a detached dwelling or business shall have a minimum width of fifty
(50) feet;
3) The lot width may be reduced further for rear lot development.
D. If the subject property is located within 500 feet of Central Commercial zoned
property, there shall be no property line setback requirements.
E. Front Yard in all other areas: The front yard setback shall be a minimum of ten (10)
feet. Corner lot front yard setbacks, one side must have a minimum of 10 feet. Front
yard setbacks may be reduced to ten (10) feet for an enclosed porch, portico, or other
architectural feature that is connected directly to a building entrance.
F. Side Yard in all other areas: There shall be a minimum side yard of five (5) feet, except
for common wall dwellings or businesses as provided in "G", below. The portions of
buildings or structures, which are above the 15-foot height, measured from ground level,
must be inset an additional one-half foot for each foot of height exceeding fifteen (15)
feet.
G. Rear Yard in all other areas. There shall be a minimum rear yard of five (5) feet, except
for common wall dwellings as provided in "G", below. The portions of buildings or
structures which are above the 15-foot height must be inset an additional one-half foot
for each foot of height exceeding fifteen (15) feet.
H. The required setbacks on one or more of the side or rear yards may be eliminated
where construction of two or more principal uses to be located on adjoining lots is
designed to utilize common wall construction. Any such development shall submit a
site plan for approval pursuant to §153.051 and shall be subject to the following:
1) The common wall shall be a firewall and shall be a kind of construction that will insure
fire protection as per the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the State.
2) Common-wall, single-family structures shall be required to provide a sound
transmission class rating of not less than fifty as per the Uniform building Code as
adopted by the State. The building technique used to achieve the barrier rating shall be
the responsibility of the general contractor and will be accepted upon inspection if it
meets the code requirements and is supported by proof of meeting sound emission
controls as specified.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 33
I. Site and Building Design.
1) Site and building design shall meet the requirements listed in §153.051, Design and
Landscaping Standards §153.055 and the following:
a) Address numbers on buildings are oriented towards the street for clear identification
of the building.
b) Buildings and their entrances shall be oriented towards the street for pedestrian
circulation, safety and crime prevention except if conditions such as lot size, shape,
topography or other circumstances over which the applicant has no control apply to
the property.
c) Vehicle/Pathway Separation for residential buildings larger than a duplex, and
commercial buildings. Where pathways are parallel and adjacent to a driveway or
street (public or private), they shall be raised 6 inches and curbed, or separated from
the driveway/street by a 5-foot minimum strip with bollards, a landscape berm, or
other physical barrier. If a raised path is used, the ends of the raised portions must
be equipped with curb ramps.
d) Parking lots, for residential buildings larger than a duplex and commercial
buildings, are located at the side or rear of (or under) buildings for reduced
interrupted pedestrian circulation and safety and site appearance.
e) Garages accessed by the alley may be provided for attached housing, duplexes,
triplexes, and fourplexes to reduce the dominance of the garage and automobile
presence on the property, and improve attractive and pedestrian-friendly
streetscapes.
f) Alleys are encouraged in new development. Alleys may be provided under recorded
access easements and do not count against required minimum lot area.
g) Permanent solid waste containers and receptacles shall be screened away
from public view.
h) Address numbers on buildings are oriented towards the street for clear
identification of the building.
i) Pedestrian and Bicycle Access and Circulation
1) Continuous Pathways. The pathway system shall extend throughout the
development site, and connect to all future phases of development,
adjacent trails, public parks and open space areas whenever possible. The
developer may also be required to connect or stub pathway(s) to adjacent
streets and private property, in accordance with the provisions of this
development code.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 34
2) Safe, Direct, and Convenient Pathways. Pathways within developments shall
provide safe, reasonably direct and convenient connections between primary
building entrances, and all adjacent streets.
3) Pathway connectivity. Pathways (for pedestrians and bicycles) shall be
provided at or near mid-block where the block length exceeds the length
required by Street Standard of §153.051. Pathways shall also be provided
where cul-de-sacs or dead-end streets are planned, to connect the ends of
the streets together, to other streets, and/or to other developments as per
Cul-de-Sac standards of §153.051. Pathways used to comply with these
standards shall conform to all of the following criteria:
i) Multi-use pathways (i.e., for pedestrians and bicyclists) are no
less than 6 feet wide and located within a 10 foot right-of-way or
easement that allows access for emergency vehicles;
ii) If surrounding streets are lighted, pathways shall also be
adequately lit.
7. Signs. Signs are allowed per §153.053 of this development code.
8. Off-Street Parking. Off-Street parking shall be provided as required in §153.054, unless the
subject property is located within 500 feet of Central Commercial zoned property and onstreet
parking exists or can be made available on its frontage, in which case, no onsite parking
shall be required.
9. Other Required Conditions.
A. See §153.052, Provisions Applying to Special Uses, where applicable.
B. All activities and uses within the R-O District must be conducted wholly within an
enclosed building, except as provided in Subsection 4(B), above.
C. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit the use of vacant property or prohibit
the secondary/accessory use of the subject property for gardening or fruit raising for
subsistence or commercial purposes.
D. All conditional use permits are required to be taken through the site plan review process as
listed in §153.073 of this development code.
E. New development or substantial remodel of the following is subject to the site
development standards and requirements as listed in S§153.051, the design and
landscaping standards as listed in §153.055 and the site plan review process as listed in
§153.073 of this development code.
1) Multiple-family dwellings, triplexes, apartment houses and manager's office.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 35
2) Residential Care Facilities, and the licensing requirement in ORS 197.660-670.
F. All alterations of non-conforming uses or structures are required to be taken through the
review process as described in §153.074 of this development code.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 36
§153.014 - NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT, OR N-C DISTRICT
1. Purpose. This district is intended to provide for the location of small businesses and services
in residential sections of the City for the convenience of nearby residents; also, to recognize
existing uses of this type within the City. New C-N districts have a maximum area of 40,000
square feet of contiguous land. The businesses are intended to fit into the residential pattern
of development and not create either land use, architectural or traffic conflicts. The above
site sizes for new C-N districts and the following regulations are intended to protect the
residential environment.
2. Uses Permitted Outright. The following uses are permitted in the C-N District:
A. Any Commercial enterprise, provided the floor area of every such use does not
exceed 7,000 square feet, except grocery stores which shall not exceed 10,000 square
feet.
B. Multiple-family dwellings, triplexes, apartment houses and manager's office.
C. Residential Care Homes and Facilities, and the licensing requirement in ORS
197.660-670.
D. Residential uses in conjunction with another permitted use.
E. Accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, such as incidental
storage facilities, are permitted.
F. Bed and Breakfast establishments which are consistent with §153.052 of this
development code.
4. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a
Conditional Use Permit.
A. Any Public Facility as defined in the development code.
B. Planned Unit Developments subject to the provisions of §153.072 of this
development code.
C. Rear Lot Development subject to §153.072 of this development code.
D. Nursing Homes subject to §153.052 of this development code.
E. Recreational and accessory uses (including but not limited to ball fields, golf courses,
other recreational uses, and uses accessory to such uses including but not limited to
restaurants associated with such recreational use or uses, club house, driving range,
putting greens, pro
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 37
shop, meeting facilities, swimming pools, tennis and basketball courts, snack shop,
walking paths and jogging/bike trails).
5. Height Regulations. No building or structure shall be hereafter erected, enlarged or structurally
altered to exceed 45 feet in height. For exceptions, see §153.050 of this development code.
6. Lot Requirements and Design. The following lot requirements and design standards shall
be observed and apply to all new development. Note: Residential uses are required to
comply with all lot requirements of the R-O Zoning District.
A. Lot Area: No minimum requirements. Maximum of 40,000 square feet.
B. Lot Width:
1) Each lot for an attached dwelling or business shall have a minimum width of
twenty (20) feet;
2) Each lot for a detached dwelling or business shall have a minimum width of fifty
(50) feet,
3) The lot width may be reduced further for rear lot development.
C. Lot Depth: No requirements.
D. Front Yard: The front yard setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet. Corner lot front yard
setbacks, one side must have a minimum of 10 feet. Front yard setbacks may be reduced
to ten (10) feet for an enclosed porch, portico, or other architectural feature that is
connected directly to a building entrance.
E. Side Yard: None, except when a side lot line is abutting a lot in an R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O
District, then the side yard shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet. The portions of buildings
or structures along a required side yard which are above the 20 foot height must be inset
an additional one-half foot for each foot of height exceeding 20 feet.
F. Rear Yard: None, except when a rear lot line is abutting a lot in an R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O
District, then the rear yard shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet. The portions of buildings
or structures along a required side yard which are above the 20 foot height must be inset an
additional one-half foot for each foot of height exceeding 20 feet.
G. Site and Building Design.
1) Site and building design shall meet the requirements listed in §153.051, Site
Development Standards, and §153.055, Design and Landscaping Standards, and
the following:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 38
a) Address numbers on buildings are oriented towards the street for clear identification
of the building.
b) Buildings and their entrances shall be oriented towards the street for pedestrian
circulation, safety and crime prevention except if conditions such as lot size, shape,
topography or other circumstances over which the applicant has no control apply to
the property.
c) Vehicle/Pathway Separation for residential buildings larger than a duplex, and
commercial buildings. Where pathways are parallel and adjacent to a driveway or
street (public or private), they shall be raised 6 inches and curbed, or separated from
the driveway/street by a 5-foot minimum strip with bollards, a landscape berm, or
other physical barrier. If a raised path is used, the ends of the raised portions must
be equipped with curb ramps.
d) Parking lots, for residential buildings larger than a duplex and commercial
buildings, are located at the side or rear of (or under) buildings for reduced
interrupted pedestrian circulation and safety and site appearance.
e) Garages accessed by the alley may be provided for attached housing, duplexes,
triplexes, and fourplexes to reduce the dominance of the garage and automobile
presence on the property, and improve attractive and pedestrian-friendly
streetscapes.
f) Alleys are encouraged in new development. Alleys may be provided under recorded
access easements and do not count against required minimum lot area.
g) Permanent solid waste containers and receptacles shall be screened away from
public view.
h) Address numbers on buildings are oriented towards the street for clear identification
of the building.
i) Pedestrian and Bicycle Access and Circulation
1) Continuous Pathways. The pathway system shall extend throughout the
development site, and connect to all future phases of development, adjacent
trails, public parks and open space areas whenever possible. The developer
may also be required to connect or stub pathway(s) to adjacent streets and
private property, in accordance with the provisions of this development
code.
2) Safe, Direct, and Convenient Pathways. Pathways within developments shall
provide safe, reasonably direct and convenient connections between primary
building entrances, and all adjacent streets.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 39
3) Pathway connectivity. Pathways (for pedestrians and bicycles) shall be
provided at or near mid-block where the block length exceeds the length
required by Street Standard of §153.051. Pathways shall also be provided
where cul-de-sacs or dead-end streets are planned, to connect the ends of
the streets together, to other streets, and/or to other developments as per
Cul-de-Sac standards of §153.051. Pathways used to comply with these
standards shall conform to all of the following criteria:
i) Multi-use pathways (i.e., for pedestrians and bicyclists) are no less
than 6 feet wide and located within a 10 foot right-of-way or
easement that allows access for emergency vehicles;
ii) If surrounding streets are lighted, pathways shall also be adequately lit.
7. Signs: As per §153.053 of this development code.
8. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-Street Parking and loading space shall be provided
as required in §153.054 of this development code.
9. Other Required Conditions.
A. No single business shall have a floor area exceeding 7,000 square feet, except
grocery stores.
B. All uses shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, except for offstreet
parking and loading facilities.
C. In any C-N district directly across the street or abutting any R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District,
the parking and loading area shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the street right-ofway.
These areas shall be appropriately landscaped either along the residential street
frontage, side yard or rear yard to protect the character of adjoining and adjacent
residential property. Such landscaping shall be maintained.
D. See §153.052 of this development code, applying to Special Uses where applicable.
E. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit the use of vacant property or
prohibit the secondary/accessory use of the subject property for Urban Farming gardening
or fruit raising for subsistence or commercial purposes.
F. All conditional use permits are required to be taken through the site plan review process
as listed in §153.073 of this development code.
G. New development or substantial remodel is subject to the site development standards and
requirements as listed in §153.051, the design and landscaping standards as listed in
§153.055 and the site plan review process as listed in §153.073 of this development code.
H. All alterations of non-conforming uses or structures are required to be taken through the
review process as described in §153.074 of this development code.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 40
§153.015 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT, OR H-C DISTRICT
1. Purpose. This district is intended to provide for those commercial uses which are appropriate
to major thoroughfare or highway locations, and are dependent upon thoroughfare travel, and
for those establishments that require large land areas.
2. Uses Permitted Outright. The following uses are permitted in the C-H District:
A. Any Commercial enterprise conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
B. Accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, or
approved conditional use, such as incidental storage are permitted.
D. Government Facilities.
E. Rest Stops or Waysides.
F. Urban Farming, gardening, horticulture, field crops, orchards, berries, nursery or flower
stock and other agricultural uses for subsistence or commercial purposes; as described in
Section 23 of this development code.
3. Conditional Use. The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a
Conditional Use Permit as per §153.070.
A. Apartments.
B. A Caretaker’s dwelling, accessory or incidental to a use on the subject property.
C. Manufactured Dwelling Parks subject to the requirements of §153.052.
D. Recreational Vehicle Parks subject to the requirements of §153.052.
4. Height Regulations. No building or structure shall be hereafter erected, enlarged or
structurally altered to exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet. For exceptions, see §153.050 (3).
5. Lot, Site Development and Building Design Requirements. The following lot requirements
and design standards shall be observed and apply to all new development.
A. Building Sites.
1) Size and Shape. The size, shape, width and orientation of building sites shall be
appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated, and shall be
consistent with the lot size provisions as per Site Plan Review.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 41
2) Lot and Parcel Side Lines. The lines of lots and parcels, as far as practicable, shall run
at right angles to the street upon which they face, except that on curved streets they
shall
radial to the curve.
B. Site and Building Design: the following site and building design standards are required.
1) Buildings and their entrances shall be oriented towards the street for pedestrian
circulation, safety and crime prevention except if conditions such as lot size, shape,
topography or other circumstances over which the applicant has no control apply to the
property.
2) Parking, Front Yard. Unless otherwise provided, required parking and loading spaces
may be located in a required front yard where parking and loading may occur in all but
the first ten (10) feet of yard area from any public right-of-way. Parking spaces may be
located within a required side or rear yard.
3) Garages accessed by the alley may be provided for attached housing, duplexes,
triplexes, and fourplexes to reduce the dominance of the garage and automobile
presence on the property, and improve attractive and pedestrian-friendly streetscapes.
4) Alleys are encouraged in new development. Alleys may be provided under recorded
access easements and do not count against required minimum lot area.
5) Permanent solid waste containers and receptacles shall be screened away from public
view.
6) Address numbers on buildings are oriented towards the street for clear identification of
the building.
7) Pedestrian and Bicycle Access and Circulation
a) Continuous Pathways. The pathway system shall extend throughout the
development site, and connect to all future phases of development, adjacent trails,
public parks and open space areas whenever possible. The developer may also be
required to connect or stub pathway(s) to adjacent streets and private property, in
accordance with the provisions of this development code.
b) Safe, Direct, and Convenient Pathways. Pathways within developments shall
provide safe, reasonably direct and convenient connections between primary
building entrances, and all adjacent streets.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 42
c) Pathway connectivity. Pathways (for pedestrians and bicycles) shall be provided at
or near mid-block where the block length exceeds the length required by Street
Standard of Secti§153.051 on 22. Pathways shall also be provided where cul-desacs
or dead-end streets are planned, to connect the ends of the streets together, to other
streets, and/or to other developments as per Cul-de-Sac standards of §153.051.
Pathways used to comply with these standards shall conform to all of the following
criteria:
1. Multi-use pathways (i.e., for pedestrians and bicyclists) are no less than 6 feet
wide and located within a 10 foot right-of-way or easement that allows access
for emergency vehicles;
2. If surrounding streets are lighted, pathways shall also be adequately lit.
6. Signs: As per §153.053.
7. Access Requirements. Access requirements will be determined on the basis of the Traffic
Capacity Analysis as peer §153.051, and the City of Tillamook City Transportation System
Plan.
8. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-Street Parking and loading space shall be provided as
required in §153.054.
9. Other Required Conditions.
A. All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise display on property
abutting or across the street from a lot in an R-7.5, R-5.0, or R-O District, shall be
conducted wholly within an enclosed building unless screened from the "R" District by a
sight-obscuring fence or wall not less than six (6) feet nor more than eight (8) feet in height.
Said fence or wall shall not extend into a required front yard area.
B. Motor vehicle, boat, or trailer rental, sales or storage lot shall be drained and surfaced with
rock or pavement, except in those portions of the lot maintained as landscaped areas.
C. Solid waste containers and receptacles shall be screened and away from public view.
D. Separate stores, shops, businesses, offices or establishments owned and/or operated
separately which are parts of shopping mall or shopping center concept or complex may
only contain permitted uses as defined in this section.
E. The emission of disturbing vibrations or of unpleasant odorous gases or matter in such
quantity or at such amplitude as to be readily detectable at any point beyond the property
line of the use creating the vibrations or odors is prohibited.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 43
F. All uses in the C-H District shall be carried on in such a manner that they do not create
smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound, vibration, soot, heat, glare, or lighting to a degree which might
be obnoxious or offensive to persons residing in or conducting business in this or any other
district.
G. All conditional use permits are required to be taken through the site plan review process as
listed in §153.073 of this development code.
H. New development or substantial remodel is subject to the site development standards and
requirements as listed in §153.051, the design and landscaping standards as listed in
§153.055 and the site plan review process as listed in §153.073 of this development code.
I. All alterations of non-conforming uses or structures are required to be taken through the
review process as described in §153.074 of this development code.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 44
§153.016 CENTRAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT, OR C-C DISTRICT
1. Purpose. This district is intended to serve as the central trading area for the City and
surrounding urbanized areas.
2. Uses Permitted Outright. The following uses are permitted in the C-C District:
A. Any Commercial enterprise conducted in accordance with the provisions of this
Section.
B. Accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted or approved
conditional use, such as incidental storage, are permitted.
C. Secondary residential uses.
D. Light fabrication and assembly processing businesses that have a retail component and
that follow the uses permitted outright in Section 153.014 (2) (A) & (B) which do not Use
Permit. generate noise, odor, vibration, dust, or hazard outside of the property.
3. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional A.
Any public facility.
B. Housing for the elderly or handicapped person subject to §153.052. 13 of this development
code.
C. Circuses, Carnivals, Animal Rides, Animal Displays, Amusement Rides, Flea Markets,
Christmas Tree Lots subject to §153.052 of this Code.
D. Cemetery, Crematory, Mausoleum, or Columbarium subject to §153.052 of this Code.
E. Bed and Breakfast establishments which are consistent with §153.073 .14.
4. Height Regulations. No building or structure shall be hereafter erected, enlarged or structurally
altered to exceed a height of 100 feet. For exceptions, see §153.050.
5. Lot, Site Development and Building Design Requirements. The following lot requirements and
design standards shall be observed and apply to all new development. A. Lot Area: No
requirements.
B. Lot Width: No requirements.
C. Lot Depth: No requirements.
D. Front Yard: None, except on corners where the setback shall be ten (10) feet.
E. Side Yard: None, except when a side lot line is abutting a R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 45
Then the side yard shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet. The required side yard shall be
increased by one-half (1/2) foot for each foot exceeding 35 feet of building height.
F. Rear Yard: None, except when a rear lot line is abutting a R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District.
Then the side yard shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet. The required rear yard shall be
increased by one-half (1/2) foot for each foot exceeding 35 feet of building height.
G. Site and Building Design: the following site and building design standards are required.
1. Buildings and their entrances shall be oriented towards the street for pedestrian
circulation, safety and crime prevention except if conditions such as lot size, shape,
topography or other circumstances over which the applicant has no control apply to the
property.
2. Parking lots are located at the side or rear of (or under) buildings for reduced interrupted
pedestrian circulation and safety and site appearance.
3. Garages accessed by the alley may be provided for attached housing, duplexes,
triplexes, and fourplexes to reduce the dominance of the garage and automobile
presence on the property, and improve attractive and pedestrian-friendly streetscapes.
4. Alleys are encouraged in new development. Alleys may be provided under recorded
access easements and do not count against required minimum lot area.
5. Permanent solid waste containers and receptacles shall be screened away from public
view.
6. Address numbers on buildings are oriented towards the street for clear identification of
the building.
7. Building Sites.
a) Size and Shape. The size, shape, width and orientation of building sites shall be
appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated, and shall be
consistent with the residential lot size provisions of the Zoning Code.
b) Lot and Parcel Side Lines. The lines of lots and parcels, as far as practicable, shall
run at right angles to the street upon which they face, except that on curved streets
they shall radial to the curve.
c) Large Building Sites. In dividing tracts into large lots or parcels which at some
future time are likely to be redivided, the Planning Commission may require that the
blocks be of such size and shape, be so divided into building sites and contain such
site restrictions as will provide for extension and opening of streets at intervals
which will permit a subsequent division of any tract into lots or parcels of smaller
size.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 46
8. Pedestrian and Bicycle Access and Circulation
a) Continuous Pathways. The pathway system shall extend throughout the
development site, and connect to all future phases of development, adjacent trails,
public parks and open space areas whenever possible. The developer may also be
required to connect or stub pathway(s) to adjacent streets and private property, in
accordance with the provisions of this Code.
b) Safe, Direct, and Convenient Pathways. Pathways within developments shall
provide safe, reasonably direct and convenient connections between primary
building entrances, and all adjacent streets.
c) Pathway connectivity. Pathways (for pedestrians and bicycles) shall be provided at
or near mid-block where the block length exceeds the length required by Street
Standard of §153.051. Pathways shall also be provided where cul-de-sacs or
deadend streets are planned, to connect the ends of the streets together, to other
streets, and/or to other developments as per Cul-de-Sac standards of §153.051.
Pathways used to comply with these standards shall conform to all of the following
criteria:
9. Multi-use pathways (i.e., for pedestrians and bicyclists) are no less than 6 feet wide and
located within a 10 foot right-of-way or easement that allows access for emergency
vehicles;
10. If surrounding streets are lighted, pathways shall also be adequately lit;
H. Lot Coverage: No requirements, only that all other lot and parking requirements are met.
6. Signs: Permitted as per §153.053.
7. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-Street Parking and loading spaces or an equivalent as
accepted by the Planning Commission shall be provided as required in §153.054.
Exception: The parking and loading requirements shall be exempted from the
area contained by the C-4 District below.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 47
9. Other Required Conditions.
A. All uses, excepting automobile, truck, trailer and boat sales, car washes, automobile
service stations and drive-up windows shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed
building.
B. In any C-C district directly across the street or abutting any R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District,
the parking and loading area shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the street rightofway.
These areas shall be appropriately landscaped either along the residential street
frontage, side yard or rear yard to protect the character of adjoining and adjacent
residential property. Such landscaping shall be maintained.
C. Site Plan Review as per §153.073.
D. The emission of disturbing vibrations or of unpleasant odorous gases or matter in such
quantity or at such amplitude as to be readily detectable at any point beyond the
property line of the use creating the vibrations or odors is prohibited.
E. All uses in the C-C District shall be carried on in such a manner that they do not create
smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound, vibration, soot, heat, glare, or lighting to a degree which
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 48
might be obnoxious or offensive to persons residing in or conducting business in this or any
other district.
F. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit the use of vacant property or
secondary/accessory use of the subject property for Urban Farming for subsistence or
commercial uses. Also see §153.052 of this Code, applying to Special Uses where
Applicable.
G. All conditional use permits are required to be taken through the site plan review process as
listed in §153.073 of this development code.
H. New development or substantial remodel is subject to the site development standards and
requirements as listed in §153.051, the design and landscaping standards as listed in
§153.055 and the site plan review process as listed in §153.073 of this development code. I.
All alterations of non-conforming uses or structures are required to be taken through
the review process as described in §153.074 of this development code.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 49
§153.017 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT, OR L-I DISTRICT
1. Purpose. This district is intended to provide for those heavier commercial and light industrial
uses, high tech processing and assembly, warehousing, related office and research facilities as
well as small scale cottage industries located in existing built-up areas of the City.
2. Uses Permitted Outright. The following uses are permitted in the I-L District.
A. Commercial activities (as listed below):
1. Building/Landscaping material sales and supplies including lumber yards, nurseries,
and greenhouses;
2. Special Trade Contractor facilities for plumbing, roofing, sheet metal, electrical, heating
and air conditioning, tents and awnings, cabinet and carpentry, and similar construction
and construction related activities. This includes the establishment of a sales office,
storage of equipment and materials, and fabrication and repair for the special trade;
3. Automobile sales and service station, including towing services and vehicle washing
and polishing facilities;
4. New and used automobile, truck, motorcycle, trailer, recreational vehicle, agricultural
vehicle, mobile home, industrial equipment and boat sales, services and storage;
5. Retail tire sales and tire recapping, service and repair, painting and body shop;
6. Bulk cleaning and laundry plants and services;
7. Feed and seed stores, and wholesale distribution facilities;
8. Welding shop, blacksmith;
9. Mini-storage with a maximum storage unit size of 1,000 square feet
B. Any light industrial use conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Section. These
uses include:
1. Cabinet shops;
1. Custom manufacturing – ceramic studios, candle-making shops or custom jewelry
manufacture;
2. Machine shops;
3. Manufacturing, assembly, testing, research and repair of components, devices,
equipment, and systems of an electronic or electromechanical nature and precision
equipment;
4. Manufacturing, compounding, bottling, processing packaging, or treatment of food and
beverage products;
5. Manufacturing, compounding, processing, printing, assembling, packaging, treatment
or fabrcation, or such facilities to include cosmetics, drugs, glass, leather, paint,
ceramics, paper, perfume, plaster, plastics, stone, textiles, rubber, wood, metal products
and chemicals;
6. Freight terminals, including moving and storage, warehouse for short term storage,
including mini-warehouse and cold storage
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 50
7. Wholesaling, storage and distribution such as RV storage, household storage
and personal storage.
C. Accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted or conditional
use, such as:
1. Incidental storage, garages, sheds for storage.
2. Dwelling units for caretakers and night watchmen are permitted as accessory uses
when incidental to a permitted use.
3. Single-Family (attached or detached) dwellings, Multi-family dwellings, for
permanent live/work conditions, with either a use permitted through a site plan review
or a use permitted as a conditional use.
D. Urban Farming, gardening, horticulture , field crops, orchards, berries, nursery or
flower stock and other agricultural uses for subsistence or commercial purposes; as
described in §153.052 of this development code.
3. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a
Conditional Use Permit.
A. Any Public Facility as defined in this Code subject to the requirements of §153.052
(including subsection 3, Cemetery, Crematory, Mausoleum, Columbarium; subsection 5,
Circuses, Carnivals, Animal Rides, Animal Displays, Amusement Rides, Flea Markets,
Christmas Tree Lots; subsection 10, Nursery School, Kindergarten and Child Care
Centers) of this Code.
B. Communication Services and facilities including wireless communication facilities (as
listed in §153.052, Provisions Applying to Special Uses. C. Professional or
Business service establishment.
D. Retail sales establishment.
4. Height Regulations. No building or structure shall be hereafter erected, enlarged or
structurally altered to exceed a height of 45 feet. For exceptions, see §153.050 of this
development code.
5. Lot Requirements. The following lot requirements shall be observed: A. Minimum Lot Area:
5,000 square feet.
B. Minimum Lot Width: 50 feet.
C. Lot Depth: Each lot shall have a minimum depth of 100 feet.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 51
D. Front Yard: None, except when a side lot line is abutting a lot in an R-7.5, R-5.0 or RO
District, then the front yard shall be the front yard required in the abutting "R"
District.
E. Side Yard: None, except when a side lot line is abutting a R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District,
then the side yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet. The portions of buildings or
structures along a required side yard which are above the 20 foot height must be inset
an additional one-half foot for each foot of height exceeding 20 feet.
F. Rear Yard: None, except when a rear lot line is abutting a R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District.
then the rear yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet. The portions of buildings or
structures along a required rear yard which are above the 20 foot height must be inset
an additional one-half foot for each foot of height exceeding 20 feet.
G. Lot Coverage: No requirements.
H. Site and Building Design: the following site and building design standards are required.
1. Buildings and their entrances shall be oriented towards the street for pedestrian
circulation, safety and crime prevention except if the entrance and opening to
structures on sides adjacent to or across the street from an R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District
cause glare, excessive noise or similar conditions and have an adverse effect on
property in the R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District.
2. Garages accessed by the alley may be provided to reduce the dominance of the garage
and automobile presence on the property, and improve attractive and pedestrianfriendly
streetscapes.
3. Alleys are encouraged in new development. Alleys may be provided under
recorded access easements and do not count against required minimum lot area.
4. Permanent solid waste containers and receptacles shall be screened away from
public view.
5. Address numbers on buildings are oriented towards the street for clear identification
of the building.
6. Building Sites.
a) Size and Shape. The size, shape, width and orientation of building sites shall
be appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated, and shall be
consistent with the lot size provisions as per Site Plan Review.
b) Lot and Parcel Side Lines. The lines of lots and parcels, as far as practicable, shall
run at right angles to the street upon which they face, except that on curved streets
they shall radial to the curve.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 52
6. Signs: Permitted as per §153.053.
7. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-Street Parking and loading space shall be provided
as required in §153.054.
8. Other Required Conditions.
A. All business, service, repair, processing, manufacturing, compounding, assembling,
packaging, treatment, fabrication, bottling, packaging, storage or merchandise display
on property abutting or across the street from a lot in a R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District
shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building unless screened from the "R"
District by a sight-obscuring fence or wall.
B. Opening to structures on sides abutting to or across the street from a lot in a R-7.5, R-5.0
or R-O District shall be prohibited if such access or openings will cause glare, excessive
noise or similar conditions so as to have an adverse effect on property in the R-7.5, R-5.0
or R-O District.
C. Motor vehicle, boat, or trailer rental, sales or storage lot shall be drained and surfaced
with rock or pavement except in those portions of the lot maintained as landscaped areas.
D. In an I-L District directly across the street from a lot in a R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District,
the parking and loading area and outdoor display or storage areas shall be set back at
least ten (10) feet from the right-of-way, and said areas shall be appropriately landscaped
along the residential street frontage to protect the character of the adjoining residential
property. Such landscaping shall be maintained.
E. Access point from a public road to properties in an I-L District shall be so located as
to minimize traffic congestion and to avoid directing traffic onto local access streets
of a primarily residential character.
F. All materials, including wastes, shall be stored and all grounds shall be maintained in a
manner which will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or create health
or fire hazards.
G. The emission of disturbing vibrations or of unpleasant odorous gases or matter in such
quantity or at such amplitude as to be readily detectable at any point beyond the
property line of the use creating the vibrations or odors is prohibited.
H. All uses in the I-L District shall be carried on in such a manner that they do not create
smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound, vibration, soot, heat, glare, or lighting to a degree which
might be obnoxious or offensive to persons residing in or conducting business in this or
any other district.
I. See §153.052 applying to Special Uses where applicable.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 53
J. All conditional use permits are required to be taken through the site plan review process as
listed in §153.073 of this development code.
K. New development or substantial remodel is subject to the site development standards and
requirements as listed in §153.051, the design and landscaping standards as listed in
§153.055 and the site plan review process as listed in §153.073 of this development code.
L. All alterations of non-conforming uses or structures are required to be taken through the
review process as described in §153.074 of this development code.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 54
§153.018 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT, OR G-I DISTRICT
1. Purpose. This district is intended to provide for the establishment of light and heavier industrial
uses essential to the development of a balanced economic base in an industrial environment
with a minimum conflict between industrial uses and residential and light commercial uses.
2. Uses permitted outright. The following uses are permitted in the I-G District:
A. Any outright permitted use in a Light Industrial, I-L Zone and conducted in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
B. Any accessory use permitted in a Light Industrial Zone is permitted when accessory to a
permitted use or an approved conditional use.
C. Automotive and Equipment: Automotive Wrecking Yard;
D. Automotive and Equipment: Repairs, Heavy Equipment – Truck Transmission Shops, Body
Shops or Motor Freight Maintenance Groups;
E. Automotive and Equipment: Sales/Rentals, Heavy Equipment – Aircraft Dealers, Boat
Dealers, or Heavy Construction Equipment Dealers;
F. General Industrial – manufacturing, compounding, processing, publishing, assembling,
packaging, treatment or fabrication of materials and property, cabinet shops, textiles and
metal fabrication;
G. Heavy Industrial – Processing of Raw Materials and Tannery;
H. Scrap Operations – Junk Yards, Paper Salvage Yards, Auto Salvage Yards or Appliance
Salvage Yards;
I. Solid Waste Transfer Facility or Recycling Depots;
J. Wholesaling, Storage and Distribution: Heavy – Monument or Stone Yards, Grain
Elevators, Open Storage Yards or Petroleum Storage Facilities;
K. Wholesaling, Storage and Distribution: Storage in Association with an Authorized
Manufacturing Operation.
3. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional
Use Permit as per §153.070.
A. Any public facility, including those listed in §153.019 of this Code.
B. Any commercial service or commercial retail use not exceeding 3,000 square feet of gross
floor area that is part of a mixed use with any other permitted or conditional use identified in
this section provided that the uses are demonstrated to meet both of the following conditions
and the criteria listed in §153.070 of this Code:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 55
1. compatible with other uses on the proposed site; and
2. compatible with other existing or planned adjacent uses.
C. Communication Services and facilities including wireless communication facilities (as
listed in §153.052, Provisions Applying to Special Uses.
4. Height Regulations. No building or structure shall be hereafter erected, enlarged or structurally
altered to exceed a height of 100 feet. For exceptions, see §153.017 (4D), §153.050 and
§153.070.
5. Lot Requirements. The following lot requirements shall be observed: A. Minimum Lot Area:
5,000 square feet.
B. Minimum Lot Width: 50 feet.
C. Lot Depth: Each lot shall have a minimum depth of 100 feet.
D. Front Yard: None, except when a front lot line is abutting a lot in an R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O
District, then the front yard shall be the front yard required in the abutting "R" District.
E. Side Yard: None, except when a side lot line is abutting a lot in an R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O
District, then the side yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet. The portions of buildings or
structures along a required side yard which are above the 20 foot height must be inset an
additional one-half foot for each foot of height exceeding 20 feet.
D. Rear Yard: None, except when a rear lot line is abutting a lot in an R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O
District, then the rear yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet. The portions of buildings or
structures along a required rear yard which are above the 20 foot height must be inset an
additional one-half foot for each foot of height exceeding 20 feet. E. Lot Coverage: No
requirements.
F. Site and Building Design: the following site and building design standards are required.
1) Buildings and their entrances shall be oriented towards the street for pedestrian
circulation, safety and crime prevention except if the entrance and opening to structures
on sides adjacent to or across the street from an R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District if such
access or openings cause glare, excessive noise or similar conditions and have an
adverse effect on property in the R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District.
2) Alleys are encouraged in new development. Alleys may be provided under recorded
access easements and do not count against required minimum lot area.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 56
3) Permanent solid waste containers and receptacles shall be screened away from
public view.
4) Address numbers on buildings are oriented towards the street for clear identification
of the building.
5) Building Sites.
D. Size and Shape. The size, shape, width and orientation of building sites shall
be appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated, and shall be
consistent with the lot size provisions as per Site Plan Review.
E. Lot and Parcel Side Lines. The lines of lots and parcels, as far as practicable,
shall run at right angles to the street upon which they face, except that on
curved streets they shall radial to the curve.
6. Signs: Permitted as per §153.053.
7. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-Street Parking and loading space shall be provided
as required in §153.054.
8. Other Required Conditions.
A. All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise display on property
abutting or across the street from a lot in a R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District shall be conducted
wholly within an enclosed building unless screened from the R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District
by a sight-obscuring fence or wall.
B. Opening to structures on sides adjacent to or across the street from an R-7.5, R-5.0 or RO
District shall be prohibited if such access or openings will cause glare, excessive noise
or similar conditions so as to have an adverse effect on property in the R-7.5, R-5.0 or RO
District.
C. Motor vehicle, boat, or trailer rental, sales or storage lot shall be drained and surfaced
with rock or pavement except in those portions of the lot maintained as landscaped areas.
The above listed along the frontage, side and rear yard (rear yard where applicable), shall
use landscaping to protect and maintain the character of the adjoining property and
frontage area. Such landscaping shall be maintained.
D. In any I-G District directly across the street from or abutting a R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O
District, the parking and loading area and outdoor display or storage areas shall be set
back at least ten (10) feet from the right-of-way, and said areas shall be appropriately
landscaped along the residential street frontage and side yards, to protect the character of
the adjoining residential property. Such landscaping shall be maintained.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 57
E. Access point from a public road to properties in an I-G District shall be located as to
minimize traffic congestion and to avoid directing traffic onto local access streets of a
primarily residential character. See Site Plan Criteria as per §153.073.
F. All materials, including wastes, shall be stored and all grounds shall be maintained in a
manner which will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or create health or
fire hazards.
G. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit the use of vacant property or prohibit
the secondary/accessory use of the subject property for Urban Farming for subsistence or
commercial purposes.
H. See §153.052 applying to Special Uses where applicable.
I. All conditional use permits are required to be taken through the site plan review process as
listed in §153.073 of this development code.
J. New development or substantial remodel is subject to the site development standards and
requirements as listed in §153.051, the design and landscaping standards as listed in
§153.055 and the site plan review process as listed in §153.073 of this development code.
K. All alterations of non-conforming uses or structures are required to be taken through the
review process as described in §153.074 of this development code.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 58
§153.019 PUBLIC & SEMI-PUBLIC OR P & S-P DISTRICT
1. Purpose. To recognize existing public facility land use and areas for those uses which generate
large public gatherings, and to provide for the development of public facility services and other
public-oriented uses.
2. Permitted Uses. The following uses listed below are permitted in the P & S-P District:
A. Fairgrounds
B. Granges, fraternal organizations' meeting halls
C. Public/semi-public schools (including colleges)
D. Churches
E. Parks
F. City, county and state school offices
G. Public/semi-public convention centers
H. Maintenance and operation of existing structures
I. Accessory uses/Accessory Structure customarily appurtenant to a permitted or approved
conditional use.
J. Urban Farming, gardening, horticulture, field crops, orchards, berries, nursery or
flower stock and other agricultural uses for subsistence or commercial purposes; as
described in Section 23 of this development code.
3. Conditional Uses. The following Conditional Uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional
use permit.
A. Public offices, including outdoor storage and maintenance facilities.
B. Motor and non-motorized race track and/or events, and similar uses
C. Utility substations
D. Water and sewer pumping facilities
E. Golf courses, including miniature golf
F. Public Facilities (as defined in §153.003 of this development code)
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 59
4. Dimensional Standards.
A. Height Regulations. None.
B. Lot Requirements. None.
5. Development Standards.
A. Off-street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking in the P & S-P District shall conform
to the standards and criteria as set in §153.054 of this development code. Surfaced
parking areas shall not be required for short-term uses that generate large parking
requirements and shall meet the standards set in “D”, Site and Building Design, below.
B. Signs. Signs in the P & S-P District shall conform to the standards and criteria as per set
in §153.053 of this development code.
C. Design Review, Site and General Development. All new development or expansion of
an existing structure or use in the P & S-P shall be subject to the standards and criteria
as set in §153.051 and §153.055 of this development code.
D. Site and Building Design: the following site and building design standards are required.
1. Buildings and their entrances shall be oriented towards the street for pedestrian
circulation, safety and crime prevention except if conditions such as lot size, shape,
topography or other circumstances over which the applicant has no control apply to the
property.
2. Parking lots are located at the side or rear of (or under) buildings for reduced
interrupted pedestrian circulation and safety and site appearance.
3. Garages accessed by the alley may be provided to reduce the dominance of the garage
and automobile presence on the property, and improve attractive and pedestrianfriendly
streetscapes.
4. Alleys are encouraged in new development. Alleys may be provided under
recorded access easements and do not count against required minimum lot area.
5. Permanent solid waste containers and receptacles shall be screened away from public
view.
6. Address numbers on buildings are oriented towards the street for clear identification
of the building.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 60
7. Building Sites.
a) Size and Shape. The size, shape, width and orientation of building sites shall be
appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated, and shall be
consistent with the lot size provisions as per site plan review.
b) Lot and Parcel Side Lines. The lines of lots and parcels, as far as practicable, shall
run at right angles to the street upon which they face, except that on curved streets
they shall radial to the curve.
8. Pedestrian and Bicycle Access and Circulation
a) Continuous Pathways. The pathway system shall extend throughout the
development site, and connect to all future phases of development, adjacent trails,
public parks and open space areas whenever possible. The developer may also be
required to connect or stub pathway(s) to adjacent streets and private property, in
accordance with the provisions of this development code.
b) Safe, Direct, and Convenient Pathways. Pathways within developments shall
provide safe, reasonably direct and convenient connections between primary
building entrances, and all adjacent streets.
c) Pathway connectivity. Pathways (for pedestrians and bicycles) shall be provided at
or near mid-block where the block length exceeds the length required by Street
Standard of §153.051. Pathways shall also be provided where cul-de-sacs or
deadend streets are planned, to connect the ends of the streets together, to other
streets, and/or to other developments as per Cul-de-Sac standards of §153.051.
Pathways used to comply with these standards shall conform to all of the following
criteria:
1.Multi-use pathways (i.e., for pedestrians and bicyclists) are no less than 6 feet
wide and located within a 10 foot right-of-way or easement that allows access
for emergency vehicles;
2.If surrounding streets are lighted, pathways shall also be adequately lit.
E. Access Requirements and Management. Access requirements and management will be
determined on the basis of the Traffic Capacity Analysis as per, access management
standards as per §153.051 and the City of Tillamook Transportation System Plan.
F. Land Divisions. All partitioning, subdividing and planned unit development shall be
subject to the procedures, standards and criteria as set in §153.072 of this development
code.
1. Large Building Sites. In dividing tracts into large lots or parcels which at some future
time are likely to be re-divided, the Planning Commission may require that the blocks
be of such size and shape, be so divided into building sites and contain such site
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 61
restrictions as will provide for extension and opening of streets at intervals which will
permit a subsequent division of any tract into lots or parcels of smaller size.
9. Other Required Conditions.
A. All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise display on property
abutting or across the street from a lot in a R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District shall be conducted
behind appropriate sight screening.
B. Motor vehicle, boat, or trailer storage lots shall be drained and surfaced with rock or
pavement except in those portions of the lot maintained as landscaped areas.
C. All uses in the Public & Semi-Public District shall be carried on in such a manner that they
do not create smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound, vibration, soot, heat, glare, or lighting to a
degree which might be obnoxious or offensive.
D. All conditional use permits are required to be taken through the site plan review process as
listed in §153.073 of this development code.
E. New development or substantial remodel is subject to the site development standards and
requirements as listed in §153.051, the design and landscaping standards as listed in
§153.055 and the site plan review process as listed in §153.073 of this development code.
F. All alterations of non-conforming uses or structures are required to be taken through the
review process as described in §153.074 of this development code.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 62
§153.020 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT OR PUD DISTRICT
A. Purpose. To encourage development of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) District as
planned building groups by making possible greater variety, functionality, and
diversification in the location and orientation of buildings and open spaces. It is further
the purpose of Planned Unit Developments to serve at least three of the following
purposes listed in §153.072.6.B of the City Code of Ordinances
B. Application Requirements. The application for planned unit development approval are
listed in §153.072.6.B of the City Code of Ordinances.
C. PUD application.
1. Applicability of Planned Unit Development Regulations. The requirements for a
Planned Unit Development set forth in this Section are in addition to the conditional
use procedures and standards of §153.070.
2. PUD Review Procedures/Approval Process. Planned developments will be reviewed
in two phases: a preliminary development plan phase and a final development plan
phase. §153.072.6.C.2 of the City Code of Ordinances describes the review and
approval process. Pre-application review of the project before these phases is
required. No building or other permit shall be issued for such development or part
thereof until the Planning Commission has approved said development.
3. Findings for Project Approval. The Planning Commission shall approve a Planned
Unit Development only if it finds that the Planned Unit Development will satisfy the
criteria of 153.072.6.C.3 of the City Code of Ordinances.
4. Potential Uses allowed in the PUD District. The following uses are allowed in the
PUD District if the Planning Commission considers them appropriate for the
particular development being proposed and if other applicable standards are satisfied:
Uses Permitted: The following are uses permitted in the Planned Unit Development District:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 63
LAND USE COMMENTS & REFERENCES
Accessory Dwelling
Accessory Structure Includes sheds, storage buildings, residential
garages
Apartments Called “Multi-family dwellings/Complexes”
Appliance & Computer Repair Including stereos, electronic equip., residential
appliances
Beauty/Barber Shops & Salons
Bed & Breakfast
Bicycle Sales &Service
Café, Restaurant (sit-down), Diner
Caretaker, Watchman living on-site
Child Care & Day Nursery
Church, Religious Institution
Complex, Multi-family (over 4 dwellings) 30% parking reduction for senior facilities
Condominium State regulated
Driving Range
Drug Store, Pharmacy
Dwelling, Duplex
Dwelling, Multi-family (incl. 3 & 4 plex)
Dwelling, Single family
Equestrian facilities Subject to CCT Section 153.052
Feed Store, Agriculture supplies Only as part of an equestrian facility
Florist
Gallery, Studio
General Retail
Gift/Card Shop
Golf Course
Greenhouse
Grocery Store, Deli, Market
Gymnasium, Fitness Center, Spa
Hardware
Indoor Commercial Recreation
Lodge, Club, Non-Profit/ Fraternal
Organization
Miniature Golf, “Pitch & Putt”
Novelty, Specialty, Variety Including music/art, electronic equip., sporting
goods
Office
Outdoor Commercial Recreation
Park (public or private) Playgrounds, recreation centers, pools, etc.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 64
Parking Garage (private) Private only: common area maintained by HOA
Pet Shop
Plant Nursery
Printing/Copying Shop
Public Transportation Station
Residential Use other than Ground Floor
Residential Care Facility Only permitted where Multi-family residents are
allowed
Residential Care Home Only permitted where Single-family residents are
allowed
RV Park (public or private)
RV Storage For residential use only; HOA maintenance
required
Schools (public or private
Single Family Manufactured Home
Stable (public or private)
Townhouse
Utility Facility
a. Industrial uses such as small-scale live-work industries supported mainly by residents of the
planned development when such industrial uses are contained in a structure onsite and
require an area no larger than five (5) percent of the area devoted to residential uses;
b. Residential/Commercial mixed use developments;
c. Urban Farming, Gardening, Animal Husbandry (meeting the requirements listed in
153.052);
d. Accessory Uses in the Planned Unit Development District. In addition to the accessory uses
typical of the primary uses authorized, accessory uses approved as a part of the Planned Unit
Development District may include the following uses:
1. Golf courses;
2. Private park, lake or waterway;
3. Recreation area (including trails);
4. Recreation building, club house or social hall;
5. Other accessory structures which the Planning Commission finds are designed to serve
primarily the tenants of the Planned Unit Development, and are compatible to the design
of the Planned Unit Development.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 65
5. Density. Generally the density shall be 35 units per acre. The gross area of the PUD
shall be used (total area including street dedications) to calculate the density of the
PUD District. Areas of common use may be included in calculating allowable
density.
6. Deviations to be authorized. The Planning Commission may authorize the design and
approval of PUD's which deviate from the strict standards of this Code. The deviations
shall be limited to the limitations, restrictions and design standards listed in
§153.072.6.C.7 of the City Code of Ordinances.
7. Dimensional and Bulk Standards apply as listed in §153.072.6.C.8 of the City Code
of Ordinances.
8. Common Areas. In the PUD District, 25 percent of the total land area shall be
devoted to open space, in the form of yards, buffers, setbacks, common open areas, or
recreational facilities. A portion of this area shall be common or shared open space.
The open space requirements are listed in §153.072.6.C.9 of the City Code of
Ordinances. The Planning Commission may increase or decrease the open space
requirements depending on the particular site and the needs of the development.
9. Transportation. The requirements for transportation listed in §153.072.6.C.10 of the
City Code of Ordinances shall apply in the PUD District.
10. Signs. All signs larger than eight (8) square feet within a planned development are
subject to approval of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall
consider each such sign on its merits based on the aesthetic impact on the area,
potential traffic hazards, and the need for the sign.
11. Compatibility with Adjacent Development. If topographical or other barriers near the
perimeter of the development do not provide reasonable privacy for existing uses
adjacent to the development, the Planning Commission shall require buildings in the
planned development to be setback an adequate distance, as determined by the
Planning Commission, from the perimeter and/or require an attractively designed and
maintained buffer in the form of vegetation, fencing, walls, and/or berms.
12. Utility Easements. Easements necessary for the orderly extension and maintenance of
public utilities may be required as a condition of approval.
13. Control of the Development after Completion. The final development plan shall
continue to control the Planned Unit Development after it is finished, as required by
§153.072.6.C.16 of the City Code of Ordinances
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 66
§153.030 AIRPORT APPROACH OVERLAY ZONE, OR AAO DISTRICT
1. Purpose. In order to carry out the provisions of this overlay zone, there is hereby created and
established an Airport Approach Overlay District which includes all of the land lying beneath
the Airport Imaginary Surfaces as they apply to the Tillamook County Airport in Tillamook
County at the Port of Tillamook Bay. The Airport Approach Overlay District (AAO District) is
shown on the current Airspace and Approach Zones Plan Map, adopted by the Port of
Tillamook Bay and the City of Tillamook.
2. Scope. To prevent the establishment of air space obstructions in airport approaches and
surrounding areas including the Horizontal Surface and Conical Surface, through height
restrictions and other land use controls as deemed essential to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the people of the City of Tillamook.
3. Authorization. In addition to complying with the provisions of the underlying zoning district,
uses and activities shall comply with the provisions of this overlay zone, as required by the
City, the Port of Tillamook Bay and the FAA. In the event of any conflict between any
provisions of this overlay zone and the underlying zoning districts, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.
4. Permitted Uses Within the Airport Approach Safety Zone. This area extends for a horizontal
distance for 5,000 feet at a slope of 20 feet outward for each foot upward (20:1) for all utility
and visual runways.
A. Farm use, excluding the raising and feeding of animals which would be adversely affected
by aircraft passing overhead.
B. Landscape nursery, cemetery or recreation areas which do not include buildings or
structures.
C. Roadway, parking areas and storage yards located in such a manner that vehicle lights will
not make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between landing lights and vehicle lights or
result in glare, or in any way impair visibility in the vicinity of the landing approach.
Approach surfaces must clear these by a minimum of 15 feet.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 67
D. Pipeline.
E. Underground utility wire.
F. Single family dwellings, mobile homes, duplexes and multi-family dwellings, and structures
accessory to a permitted use when authorized in the underlying zoning district. G. Structures
that meet the height restrictions listed in Section 6.
H. Transportation Facilities and Improvements
1. Normal operation, maintenance;
2. Installation of improvements within the existing right-of-way;
3. Projects identified in the adopted transportation System Plan not requiring future land
use review and approval;
4. Landscaping as part of a transportation facility;
5. Emergency measures;
6. Street or road construction as part of an approved subdivision or partition;
4. Conditional Uses.
A. Commercial and industrial uses, and buildings and uses of a public works, public service or
public utility nature when authorized in the underlying zoning district, provided the use does
not result in the following:
1) Creating electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication
between the airport and aircraft.
2) Making it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights or others.
3) Impairing visibility.
4) Creating bird strike hazards.
5) Endangering or interfering with the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft
intending to use the airport.
6) Attracting large numbers of people. B. Places of public assembly.
5. Procedures for a Conditional Use Permit. An applicant seeking a conditional use shall follow
procedures set forth in the conditional use section, §153.070, of this Code and shall also
include the following information accompanying the application:
A. Property boundary lines as they relate to the Airport Imaginary Surfaces;
B. Location and height of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, utility lines and
roads; and
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 68
C. A statement from the Oregon Aeronautics Division indicating that the proposed use will not
interfere with operation of the landing facility.
6. Restrictions for Development in the AAO District.
A. To meet the standards and reporting requirements established in FAA Regulations, Part 77,
no structure shall penetrate into the Airport Imaginary Surfaces as defined above.
1) No structure in the Horizontal Surface shall extend a height greater than 150 feet.
2) No structure in the Conical Surface shall extend a height greater than 200 feet.
B. No structure or building shall be allowed within the Clear Zone.
C. Whenever there is a conflict in height limitations prescribed by this overlay district and the
underlying zoning district, the lowest height limitation fixed shall govern; provided,
however, that the height limitations here imposed shall not apply to such structures
customarily employed for aeronautical purposes.
D. No glare producing materials shall be used on the exterior of any structure located within
the Airport Approach Safety Zone.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 69
§153.031 - HAZARDS OVERLAY ZONE, OR HO DISTRICT
1. Purpose. The purpose of this overlay zone is to avoid development hazards in the areas of the
City and the Urban Growth Boundary, which have been mapped as inundation zones (limit
construction of new essential facilities and special occupancy structures as defined in ORS
455.447 in tsunami inundation zones). The following special regulations apply to all properties,
which lie wholly or partially within one or more of these areas (refer to Tsunami Hazard Map of
Tillamook Quadrangle).
2. Scope.
A. Protect life and property from natural disasters and hazards.
B. Provide appropriate safeguards to protect development from natural hazards.
3. Authorization. In addition to complying with the provisions of the underlying zoning district,
uses and activities shall comply with the provisions of this overlay zone, as required by ORS
455.447.
4. Hazard Overlay Zone Boundaries. The boundaries of the HO District shall be the same as the
boundaries of the Cascadia Subduction Zone Tsunami Inundation Zone Map for Tillamook.
These areas shall be part of the Zoning Code. The underlying zoning district regulations shall
remain in effect and all development shall be subject to the requirements of both the underlying
zone district and the Hazards Overlay Zone.
5. Site Investigation Required. A site investigation shall be required by the City for subdivision,
partitioning, conditional use or other site development approved by the City Planning
Commission in the Hazards Overlay Zone. The City Planning Official shall require the site
investigation in all land use applications handled administratively in which City Planning
Commission approval is not required. Site investigation reports shall be performed by qualified
engineer or engineering geologist registered by the State to practice as such. In areas requiring
specialized knowledge, such as Tsunami inundation zones, the City may require that a person
with experience or training in such areas be employed.
Essential facilities and new special occupancy structures shall not be constructed in tsunami
inundation zones established by Department of Geology and Minerals Industries (DOGAMI),
unless specifically exempted by ORS 455.446 or given an exception by the DOGAMI
governing board.
New "essential facilities", special occupancy structures and all new hazardous facilities and
major structures defined in ORS 455.447 that are constructed in a tsunami inundation zone are
mandated to seek advice from DOGAMI.
6. Method for Minimizing Inundation Zone Hazards.
A. The owner or developer will have a site investigation report for the site prepared to
determine the nature and extent of inundation area on the site, unless the Planning
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 70
Commission determines that an adequate site investigation report has already been
undertaken.
B. The method used to conduct the site investigation report must be acceptable to a qualified
engineering geologist and acknowledged by DOGAMI.
1. The report shall be based on historical inundation information
2. In situations where similar source, tectonic, and coastal environments exist and modeled
inundation has been done elsewhere, interpolate inundation based on maximum modeled
inundation in nearby / bounding areas.
a. If available, use low resolution, regional simulations to estimate the relative
amplification of tsunamis by offshore bathymetric effects.
b. Interpolation should take into account the behavior of tsunamis of similar size for
terrain analogous to that of the target area.
3. The report should extrapolate lower-resolution model data on land to estimate
inundation and add a safety factor for both inundation and elevation.
a. Extrapolation should take into account the behavior of tsunamis of similar size for
terrain analogous to that of the target area, even for tsunamis from other parts of the
world.
4. In the absence of other tsunami hazard information, consultation with your NTHMP
scientific representative, for tsunami evacuation planning.
C. If the detailed site investigation report indicates that significant amounts of inundation area
are in locations required for development, the developer or owner shall have a report
prepared by a qualified engineering geologist, which indicates suitable techniques to
minimize potential hazards to facilities on the parcel, adjacent and nearby property.
D. Buildings identified for vertical evacuation should have the following characteristics:
1. Designed and built using modern structural engineering;
2. Constructed of reinforced concrete or steel; and
3. Well maintained, with building materials in good condition.
7. Conditional Uses. The following Conditional Uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional use
permit.
A. Transportation Facilities and Improvements
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 71
1. Transportation projects that are not designated improvements in the Transportation System
Plan;
2. Transportation projects that are not designated and constructed as part of an approved
subdivision or partition.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 72
§153.032 TOWN CENTER OVERLAY DISTRICT, OR TC DISTRICT
1. Purpose. This district implements the Tillamook Town Center Plan. The district is intended to
create a pedestrian-oriented, mixed-use downtown core and preserve and enhance the historic
buildings and character of the key historic period of the Town Center which is dated prior to
1950. Existing buildings in the downtown core reflect architectural styles that were popular as
late as the 1940s. The most recognized features from this timeframe are:
 Buildings with no setback from the sidewalk.
 Uniform architectural rhythm of alternating columns and bays.
 Large storefront display windows at street level suitable for commercial use.
 Upper stories with “punched” masonry openings and double-hung windows.
 Articulated parapets and cornices that vary from building to building
 Masonry as the predominant building material
 Signs featuring neon, large blade signs above the canopies,  Signs in Windows oriented
towards pedestrians set at eye level.
 Existing buildings should be restored with the historic design guidelines identified in this
section.
 All new structures, additions and uses must be compatible with historic forms described in
this section, and the prevailing character of the surrounding area to create harmony between
the existing architectural character and new elements introduced into the Town Center.
2. Relationship to Base Zoning. In cases of conflict, this overlay district supersedes the standards
of the underlying zone.
3. Uses Permitted Outright. The following uses are permitted outright in the TC District:
A. Uses and structures lawfully existing on the effective date of the original adoption of the
Town Center Overlay District which are non-conforming shall be deemed legal
nonconforming and may be altered, and/or expanded consistent with §153.074.
B. Residential Uses
1) Upper Floor Residential (single-family and multi-family).
2) Housing for the Elderly or Disabled.
3) Ground Floor Residential Uses (single-family and multi-family) occupying less than
twenty-five percent (25%) of the ground floor of commercial buildings, provided that
commercial store fronts are maintained on the street front.
C. Commercial, Educational and Professional Uses, Operations and Activities
1) Commercial Retail.
2) Commercial Services, financial services, and professional services.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 73
3) Cultural Facilities.
4) Day Care.
5) Galleries or Studios for Dance, Art, Photography.
6) Hotels.
7) Medical, Dental, Veterinary Clinics.
8) Pharmacy.
9) Restaurants.
10) Theaters
11) Upper Floor Clubs or Lodges.
D. Public Facilities including:
1) Governmental Offices.
2) Libraries.
3) Museums.
4) Parks.
5) Plazas.
6) Open Space.
7) Postal Services.
E. Any uses in buildings incidental/secondary/accessory to a permitted use, such as incidental
storage.
F. The Historic Retail Overlay District located on Main Avenue, between First Street and
Fourth Street, is limited to the following uses with both located on the ground floor spaces
facing the street.
1) Commercial retail
2) Commercial services, described in “C” above,
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 74
4. Uses permitted through the Conditional Use Permit process. The following conditional uses
may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as per the provisions of §153.070 of this
development code.
A. Indoor Recreation Facilities
B. Other Public Facilities (not listed above).
C. Manufacturing as described in §153.017.
D. Urban Farming/Agriculture
5. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited in the Town Center Overlay District.
A. Commercial marijuana production. Marijuana Facilities where marijuana is produced and
registered with the Oregon Health Authority (OHA) or the Oregon Liquor Control
Commission (OLCC)
6. Review Requirements. Site Plan Review is required for development in the Town Center
consistent with §153.073, and in addition to the Review Process (identified in ‘I’), the applicant
shall submit a development proposal for the following elements, as applicable to the proposal
as determined by the City Planner.
A. Pedestrian Plan: A pedestrian circulation plan that provides adequate pedestrian access in
the vicinity and within the project. The plan must provide compacted, safely lighted
walkways and entrances suitable for use by the handicapped.
B. Traffic Plan: A traffic plan that provides adequate vehicle circulation in the vicinity of and
within the project. The traffic plan must coordinate internal and external transportation
networks, including bikeways and mass transit to extent possible. Traffic noise must be
minimized.
C. Loading Plan: A plan for loading dock or space that provides adequate room for safe truck
backing and turning movements.
D. Open Space Plan: A plan assuring that alterations and additions to existing buildings, and
new construction, are compatible with neighboring properties in terms of the relative
proportion of impervious/covered area to open space. Any landscape alterations for
commercial, fabrication, educational, or professional uses shall be made in accordance with
the standards contained in §153.055.
E. Parking Plan: A parking plan describing the impacts upon the City's parking program for
both automobiles and bicycles, unless adequate on-site parking can be provided without
damaging the integrity of the property.
F. Public Safety Plan: A plan for minimizing the likelihood of criminal activity by eliminating
areas that are neither clearly private nor clearly public and by using landscaping that allows
maximum observation while providing desired aesthetics.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 75
G. Perimeter Plan: A plan for the perimeter of the project to protect adjacent properties from
noise, visual incompatibility, light glare, heat pumps, fans, or other potential nuisances.
This may be accomplished through screening, setbacks, siting, or other means.
H. Projects that are limited in scope or minor alterations (as defined in §153.073) can be
handled administratively and shall not require a public hearing before the City Planning
Commission, but will require a public notice and the opportunity for appeal in accordance
with §153.076.
I. Review Process.
1) Site plan review within the TC Overlay District shall be conducted before the
City Planning Commission, as specified below:
a) For a new structure.
b) For an exterior structural addition, exterior extension, exterior remodeling, or other
exterior development that does not increase the useable mass of the building, site
plan review is not required, and compliance with the standards in this section shall
be processed as an administrative action.
c) For an exterior structural addition, exterior extension, exterior remodeling or other
exterior development which increases the useable mass of the building, site plan
review is required.
d) In processing administrative requests, the City Planner may waive selected
submittal requirements if they are not necessary to determining compliance with this
section. In addition, the City Planner may forward any request to the Planning
Commission for review if the scale or nature of the proposal merits broader review.
J. All Reviews shall meet the requirements listed in the General Provisions.
7. General Provisions. All development in the Town Center Overlay District shall meet the
following requirements.
A. Height Regulations. No building or structure (including signage) shall hereafter be erected,
enlarged or structurally altered to exceed a height of 50 feet. For exceptions, see §153.050.
B. Density. For properties, on Main Avenue between First Street and Fourth Street and Second
Street between Ivy Avenue and Pacific Avenue, buildings shall be a minimum of 2 stories
and a maximum of 4 stories, with a zero (0) foot setback for all floors. Continuous
storefronts shall occupy one hundred percent (100%) of the parcel width at the front
setback line.
C. Lot Requirements.
1) Lot Area: No maximum lot area.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 76
2) Lot Width/Depth.
a) Building Width.
 The width should not exceed that which was traditional for the building styles of
the Town Center dated prior to 1950.
 The width should maintain the traditional scale and proportion of the building
style and be visually compatible with historic design as described in subsection
12 and illustrated in subsection14. Where building sizes will not be equivalent
or comparable, larger building facades shall be broken down into units that
resemble the size of existing storefront facades.
3) Front Yard Setback: Minimum of zero (0) feet and a maximum of ten (10) feet. The
10foot maximum applies to the first fifteen (15) feet of building height only. Upper
stories may step back for balconies or other outdoor space. For exceptions see 9 of this
section. The 10-foot maximum setback area may be used only for plazas, outdoor
seating, or other useable pedestrian space related to the adjacent business. See Section
10(B) for Building Frontage requirements.
4) Side Yard Setback: No requirements.
5) Rear Yard Setback: No requirements.
D. Site and Building Design Standards. The following standards are intended to promote a
desired level of future development quality that will stimulate investment and strengthen
economic vitality in the Town Center, and renew a positive physical image of the
downtown core.
1) Building Orientation: All new buildings shall be oriented to public streets. Building
orientation is demonstrated by placing buildings and their public entrances close to
streets so that pedestrians have a direct and convenient route from the street sidewalk to
building entrances. Off-street parking or vehicular circulation shall not be placed
between buildings and streets used to comply with this standard.
2) Building Frontage: On sites with 100 feet or more of public street frontage, at least
eighty percent (80%) of the site width shall be occupied by buildings placed within the
maximum setback. For sites with less than one hundred (100) feet of public or private
street frontage, at least sixty percent (60%) of the site width shall be occupied by
buildings placed within the maximum setback.
3) Differentiation between spaces: Differentiation shall be provided between ground-level
spaces and upper stories. For example, bays or balconies for upper levels, and awnings,
canopies or other similar treatments for lower levels can provide differentiation.
Variation in building materials, trim, paint, ornamentation, windows, or other features
such as public art, may also be used.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 77
4) Ground Floor Windows and Openings in the surface of a structure: Ground floor
windows and openings in the structure surface shall be provided on the first floor
building facade that faces a street. The main front elevation(s) of buildings shall
provide sixty (60%) to eighty (80%) percent windows, transparencies or other openings
at the pedestrian level (on corner lots, this provision applies to two elevations).
5) Commercial Storefront. The continuous commercial fronts of the Town Center make
for a consistent, pedestrian friendly streetscape for a wide variety of businesses. The
storefront is predominately made up of glazing with only structure and decoration
revealed. The upper stories consist mostly of wall with “punched” window openings.
New construction and rehabilitation should maintain the continuity of the multi-story
buildings and the clear distinction between street level storefront and upper floor offices
or residences through facade treatment and articulation.
a) Entrances
 Primary entrances should be recessed, glazed and oriented to the street rather
than to a rear or interior alley.
 Tiled floors should be used as they are highly effective in marking the recessed
entrance.
b) Windows
 Changing the location or size of windows or other openings that alter the
architectural rhythm, alignment or character of the original building is
prohibited.
 Except for transom windows, windows should not break the plane of the facade.
 Clear plate glass should be used for display windows, and they should be
incorporated with transom windows.
 Storefront windows shall be no closer than 18 inches from the ground (bulkhead
height). The maximum bulkhead height for new construction should be 36
inches.
 Vertical, double-hung windows, either singly or in groups, should be used on the
upper levels.
 When considering new window fenestration (window size, size of window
panes, mullion type window materials), it is important that the new design be
sympathetic and compatible with the facade theme of the whole block.
 Obstructing or covering mezzanine windows is discouraged.
c) Storefront Facades
 Vertical structural lines (columns, piers, window patterns) should be carried down to
the ground. If the lower storefront materials are different, use similar colors and
forms to integrate the building facade.
 Non-historic materials above or below storefront windows (such as small areas of
decorative stone) should be replaced with material of craftsmanship, color and texture
that distinguishes historic from other buildings
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 78
.  Street level columns and bays for display windows should be preserved or
used. They should provide a clear visual division at the property line.
 Doors should be accentuated with simple details such as a handsome brass door
pull, brass kickplate or an attractive painted sign.
6) Roof Form. Roof forms contribute to the identity of the Town Center because
historically they were flat with parapets, false fronts or gables concealed by a parapet or
false front, in contrast to the pitched roofs in the residential neighborhoods. New
construction and rehabilitation should maintain the traditional storefront architecture of
the downtown in articulation of its roof forms along the street edge.
 Roof forms should be consistent with those commercial buildings of the key
historic period of the Town Center which is dated prior to 1950.
 Parapet and flat roofs are recommended. Pitched roof forms associated with
residential structures are not recommended, unless concealed by a parapet.
 Detailing of the parapets with patterned or relief cornices and stepping is
recommended.
 Tile, shake shingle and thick composition roofs are strongly encouraged.
Standing seam metal, corrugated metal, fiberglass, high contrast or brightly
colored glazed tile, and crushed rock roofs are prohibited.
a) Roof-Mounted Equipment. Roof-mounted equipment (e.g., HVAC) shall be
screened from view from the street by providing a parapet or cornice at least equal
in height to the equipment and by painting the equipment to match the roof. For flat
roofs, the parapet shall surround the perimeter of the building. Screening shall be
compatible with rooflines and materials so that the rooflines are harmonious.
7) Cornices and Architectural Detail. Cornices are important architectural elements. They
give interest to the roofline, breaking up the flat lines of a straight parapet wall; they
give a building its own individuality.
 Repair existing cornices; if they have been covered up, remove the applied
materials and restore; if they have been removed, consider replacing.
 Sheet metal cap flashing should be kept to a minimum unless the building has a
flat parapet wall.
 If a building has decorative architectural details, clean them to restore their
original character or paint them in contrasting colors to accentuate them.
8) Marquees. Marquees provide a “ceiling” for pedestrian traffic, which helps to give a
sense of enclosure to the street and protection from the elements. All new or
replacement awnings/overhangs must be marquee style.
 Marquees should fit within window bays so as not to detract from architectural
features of the building or obscure transom windows above display windows.
Marquees may pass over vertical columns or pilasters.
 The color of the awning should be compatible with the building.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 79
 The marquees shall be flat, horizontal metal canopies suspended by chains or
rods, if original, should be used as they provide cover for pedestrians and shade
within the store.
 The use of internally illuminated, plastic, and/or barrel awnings are prohibited as
they detract from architectural features with incompatible materials that are out
of scale.
9) Color. Color can dramatically affect the appearance of buildings and should be kept
clean and in good repair and carefully considered in relation to the overall design of the
building. Color can also affect the apparent scale and proportion of buildings by
highlighting architectural elements such as doors and windows.
 Historic masonry facades should not be painted.
 Minimize the number of colors on the building’s exterior in order to maintain a
cohesive appearance with minimum visual distraction. Commercial buildings
shall use no more than four colors.
 The color palette chosen for a building should be compatible with the colors of
adjacent buildings in the Town Center.
 Colors must be selected from the color chart approved by Council resolution.
Bright neon paint colors and large areas of intense white colors shall be avoided.
10) Rear Entrances.
 Signs should be modestly scaled to fit the casual visual character of the alley
or rear parking area.
 An awning can soften rear facades and provide a pleasant protected
space.
 The rear entry door should be wood and glass similar to the front door.
 Security lighting should be modest and should focus on the rear entry door.
 Selective use of tree plantings, potted plants and other landscaping can
subtly improve a rear facade.
 Refuse containers and service facilities should be screened from view by
solid masonry walls and landscaping to screen walls and help deter graffiti.
E. Landscaping and Screening. Landscaping and screening shall be required, in accordance
with the following standards (These standards apply in the TC District and supersede the
landscape standards in other sections of this Code):
1) All areas not occupied by structures, parking lots or pedestrian plazas that are visible
from public right of ways shall provide landscaping. Landscaping shall include a mix
of vertical and horizontal elements.
2) Street trees shall be required on at least one side of all streets except Main and Pacific
Avenues between First and Fourth Streets. Species should be compatible with the design
features provided below, and shall provide continuity with nearby landscaping. Street
tree species to be planted and minimum tree planting dimensions are described in
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 80
§153.055. A reduction to the number of required street trees may be granted when
a development preserves healthy, mature tree(s) adjacent to the sidewalk.
 Tree Canopies shall be a minimum of 10 feet diameter.
 Trunk setback from curb shall be a minimum distance of 2 ½ feet,
maximum distance of 3 feet.
3) Screening of parking areas, drives, mechanical equipment, and solid waste receptacles
with screening elements is required and shall be installed prior to building occupancy.
Screening options include landscape plants, planters, ornamental walls, trellises,
fences, or other features approved by the City Planner.
4) Drought-resistant vegetation is strongly encouraged. Irrigation systems shall be
installed to support landscaping that is not drought-resistant.
5) Streetscape.
The Town Center is a pedestrian friendly environment with a combination of features:
storefronts, sidewalks, streetlights and other amenities. New construction and
rehabilitation should contribute to making it an inhabitable place pleasant for walking,
providing a buffer zone of parked cars between automobile traffic and pedestrians,
reinforcing the rhythm of the street in accordance with the Town Center Master Plan
and Resolution 1625. The following items can be included as landscaping as required in
§153.073.
 Places for public activities. Informational kiosks, historical markers, and flagpoles
are encouraged.
 Drinking water fountains, places to sit and rest, places to stand out of the rain or
sun, with accessible benches out of pedestrian flow.
 Removal of unsightly signs and unused sign supports; signs better relating to the
pedestrian installed.
 Streetlights and sidewalk elements not obscuring line of vision from automobiles.
 Historically appropriate streetlights installed.
 Trash receptacles attractive, serviceable, durable and easily maintained.  Street
trees on all streets in the Town Center Overlay District.
F. Signs. Signs should not be the dominant feature of a
building or site, yet they are a key component in
identifying businesses and contributing to the
livelihood of the street with their individuality.
Standards in this section do not apply to window signs
or signs in the Right-of-Way. Signs should allow for
pedestrian and automobile traffic to identify businesses
without detracting from the architecture or
overpowering the streetscape.
[Note: Signs that extend into the Right-of-Way (ROW)
but are attached to the building and signs on the
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 81
property require a sign permit for approval. Other signs not attached to buildings on
property but located in the ROW require a ROW Use Permit for approval.]
Signs in the Town Center Overlay shall be allowed subject to the following conditions:
1) On-building Wall signs, canopy signs and blade signs attached to buildings shall be
allowed subject to the following requirements:
a) A maximum of three (3) such signs shall be allowed per building side.
b) Design: On-building signs shall be incorporated into the design of the building, shall
be compatible in scale, and shall not be placed in locations which interrupt, detract
from, or change the architectural character and features of the building.
2) Marquee Signs shall be allowed subject to the following requirements:
a) A maximum of three (3) such signs shall be allowed per building side.
b) Must be located within 1 inch of the top and bottom of the marquee with no more
than 3 businesses indicated per marquee.
c) Design: marquee signs shall be incorporated into the design of the building, shall be
compatible in scale, and shall not be placed in locations which interrupt, detract
from, or change the architectural character and features of the building.
3) Lit and Illuminated Signs
a) A maximum of one (1) such signs shall be allowed per business.
b) All signs, if lighted, must be by indirect illumination or lit.
c) All lighted signs must be in a manner as to not disturb neighboring property.
4) The following provisions apply to all signs, except those exempt signs (list in ‘6’
below):
a) Signs shall be of rigid material, except for noncommercial flags or banners or single
event signs.
b) Sign graphics, including borders, must be carved, molded, applied, cast, painted or
stained.
c) Projecting signs shall give a minimum vertical clearance
from the ground or sidewalk of eight feet, from a driveway
of fifteen feet.
d) All signs will be securely anchored and maintained to
ensure public safety.
e) Signs shall be maintained in a neat, clean manner.
f) Neon Signs are to be located above the marquee/canopy.
g) All molded plastic or acrylic signs must conform to the
style of the era from the 1940’s to 1950’s.
h) Signs at the rear side of the buildings should be modestly
scaled to fit the casual visual character of the alley or rear parking area.
5) Signs in the Town Center exempt to these requirements and are not included in the
required sign face area: a) Portable Signs.
b) Window Signs.
c) Incidental Signs.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 82
d) Temporary signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of commercial or industrial
premises, or identifying a property developer, lease agent or builder.
e) Real Estate Signs, and shall meet the requirements listed in §153.053.
f) Political Signs, and shall meet the requirements listed in §153.053.
G. Off –Street Parking, Loading and Circulation Requirements.
1) For commercial uses in the Town Center Overlay District, off-street parking is not
required. For residential uses, parking shall be provided at a minimum of 1 space per
dwelling unit and a maximum of 1 space per bedroom. Exceptions to the minimum
requirement may be approved by the city when it is demonstrated that the type of
housing proposed does not require parking, and/or when it is shown that use of on-street
spaces during off-peak hours will provide adequate parking for the area. Civic uses
shall provide parking consistent with the requirements of §153.054.
2) Off-Street Parking lots shall be placed to the side or rear of buildings in accordance
with the Building Orientation Standards as described in this section. All vehicular
driveway entries shall be patterned to differentiate them from sidewalks.
3) For corner lots, parking areas shall not be located within 20 feet of an intersection, as
measured from the midpoint of the curb return arc to the edge of the parking area
(curb or wheel stop) on corner lots.
4) Loading and service areas (e.g., trash enclosures) shall be located in such a manner to
minimize conflicts with public pedestrian areas, and shall be screened with plantings,
shall provide convenient access for trucks, and minimize noise and other impacts with
adjoining uses. Loading and service areas shall be located to the rear or sides of
buildings, or in alleys when available. Loading dock doors are encouraged to be
placed in recessed areas or between buildings to minimize impacts to the pedestrian
and human-scale aspects of the development.
5) Off-Street Parking areas shall be separated from buildings by either a raised concrete
walkway or landscaped strip with a minimum width of 6 feet. Situations where
parking stalls directly abut buildings shall be avoided except where wheel stops are
provided.
6) Off-Street Parking areas shall be screened from the street by a street wall or arcade
between 6 feet and 15 feet in height, and extending a maximum width to screen the
view of parked vehicles and allow for safe circulation at the minimum driveway
widths required according to §153.054.
7) Rear parking lots shall be designed and located contiguous to each other to the
greatest extent practicable so that vehicles can travel from one private parking lot to
the other (reciprocal access) without having to enter the street. Shared parking and
circulation aisles coordinated between adjacent businesses and/or developments are
strongly encouraged.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 83
8. The following graphics shall be used as a guide to comply with the standards in this section.
A. Right-of-Way Location
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 84
B. Site Design
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 85
C. Building Design and Signage
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 86
9. Special Provisions
A. Outdoor entertainment or dancing unless approved by the City Council.
B. Peddlers or mobile sales stands and pushcarts unless approved by the City Manager.
C. All Special Provisions shall meet the requirements listed in the General Provisions.
10. Other Required Provisions.
A. No uses and/or development identified in this subsection shall be permitted and no
process, equipment or materials for such uses shall be used which are found to be harmful
or a public nuisance to persons living or working in the vicinity by reason of fumes, dust,
smoke, cinders, dirt refuse, water-carried waste, noise, vibration, illumination, glare or
unsightliness, or to involve any hazard of fire or explosion.
B. Adequate fire access routes and clearances must be demonstrated and maintained.
Adequacy shall be determined by the Fire Marshal. Adequate vision clearance for
traffic safety shall also be provided.
C. All activities onsite shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure,
except for off-street parking and loading areas; gasoline service stations; outdoor
dining, entertainment, or recreation areas; nurseries; garden shops; Christmas tree sales
lots; and bus stations.
D. The relevant aspects of the Town Center Master plan and a clear connection to the
City’s applicable Comprehensive Plan Goals, Objectives and Policies shall prevail.
E. The proposed uses and/or development and site design shall be consistent with
the following:
1) Accessibility of the subject property to appropriate public facilities and services;
2) Available capacity of necessary public facilities and services; and
3) Spatial patterns of the Land Use Element and the current and future uses of
adjacent properties.
F. All commercial operations, activities, and enterprises shall emphasize pedestrian or
bicycle access.
G. Other conditions found necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding
property, or the city as a whole may be imposed. These conditions may include, but not
be limited to, the following:
1) Development of a Preservation Plan for historic sites and structures;
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 87
2) Requiring fences, walls or landscape screening and/or buffering where necessary to
reduce noise, glare and maintain the property in a character in keeping with the
surrounding area;
3) Requiring landscaping and maintenance thereof;
4) Increasing street widths, controlling the location and number of vehicular access points
to the property for ingress/egress;
5) Requiring means of pedestrian/bicycle access pathways to serve the property;
6) Increasing or Limiting the number of off-street parking and loading spaces required;
surfacing and proper drainage of parking areas;
7) Limiting size, location and number of signs;
8) Limiting the location, coverage or height of buildings because of obstructions to view
and reduction of light and air to adjacent property;
9) Increasing, limiting, or prohibiting openings in sides of buildings or structures;
10) Enclosure of storage areas and limitation of outside display and/or storage of
merchandise;
11) Requiring maintenance of grounds;
12) Regulating noise, vibration, fumes, etc.;
13) Regulating time for certain activities;
14) Establishing a time period within which the proposed use shall be developed;
15) The requirement of a bond for removal of such use within a specified period of time;
16) Requiring any future enlargement or alteration of the use be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and new conditions imposed;
17) Requiring specific lot size, yard dimensions, open spaces or buffer areas;
18) And such other conditions as will make possible the development of the city in an
orderly and efficient manner and in conformity with the intent and purposes set forth in
this section.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 88
§153.033 Hoquarton Waterfront Overlay (HWO)
1. Purpose. This district implements the Hoquarton Waterfront Plan. The district i s intended to
create a mix of industrial, commercial and residential uses that captures the recreational and
visual amenities of the Hoquarton Waterfront. Development should build on the industrial
heritage of the area while providing new opportunities for employment and services. The
district shall:
• Provide access to and enjoyment of the Hoquarton Waterfront.
• Maintain and celebrate the area's unique native and industrial heritage.
• Cultivate a diverse mix of businesses and shops to serve residents and visitors.
• Encourage a variety of housing options to support a diverse population and local workforce.
• Design sites to connect to transportation infrastructure for pedestrians, bicycles,
automobiles and trucks and provide appropriate onsite facilities to support multimodal
transportation.
2. Relationship to Base Zoning. This overlay district supplements the use and development
standards in the base C-C, H-C, L-I and R-0 zones. In the case of conflict, this overlay
district supersedes the standards of the underlying zone. This overlay does not alter or
replace any standards in the Hazard Overlay (H-0), Flood Hazard Overlay (FHO), or Water
Resource Protection Overlay (WRPO) districts.
3. Definitions.
A. Artisan Manufacturing = Small-scale businesses that manufacture artisan goods, materials
or specialty foods. Small manufacturing production primarily focuses on direct sales rather
than the wholesale market. This small-scale manufacturing use is intended to be compatible
with surrounding commercial development. An allowance for public viewing or customer
service space is required with artisan and specialty goods production. This use category
includes the following uses: sugar and confectionary, fruit and vegetable preserving, tea and
coffee, specialty foods, and bakeries; artisan leather, wood products, glass, cutlery, hand
tools, wood, paper, ceramic, textile and yarn products; microbreweries , micro distilleries,
and wineries; and similar uses determined by the Director.
B. Incubator Space = A multi-use facility providing start-up and early stage businesses
with shared office, industrial, manufacturing, food preparation, or similar facilities.
C. Live/ Work Unit = A building or space within a building used jointly for a commercial or
manufacturing activity allowed in the zone and a residential living space for the owner of the
commercial or manufacturing business, or the owner's employee, and that person’s
household, where the residential use of the space is secondary or accessory to the primary
use as a place of work.
4. Uses Permitted Outright. The following uses are permitted in addition to the uses allowed in
the base zone.
A. Existing uses.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 89
1) Single family residential uses in existence on the effective date of the original adoption of
the Waterfront Hoquarton Overlay District are a permitted use within the district.
2) All other uses and structures lawfully existing on the effective date of the original
adoption of the Waterfront Hoquarton Overlay District which are non-conforming as
defined by § I53.074 shall be deemed legal non-conforming and may be altered, and/or
expanded consistent with §I53.074.
B. In the C-C base zone, the following uses are permitted in addition to those allowed in the base
zone:
1) Artisan Manufacturing.
a. Structures shall not encompass more than 10,000 square feet of area. The 10,000
square foot total shall include all storage areas associated with the manufacturing
operation. These types of uses are limited in size to assure that they will not dominate
the commercial area and to limit the potential impacts on residential and commercial
uses.
b. All activities except loading and outdoor product displays shall occur within
buildings; outdoor storage/repair is prohibited.
c. All Artisan Manufacturing uses are required to accommodate public viewing or a
customer service space:
• Public viewing shall be accomplished with windows or glass doors covering at
least 25% of the front of the building face abutting the street or indoor lobby wall,
allowing direct views of manufacturing, openings between the display or lobby
area and manufacturing/work space may be reduced below 25% where fire-rated
separation requirements restrict opening size as determined by the planning
official, or;
• A customer service space includes a showroom, tasting room, restaurant, or retail
space.
d. All uses shall be carried on in such a manner that they do not create smoke, gas, odor,
dust, sound, vibration, soot, heat, glare or lighting to a degree that is readily detectable
at any point beyond the property line of the use.
2) Upper Floor Residential (single-family and multi-family).
3) Ground Floor Residential Uses (single-family and multi-family) occupying less than
twenty- five percent (25%) of the ground floor of commercial buildings, provided that
commercial store fronts are maintained on the street front. 4) Live/Work Units.
a. A minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of a structure's street front facade at street
level shall be occupied by nonresidential uses.
b. The minimum floor-to-floor height of the first floor shall be 13 feet.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 90
c. Off-street parking for live/work units is prohibited between the structure's street
front facade and the street.
d. Live/work units that exceed 2,000 square feet gross floor area must have separate
entrances for the business and residential portions of the use.
e. Within each live/work unit, the living area shall not exceed one-half of the total floor
area of the unit.
5) Public facilities and other public uses.
C. In the L-I base zone, the following uses are permitted in addition to those allowed in the base
zone:
1) Commercial retail limited to fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area.
2) Commercial services limited to fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area.
3) Eating and drinking establishments limited to fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area.
4) Incubator Space. All uses shall be carried on in such a manner that they do not create
smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound, vibration, soot, heat, glare or lighting to a degree that is
readily detectable at any point beyond the property line of the use.
5) Live/Work Units.
a. A minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of a structure's street front facade at street
level shall be occupied by nonresidential uses.
b. The minimum floor-to-floor height of the first floor shall be 13 feet.
c. Off-street parking for live/work units is prohibited between the structure’s street front
facade and the street.
d. Live/work units that exceed 2,000 square feet gross floor area must have separate
entrances for the business and residential portions of the use.
e. Within each live /work unit, the living area shall not exceed one-half of the total floor
area of the unit.
6) Warehouse and storage are permitted as accessory uses to a primary commercial or
manufacturing use for goods produced or sold on the premises.
7) Public facilities and other public uses.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 91
D. In the R-0 base zone, the following uses are permitted outright in addition to those allowed in
the base zone:
1) Commercial retail limited to fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area.
2) Commercial services limited to fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area.
3) Eating and drinking establishments limited to fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area.
4) Artisan Manufacturing.
a. Structures shall not encompass more than 6,000 square feet of area. The 6,000squarefoot
total shall include all storage areas associated with the manufacturing operation.
These types of uses are limited in size to assure that they will not dominate the mixed
use area and to limit the potential impacts on residential and commercial uses.
b. All activities except loading and outdoor product displays shall occur within buildings;
outdoor storage/repair is prohibited.
c. All Artisan Manufacturing uses are required to accommodate public viewing or a
customer service space:
▪ Public viewing shall be accomplished with windows or glass doors covering at
least 25% of the front of the building face abutting the street or indoor lobby wall,
allowing direct views of manufacturing, openings between the display or lobby
area and manufacturing/work space may be reduced below 25% where fire-rated
separation requirements restrict opening size as determined by the planning
official, or;
▪ A customer service space includes a showroom, tasting room, restaurant, or retail
space.
d. All uses shall be carried on in such a manner that they do not create smoke, gas, odor,
dust, sound, vibration, soot, heat, glare or lighting to a degree that is readily detectable
at any point beyond the property line of the use.
E. In the H-C base zone, the following uses are permitted in addition to those allowed in the base
zone:
l) Artisan Manufacturing.
a. Structures shall not encompass more than 6,000 square feet of area. The
6,000square- foot total shall include all storage areas associated with the
manufacturing operation. These types of uses are limited in size to assure that they
will not dominate the mixed use area and to limit the potential impacts on residential
and commercial uses.
b. All activities except loading and outdoor product displays shall occur
within buildings; outdoor storage/repair is prohibited.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 92
c. All Artisan Manufacturing uses are required to accommodate public viewing or
a customer service space:
• Public viewing shall be accomplished with windows or glass doors covering at
least 25% of the front of the building face abutting the street or indoor lobby
wall, allowing direct views of manufacturing, openings between the display
or lobby area and manufacturing/work space may be reduced below 25% where
fire-rated separation requirement s restrict opening size as determined by the
planning official, or;
• A customer service space includes a showroom, tasting room, restaurant, or
retail space.
d. All uses shall be carried on in such a manner that they do not create smoke, gas, odor,
dust, sound, vibration, soot, heat, glare or lighting to a degree that is readily detectable
at any point beyond the property line of the use.
5. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited, superseding uses allowed in the base CC,
H-C, L-1 and R-0 zones.
A. Mini-Warehouse/Storage Units as a primary use, excluding warehouse and storage
permitted accessory to a permitted use.
B. Automobile sales and service station, including towing services and vehicle washing
and polishing facilities.
C. New and use automobile, truck, motorcycle, trailer, recreational vehicle,
agricultural vehicle, mobile home, and industrial equipment sales, services and
storage.
D. Freight terminals, including moving and storage, warehouse for short-term storage, and
cold storage.
E. Wholesaling, storage, and distribution such as RV storage, household storage, and
personal storage.
F. Marijuana facility where marijuana is produced and registered with the Oregon
Health Authority (OHA) or the Oregon Liquor Control Commission (OLCC).
G. Drive-through facilities.
6. Height Requirements. The height requirements of the underlying zone shall apply with
the following exceptions:
A. In the C-C, H-C, L-1 and R-0 base zone, no building or structure shall hereafter be
erected, enlarged or structurally altered to exceed a height of 50 feet.
B. Historic resources constructed prior to 1950 or recreations of said resources shall be
exempt from the height limit in the overlay zone and the base zone.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 93
7. Lot Requirements.
A. Lot Area: No minimum or maxi mum lot area.
B. Lot Width/Depth: No minimum or maxi mum lot width or depth.
C. The front, side and rear yard setbacks of the underlying zone shall apply with
the following exceptions:
1) In the C-C, H-C, and L-1 and base zones, the maximum front setback shall be I 0
feet. The 10- foot maximum applies to the first 15 feet of building height only and
upper stories may step back.
2) In the R-0 base zone:
a. Front Yard Setback: The minimum front yard setback shall be I 0 feet. Corner lot
front yard setbacks, one side must have a minim um of 5 feet. Front yard setbacks
may be reduced to 5 feet for an enclosed porch, portico, or other architectural
feature that i s connected directly to a building entrance.
b. Side and Rear Yard Setbacks: No requirements.
8. Site Design. The following standards are intended to promote a desired level of future
development quality that will stimulate investment and strengthen economic vitality in the
Hoquarton Area, renew a positive physical image of the area and require compatibility
with nearby uses.
A. Building Orientation: Al l new buildings shall be oriented to public streets. Building
orientation is demonstrated by placing buildings and their public entrances close to streets
so that pedestrians have a direct and convenient route from the street sidewalk to building
entrances. Off-street parking or vehicular circulation shall not be placed between buildings
and streets used to comply with this standard.
B. Building Frontage: On sites with 100 feet or more of public street frontage, at least eighty
percent (80%) of the site width shall be occupied by buildings placed within the maximum
setback. For sites with less than one hundred (100) feet of public street frontage, at least
sixty percent (60%) of the site width shall be occupied by buildings placed within the
maximum setback.
C. Differentiation Between Stories: Differentiation shall be provided between ground-level
spaces and upper stories. For example, bays or balconies for upper levels, and awnings,
canopies or other similar treatments for lower levels can provide differentiation. Variation
in building materials, trim, paint, ornamentation, windows, or other features such as public
art, may also be used.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 94
9. Design Standards. The following standards apply to residential development in the C-C or R-
0 base zones within the overlay district and are intended to provide visual interest, distinct
design qualities, appropriate massing, and a pleasing transition between uses to promote
compatibility through architectural detailing and the use of sustainable and high-quality
materials that are contextually appropriate for the Oregon coast.
A. Materials. Use building materials of high durability and high quality.
1) Painted or natural stain wood, stone, brick, rusticated concrete block, and wood
textured, cementitious fiberboard products are allowed.
2) Areas greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of the facade surfaced with rough-cut wood,
wide rough-cut lap siding, T-1 1 1, plywood, corrugated metal, foam/synthetic stucco,
or similar material s are prohibited.
3) Vinyl siding is prohibited on the ground floor.
B. Window Coverage. At least fifteen percent (1 5%) of the area of each street-facing facade
shall consist of windows and/or doors. lf a front and side facade are street-facing, the two
facades may be combined for the purpose of this calculation.
C. Architectural Expression. The street-facing facade of a townhouse, row house and other
individual unit, excluding apartments, shall provide architectural detail or composition
to visually identify each individual unit as seen from the street. Each unit shall include
a minimum of two of the following features total, one each from two separate categories on
the following list:
1) Roof
a. Dormers;
b. Gables;
c. Cupolas;
d. Eaves (minimum six-inch projection);
2) Entry
a. Recessed entries;
b. Covered porch entries;
3) Windows
a. Bay or bow windows;
4) Other
a. Pillars or posts;
b. Off-sets on building face or roof (minimum 16 inches).
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 95
D. Rooflines
1) Roof Forms. Roof designs shall conform predominately to one of the following: flat
with stepped parapet, gabled, or hipped. Secondary roof forms may include towers,
dormers, turrets or other features with rounded (e.g., split-barrel), shed (e.g., dormer),
pyramidal, or crossing elevations. Gambrel, dual-pitched (e.g., hipped “mansard"),
deck (flat-topped, hipped), A-frame, and similar roof forms are prohibited. Where
roofs are pitched, a minim um pitch of at least 30 degrees should be maintained.
2) The width of any continuous flat roofline should not extend more than 100 feet without
modulation. Modulation should consist of either one or a combination of the following
treatments:
a. For flat roofs or facades with a horizontal eave, fascia, or parapet with at least an
eight- foot return, the minimum vertical dimension of roofline modulation is the
greater of four feet or 0.1 multiplied by the wall height (finish grade to top of the
wall).
b. A sloped or gabled roofline segment of at least 20 feet in width and no less than
three feet vertical in 12 feet horizontal.
E. Facade Modulation. Building facades visible from public streets and public spaces shall be
stepped back or projected forward at intervals to provide a minimum of forty percent (40%)
facade modulation unless the applicant demonstrates that an alternate design solution provides an
equal or greater level of achieving the intent of the section. The minimum depth of modulation
shall be one foot, and the minimum width shall be five feet.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 96
F. Pedestrian Entry. Each individual unit such as a townhouse or rowhouse, or each apartment
structure, shall have a pedestrian entry on the street-facing facade that is designed to be
visually prominent through the use of covered stoops, porches, or other architectural entry
features. For units on corner lots, a visually prominent pedestrian entry is required on only one
of the street-facing facades.
G. Front Setback. Design elements to provide a transition between the street and the building
entrance, such as landscaping, trees, fences, or other similar features, are required in the
front setback.
10. Off-Street Parking, Loading and Circulation.
A. For commercial or industrial uses outside of the C-4 parking district, parking shall be
provided at a minimum of one (1) space per employee plus one ( I ) space per seven hundred
(700) square feet of commercial area.
1) Commercial or industrial uses may locate parking facilities off-site consistent with
§153.054 (3) (A).
2) Commercial or industrial uses may use the on-street parking credit i n §153.054 (6) to satisfy
the minimum requirements in part or in full. On-street parking credit will be reviewed
through Site Plan Review consistent with §153.073 (12) and will not require Planning
Commission approval as stated in §153.054 (6).
3) Commercial or industrial uses may also develop a joint use of facilities as described
in §153.054 (4) to satisfy the mini m um requirements in part or in full.
B. For residential uses outside of the C-4 parking district, parking shall be provided at a minimum
of I space per dwelling unit and a maximum of 1 space per bedroom. Exceptions to the
minimum requirements may be approved by the City when it is demonstrated that the type of
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 97
housing proposed does not require parking and/or when it is shown that use of on-street spaces
during off- peak hours will provide adequate parking for the area.
1) Residential uses may use the on-street parking credit in §153.054 (6) to satisfy the minimum
requirements in part or in full. On-street parking credit will be reviewed through Site Plan
Review consistent with §153.073 (12) and will not require Planning Commission approval as
stated in § 153.054 (6).
2) Residential uses may also develop a joint use of facilities as described i n §153.054 (4) to
satisfy the minimum requirements in part or in full.
C. Off-street parking lots shall be placed to the side or rear of buildings i n accordance with the
Building Orientation Standards as described in 8(A) of this section and §153.051. Access from
alleys is encouraged. All vehicular driveway entries shall be patterned to differentiate them
from sidewalks.
D. For corner lots, parking areas shall not be located within 20 feet of an intersection, as measured
from the midpoint of the curb return arc to the edge of the parking area (curb or wheel stop) on
corner lots.
E. Loading and service areas (e.g., trash enclosures and drive-throughs) shall be located in such a
manner to minimize conflicts with public pedestrian areas, and shall be screened with plantings,
shall provide convenient access for trucks, and minimize noise and other impacts with adjoining
uses. Loading and service areas shall be located to the rear or sides of buildings, or i n alleys
when available. Loading dock doors are encouraged to be placed in recessed areas or between
buildings to minimize impacts to the pedestrian and human- scale aspects of the development.
F. Off-street parking areas shall be separated from buildings by either a raised concrete walkway
or landscaped strip with a minim um width of 6 feet. Situations where parking stalls directly
abut buildings shall be avoided except where wheel stops are provided.
G. Off-street parking areas shall be screened from the street by a street wall or arcade, between 6
feet and 15 feet in height, and extending a maxim um width to screen the view of parked
vehicles and allow for safe circulation at the minimum driveway widths required according to
§153.054.
Alternately, parking areas shall be screened from the street by a minimum 6-foot wide
landscaping buffer with plants with a mature height of 6 to 15 feet and 50% opacity year-round.
H. Rear parking lots shall be designed and located contiguous to each other to the greatest extent
practicable so that vehicles can travel from one private parking lot to the other (reciprocal
access) without having to enter the street. Shared parking and circulation aisles
coordinated between adjacent businesses and/or developments are strongly encouraged.
I. Parking areas on lots with historic resources constructed prior to 1950 are exempt from the
off-street parking, loading and circulation provisions of this section.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 98
11. Landscaping.
A. New development or substantial remodel is subject to the design and landscaping standards
as listed in §153.055 for the base zone i n which the development is located.
B. All areas not occupied by structures, parking lots or pedestrian plazas that are visible from
public rights of way shall provide landscaping. Landscaping shall include a mix of vertical
and horizontal elements.
C. Street trees shall be required on at least one side of all streets except Front Street between
Main and Cedar Avenues, or as specified in the Hoquarton Waterfront Plan. Species should be
compatible with the standards provided below, and shall provide continuity with nearby
landscaping. Street tree species to be planted and minimum tree planting dimensions are
described in §153.055. A reduction to the number of required street trees may be granted when
a development preserves healthy, mature tree(s) adjacent to the sidewalk.
1) Tree canopies shall be a minimum of 10 feet diameter.
2) Trunk setback from curb shall be a minimum distance of 2 1/2 feet, maximum distance of
3 feet.
12. Review Required. Site Plan Review is required consistent with §153.074. In addition, the
applicant shall submit a development proposal for the following elements, as applicable to
the proposal as determined by the City Planner.
A. Pedestrian Plan: A pedestrian circulation plan that provides adequate pedestrian access i n the
vicinity and within the project. The plan must provide compacted, safely lighted walkways
and entrances suitable for use by the handicapped.
B. Traffic Plan: A traffic plan that provides adequate vehicle circulation in the vicinity of
and within the project. The traffic plan must coordinate internal and external
transportation networks,
including bikeways and mass transit to extent possible. Traffic noise must be minimized.
C. Loading Plan: A plan for loading dock or space that provides adequate room for safe
truck backing and turning movements.
D. Open Space Plan: A plan assuring that alterations and additions to existing buildings, and new
construction, are compatible with neighboring properties in terms of the relative proportion of
impervious/covered area to open space. Any landscape alterations for commercial, fabrication,
educational, or professional uses shall be made in accordance with the standards contained i n
§153.051.
E. Parking Plan: A parking plan describing the impacts upon the City's parking program for both
automobiles and bicycles, unless adequate on-site parking can be provided without damaging
the integrity of the property.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 99
F. Public Safety Plan: A plan for minimizing the likelihood of criminal activity by eliminating
areas that are neither clearly private nor clearly public and by using landscaping that allows
maximum observation while providing desired aesthetics.
G. Perimeter Plan: A plan for the perimeter of the project to protect adjacent properties from noise,
visual incompatibility, light, glare, heat pumps, fans, or other potential nuisances. This may be
accomplished through screening, setbacks,
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 100
§153.034 HEALTH CARE OVERAY ZONE OR HCO DISTRICT
1. Purpose. The purpose of the Health Care Overlay District is to allow areas for the
concentration of medical facilities and related uses in a campus like setting to enable the
provision of a wide range of medical services to enhance the public’s health, safety and
general welfare and allow for the continuation and flexible expansion of the hospital, medical
clinics and associated uses in a planned and coordinated manner so existing and future uses
can respond and adapt to changes in technology, the medical profession, and society as a
whole.
The overlay zone standards will:
• Strengthen the roles currently played by:
1) The County Hospital Area around Third Street and Ash Avenue, and
2) The County Health Department area around Ninth Street and Pacific Avenue as
regional centers for health care and related services.
• Provide flexibility within the underlying zones to allow health care related uses.
• Allow small-scale supportive commercial/retail uses to supplement health care.
2. Applicability.
A. The standards and procedures, permitted and conditional uses, set forth of this section:
1) Apply to all health care related development proposed on a lot or parcel located within,
or partially within, the HCO District;
2) Are in addition to the standards of the underlying zone for the uses listed in this section;
and
3) Nothing contained in the proposed Health Care Overlay (HCO) district shall limit the
uses permitted outright or conditionally within the underlying zone districts.
3. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted within a Health Care Overlay District:
A. Medical and health care uses including hospitals, outpatient clinics, continuing/long term
care services, hospice services, laboratories, medical research facilities, urgent or
emergency medical services, offices of doctors, physical therapists, dentists and other
health care providers (both public and private).
B. Medical staff facilities and similar uses, including but not limited to administrative
offices, educational and meeting facilities and staff sleeping quarters;
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 101
C. Childcare and adult care services, including respite care;
D. Short term residential uses dependent upon or directly related to medical care, including
convalescent care facilities, skilled nursing facilities, group homes for the disabled and
overnight accommodations;
E. Health care related retail (i.e. pharmacy, medical supplies and equipment);
F. Social service providers including counseling centers and alcohol and drug treatment
facilities;
G. Accessory parking;
H. Utilities and public facilities.
4. Conditional Uses. The following uses require an additional conditional use permit for
approval:
A. Medical helicopter landing pad on the following conditions:
1) The landing pad meets the recommendations of the Oregon State Department of
Transportation Aviation Division and the Federal Aviation Administration.
2) Use shall be limited to emergency medical use only,
B. Facilities for the treatment and/or temporary storage of biomedical, radioactive and
hazardous waste generated within the overlay district; provided however that no
materials may be transported to the site from other facilities for storage or treatment
purposes.
C. A building exceeding 45 feet in height.
5. Site Development Standards. Except as otherwise noted, the site development restrictions
shall be as follows:
A. Front Yard Setback. The minimum front yard setback shall be 10 feet except on corner
lots where the vision clearance area requirements shall apply and, except when adjacent
to a lot outside of the Health Care Overlay District, the front yard setback shall be same
as the front yard setback required in the adjacent zone.
B. Side Yard Setback. The minimum side yard setback shall be five feet. The side yards
shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which the building exceeds 15 feet in
height. The side yard setback distance for one or both sides may be waived for an
approved zero lot line development.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 102
C. Rear Yard Setback. The minimum rear yard setback shall be five feet except when
adjacent to a lot outside of the Health Care Overlay District and then the rear yard
setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet. The required rear yard setback shall be increased
by one-half foot for each foot by which the building exceeds 15 feet in height.
D. Minimum distance between buildings: 10 feet
E. Maximum building height: 45 feet
F. Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
6. Site Plan Requirements. All development within the Health Care Overlay District shall be
governed by a site plan, constituted as a binding site plan and shall be reviewed and
approved administratively. In addition to the requirements listed in §153.051 and §153.055,
the site plan shall include the following:
A. Pedestrian connectivity: The campus should have accessible pedestrian connections
beyond standard sidewalks along the street and between buildings. Special attention
should be paid to crosswalks, connections between parking lots serving adjacent uses and
interior walkway connections.
B. Landscaping: Minimum landscaping shall be as required in §153.055; provided however,
that additional landscaping may be required by the City Planner at the time of Zoning
Clearance Permit to achieve the following effects:
1) Effective screening of off-street parking areas and eliminating monotony of parking
areas;
2) Effective buffering of adjacent residential uses;
3) Enhance the building architecture and on-site landscaping;
4) Streetscape plantings are required as part of the site plan; including street trees.
5) Additional landscaping within setback areas to mitigate adverse noise, light, glare,
and aesthetic impacts to adjacent residential properties from new development may
be required.
C. Lighting. Lighting shall be provided throughout the site and along all pedestrian paths
and building entrances to promote safety.
D. Building Design: There should be continuity of character and building materials
throughout the development and with adjacent development in the Health Care Overlay
to enhance a campus setting.
E. Building design should provide articulation to avoid long blank walls and a scale
appropriate to the setting. Building entries shall be recessed. Decorative patterns on
exterior finish (e.g., scales/shingles, wainscoting, board and batt, masonry) are required.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 103
Where possible, buildings should be designed to screen parking and provide useful
courtyard settings for users of the facilities.
F. Every building adjacent to a street shall have an entrance on the street side; except if the
building design cannot provide an entrance due to the internal function of the building
space (e.g., mechanical equipment, areas where the public or employees are not received,
etc.) and therefore may not be required to meet this standard. Pathways shall connect all
entrances to the street right-of-way.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 104
§153.035 WATER RESOURCES PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
1. Purpose. The purpose of the Water Resources Protection Overlay (WRPO) District is to
implement the City of Tillamook Significant Wetland and Riparian policies of the City of
Tillamook Comprehensive Plan and to guide development and conservation of significant
wetlands, streams and riparian corridors identified in the City of Tillamook Significant
Riparian/Wetlands Inventory (Local Riparian/Wetlands Inventory) and on the City of
Tillamook Significant Wetlands and Riparian Corridor Map (Significant Wetlands and
Riparian Corridor Map).
2. Scope.
A. To allow use of properties while establishing clear and objective standards to protect and
restore water bodies and their associated riparian areas, thereby protecting and restoring
the hydrologic, ecological and land conservation functions these areas provide.
B. To protect habitat for fish and other aquatic life, protect habitat for wildlife, protect water
quality for human uses and for aquatic life, control erosion and limit sedimentation, limit
development in significant riparian corridors, and reduce the effects of flooding.
C. To exclude structures from areas adjacent to fish bearing lakes and streams, and their
associated wetlands, and restrict native vegetation removal or other alterations in those
areas.
3. Applicability and Generalized Mapping
A. The WRP overlay district applies to all wetlands, streams and riparian corridors,
identified as significant in the City of Tillamook Wetlands and Stream Corridors Map
contained in the City's Comprehensive Plan. This generalized map is based on the City of
Tillamook Wetlands and Riparian Inventory. The Significant Wetlands and Riparian
Corridor Map shows the general location of significant resources. However, the edge of
the wetlands area cannot be determined, until a wetland delineation is completed by a
qualified person.
The standards and procedures of this section:
1) Apply to all development proposed on a lot or parcel located within, or partially
within, the WRPO District;
2) Are in addition to the standards of the underlying zone; and
3) In cases of conflict, this overlay district supersedes the standards of the underlying
zone.
B. The City of Tillamook wetlands and stream corridors map identifies the significant water
resources designated in subsection 2 of this Section.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 105
C. Applicable riparian and wetlands setbacks. The applicant shall be responsible for
providing a map of the precise location of the top of the streambank, the wetland edge,
and/or the riparian setback at the time of application submittal.
D. The inventory of significant wetlands and riparian corridors contained in the
Comprehensive Plan identifies all significant wetlands, identifies which streams are
fishbearing, and specifies the stream-size category. Based on the classification contained
in this inventory, the following significant wetlands and riparian corridor setbacks shall
be established:
1) Along all streams identified in the Local Riparian/Wetlands Inventory, the riparian
corridor boundary shall be 50 feet from the top of bank. This includes the following
water bodies:
a) Colby Creek
b) Dougherty Slough
c) Hall Slough
d) Holden Creek
e) Hoquarton Slough
f) Jack Creek
g) Trask River
h) Wilson River
2) Along all significant wetlands as designated in the Local Riparian/Wetlands
Inventory, the wetlands boundary shall be measured horizontally 50 feet from the line
of non-aquatic vegetation.
3) Where the riparian corridor includes all or portions of a significant wetland identified
in the Local Riparian/Wetlands Inventory, the distance to the riparian corridor
boundary shall be measured from the upland edge of the wetland.
4) The measurement of distance to the riparian corridor boundary shall be from the top
of bank. In areas where the top of the bank cannot be clearly determined, the riparian
corridor boundary shall be measured from the ordinary high water level, or the line of
non-aquatic vegetation, whichever is most landward.
4. Activities Permitted and Prohibited within the Riparian/Wetlands Area. This Section outlines
the uses and conditions associated with development in the WRPO District as required by
OAR 660-230-090 (8) (a - c).
A. The permanent alteration of the riparian corridor/wetlands area by grading or by the
placement of structures or impervious surfaces is prohibited, except for the following
uses, provided they are designed to minimize intrusion into the riparian and wetland area,
and no other options or locations are feasible:
1) Streets, roads, and paths;
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 106
2) Drainage facilities, utilities, and irrigation pumps;
3) Water-related and water-dependent uses;
4) Replacement of existing structures with structures in the same location that do not
disturb additional riparian and wetland surface area;
5) Non-conforming uses existing fully or partially within the riparian corridor and
wetland area may be expanded, provided the expansion does not occur within the
riparian corridor. Substantial improvement of a non-conforming structure in the
riparian corridor/wetland area shall comply with the standards of this Code;
6) Existing lawn within the riparian corridor/wetland area may be maintained, but not
expanded to further intrude into the riparian corridor;
7) Shoreline stabilization and flood control structures that legally existed on the effective
date of this Code may be maintained. Any expansion of existing structures or
development of new structures shall be evaluated by the City and appropriate state
natural resource agency staff. Such alteration of the riparian corridor shall be
approved only if less-invasive or non-structural methods will not adequately meet the
stabilization or flood control needs.
Removal of riparian/wetland vegetation is prohibited, except for:
1) Removal of non-native vegetation and replacement with native plant species. The
replacement vegetation shall cover, at a minimum, the area from which vegetation
was removed, and shall maintain or exceed the density of the removed vegetation;
2) Removal of vegetation necessary for the development of approved water-related or
water-dependents uses shall be kept to the minimum necessary to allow the water
dependent or water-related use;
3) Trees in danger of falling and thereby posing a hazard to life or property may be
felled, following consultation and approval from the Public Works Director. The
Public Works Director may require these trees, once felled, to be left in place in the
riparian corridor.
4) Existing landscaping, established prior to the effective date of this Code may be
maintained. However, no new encroachment into the riparian corridor/wetland area
shall be allowed. Consultation with the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife
(ODFW) is required prior to trimming/pruning of riparian/wetland vegetation in order
to minimize the adverse effect of the trimming on water quality and aquatic habitat.
Exceptions: The following activities are not required to meet the standards of this section:
1) Commercial forest practices regulated by the Oregon Forest Practices Act;
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 107
2) Normal and accepted farming practices other than buildings or structures, existing in
the riparian area prior to the date of adoption of this Code.
Development proposed within any wetland or stream, in addition to meeting the standards of
this Section, shall also be approved by Division of State Lands (DSL) and Army Corps of
Engineers (CoE).
Exemptions.
1) When performed under the direction of the City, and in compliance with the provisions
of the City of Tillamook Public Works Improvement Standards and Specifications, as
well as Riparian/wetland Setbacks in this Code, the following shall be exempt from
the provisions of this Code:
a) Emergency repairs to public facilities; and
b) Routine maintenance or replacement of existing facilities.
2) When performed under consultation with ODFW and other authorities as appropriate,
the following shall be exempt from the provisions of this Code:
a) Stream and wetlands restoration and enhancement programs; authorized by
appropriate permits;
b) Non-native vegetation removal;
c) Planting of native plant species; and
Any permitted crossings of significant riparian corridor/wetland area waterways shall be
conducted in consultation with the ODFW, DSL, and CoE.
Application Requirements. All development applications on lots within, or partially within, the
WRPO District shall submit the following information, in addition to other information required
by this development code.
A. Underlying Zone District Permitted Uses. The applicant shall prepare a plan that
demonstrates that the use will be constructed and located so as to minimize grading,
native vegetation removal, and the area necessary for the use. The City may require
additional information where necessary to determine WRPO District boundaries or to
mitigate identified impacts from a proposed development, including but not limited to:
1) Site survey as prescribed in applicable Zoning Clearance Permit application;
2) A map showing the name and location of streams including streambanks and
significant riparian corridors including adjacent wetlands;
3) A map showing the location of any wetlands;
4) A map showing the riparian setback area.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 108
B. Underlying Zone District Conditional Uses and Land Division Developments. The
applicant shall prepare a required site specific survey. If any conditional use permit or
Planned Unit Development activity is proposed within significant water resource site
setbacks, the applicant shall provide a survey of the entire site that precisely maps and
delineates the following:
1) The location of streams and significant riparian corridors, including adjacent
wetlands, and the tops of their respective stream banks or wetland boundaries;
2) Significant wetlands;
3) The area enclosed by the riparian setback;
4) Property lines and easements, existing public rights-of- way, structures, roads and
utilities;
5) Vegetation, including trees or tree clusters and under-story vegetation;
6) Existing and proposed contours at 2-foot intervals.
6. Development Standards. The following shall apply to all development, including native
vegetation removal and excavation, in the WRPO District. No application for uses identified
in this section shall be deemed complete until the applicant has addressed each of these
standards in writing.
A. Alternatives considered. In general, land development is expected to occur outside the
WRPO District significant water resource setback areas. Therefore, development
applications must carefully examine upland alternatives for the proposed use, and explain
the reasons why the proposed development cannot reasonably occur outside of the water
resource or riparian/wetland setback area.
B. Minimize siting impacts. The proposed use shall be designed, located and constructed to
minimize excavation, loss of native vegetation, erosion, and adverse hydrological impacts
on significant water resources. Site Analysis shall be provided to the City.
1) For land divisions, the applicants must certify that any adverse water quality impacts
of the development proposal will be minimized consistent with best management
practices.
2) The development shall intrude into water resource or riparian setbacks as little as
possible, recognizing the operational needs of the proposed development.
C. Construction materials and methods. Where development within the riparian area is
unavoidable, construction materials or methods used within the riparian setback area shall
minimize damage to water quality and native vegetation.
D. Alteration Requiring Mitigation. If a use is proposed within a significant resource site or
riparian and wetland setback area, a mitigation plan shall be prepared and implemented.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 109
1) Permanent alteration of the riparian/wetland area by placement of structures or
impervious surfaces is allowable under the following procedures, subject to the
mitigation requirements of subsection 5 of this section.
a) Unless permitted under subsection 4(A), a variance to the riparian/wetland setback
approved through the procedures of Subsection 7 of this section.
b) Proposals for development activities within the riparian/wetland area shall be
reviewed by ODFW under its Fish and Wildlife Habitat Mitigation Policy.
Mitigation recommendations by ODFW may become conditions for approval of a
proposed alteration of a wetland or riparian corridor.
2) Conditional uses in the underlying zoning districts , with the criteria listed in Section
27 of this development code, may be approved in the WRPO District where the
applicant can demonstrate, through site analysis, that there are no reasonable
alternatives and that the proposed use(s) are designed and constructed to minimize
intrusion into the significant resource.
E. Erosion and Vegetation Plan implementation. A schedule of planned erosion control and
re-vegetation measures shall be provided, which sets forth the progress of construction
activities, and mitigating erosion control measures. The approved Erosion Control or
Revegetation Plan shall be implemented and maintained as follows:
1) Erosion control measures shall be installed prior to any stripping or excavation work.
2) The applicant shall implement the measures and construct facilities contained in the
approved Erosion Control Plan in a timely manner. During active construction, the
applicant shall inspect erosion control measures daily, and maintain, adjust, repair or
replace erosion control measures to ensure that they are functioning properly.
3) Eroded sediment shall be removed immediately from pavement surfaces, off-site
areas, and from the surface water management system, including storm drainage
inlets, ditches and culverts.
4) Water containing sediment shall not be flushed into the surface water management
system, wetlands or streams without first passing through an approved sediment
filtering facility or device.
5) In addition, prior to fencing placement and excavation, the applicant shall call for
inspection. Prior to the foundation inspection for any building, the applicant shall call
for inspection to certify that erosion control measures are installed in accordance with
the erosion control plan.
Variances
A. In cases where the riparian corridor unduly restricts the development of a lot or parcel
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 110
legally created before the effective date of this Code, a property owner may request a
variance to the riparian setback. As a replacement to Section 32 of this development
code, granting of a variance requires findings that:
1) The proposed development represents a reasonable and legal use of the lot or parcel
considering the zoning district requirements; and
2) Strict adherence to the riparian/wetland area setback and other applicable standards
would effectively preclude a use of the parcel that could be reasonably expected to
occur in similarly zoned parcels; and
3) The property owner would be precluded a substantial property right enjoyed by the
majority of landowners in the vicinity and has exhausted all other options available
under this Code to relieve the hardship; and
4) The variance is the minimum necessary to retain a use of the property and to afford
relief, considering the potential for increased flood and erosion hazard, and potential
adverse impacts on native vegetation, fish and wildlife habitat, and water quality; and
5) Granting the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or be
injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood of the premises and no
significant adverse impacts on water quality, erosion or slope stability will result from
approval of the variance, or these impacts have been mitigated to the greatest extent
possible; and
6) The variance will be in general harmony with the intent and purpose of this Code, and
will not adversely affect any officially adopted comprehensive plan provision.
Mandatory Notification of Permitting Agencies. A riparian corridor and isolated wetlands not
designated as significant resources, and wetlands that do not qualify as significant in City of
Tillamook Local Wetland Inventory may be subject to permitting requirements of the Division
of State Lands and the Army Corps of Engineers. To effectively coordinate permitting
responsibilities the City of Tillamook will notify the Division of State Lands of all
development applications that may impact wetland resources in the City. The applicant shall be
responsible for obtaining any applicable development permits from State and Federal agencies.
A. Notification Procedure:
1) The City of Tillamook shall require written application for all Wetland modifications
at the time of local permit application.
2) The City shall record the application and forward a copy of the application to the
Division of State Lands.
3) The City shall not allow review or approval of any application for permit that includes
the intent to modify a wetland or riparian resource until such time as the permitting
agencies have approved a modification permit.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 111
4) The City shall report, in writing, a record of modification of the riparian and wetland
resources not included on the Significant Riparian Corridor and Wetland List to all
permitting agencies with a jurisdictional interest.
9 Changes to inventory maps
A. Claims of an error in the mapped location of a wetland or riparian corridor on the
Significant Wetlands and Riparian Corridor Map may be considered as part of an
application for a subdivision, partition, lot line adjustment, site plan review, conditional
use permit or variance.
B. Claims that an identified significant wetland or riparian corridor should be deleted from,
or added to, the Significant Wetlands and Riparian Corridor Map shall be considered
through the Plan Amendment process.
C. All Claims of map errors shall be supported by adequate inventory information and
analysis to justify the claim, and shall be verified by the Oregon Division of State Lands.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 112
§153.036 DEFINITIONS
As used in this Code, the masculine includes the feminine and the singular includes the plural.
Unless the context of the Code otherwise requires, the following definitions of words and
phrases shall be used in the interpretation and construction of this Code.
Abutting: adjoining with a common boundary line; except that where two or more lots
adjoin only at a corner or corners, they shall be considered as abutting if the common
property line between the two parcels measures a minimum of eight (8) feet in a single
direction.
Access: a legally and physically defined area available and practical for ingress and egress to
a parcel or lot. In determining practicality, the topography, drainage, potential for erosion,
and other factors may be considered.
Access Easement, or Access Way: the place, means, or way by which pedestrians and
vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property or use, and the
right to
cross between public and private property, as required by this Code.
Access Management: the control of street (or highway) access for the purpose of improving
the efficiency, safety, and/or operation of the roadway for vehicles; may include prohibiting,
closing, or limiting direct vehicle access to a roadway from abutting properties.
Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU): a subordinate dwelling unit which provides complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation on the same lot or parcel as the primary
dwelling unit and which is incidental to the main use of the property. In no case shall the
accessory dwelling unit exceed in area, extent or purpose, the principal lawful use of the
main structure or land or the area established in the zone district.
Accessory building, structure, or use: a building, structure, or use which is necessary for the
operation or enjoyment of a lawful use, and appropriate and subordinate to such lawful use.
A use which involves an increase in the number of dwelling units in a building, or on a lot,
beyond that which is permitted outright in the district, or which constitutes, in effect, the
conversion of a use to one not permitted in the district, shall not be considered an accessory
use. Accessory Structures in a residential district include detached garages, sheds,
workshops, greenhouses, and similar structures.
Adjacent: next to, touching or contiguous, including sites, structures and parcels which
are directly across and on the opposite side of a public street right-of-way.
Adjoin: the same as "Abutting".
Administrative: a discretionary action or permit decision made without a public hearing,
but requiring public notification and an opportunity for appeal.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 113
Administrative Decision: a decision made by the Planning Director or designated staff with
public notice and an opportunity for a public hearing. The appeal of an administrative decision
is heard by the Planning Commission. See also ‘Ministerial’.
Adult Business: any person, group, firm, business, or organization (except non-profit
corporations which are not open to the general public) which prohibits admission to all or
portions of the premises to any persons younger than 18 years of age in which an adult use is
conducted.
Adult Use: a use of whatever character, conducted on the premises of any business, where
persons under 18 years of age are prohibited by law in ORS Chapter 167 and as amended.
Adult Business and Adult Uses: those businesses which are not legally open to minors under
age 18 as defined by ORS Chapter 167.060 to 167.090 and as amended.
Adult Day Care: a community-based group program which has been designed to meet the
needs of adults who have impairments. Adult day care programs must offer individual plans of
care. Nonresidential programs are designed to provide health, social and related support
services in a safe and protective setting. Adult day care services can be offered during any part
of a day, but for less than 24 hours.
Adult Foster Home, as defined by OAR 411-5-400(2): a State-Certified dwelling operated in a
family-type setting for senior citizens and/or disabled persons over the age of 18 who are in
need of help in the provision of shelter, food, medical care and/or other service.
Advertising structure: any notice or advertisement, pictorial or otherwise, and any structure or
three dimensional form used as, or for the support of, any notice or advertisement for the
purpose of making anything known about goods, services or activities, or for simply attracting
visual attention to a business.
Adverse Impact: negative affect of development that can be measured (e.g. noise, air pollution,
vibration, dust, etc).
Aesthetic(s): the perception of design elements or elements in the natural or created
environment that are pleasing to the eye.
Affordable housing: housing affordable to a certain percentage of the population earning a
specified level of income and spending no more than 30% of their income on housing
expenses. For more information, refer to the Oregon Department of Housing and Community
Services.
Aggregate Resources: sand, gravel, rock, stone, loam and dirt.
Agriculture: the use of the land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying,
pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, apiaries, and animal and poultry
husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for storing produce, provided, however, that the
operation of any such accessory use shall be incidental to that of normal agricultural activities
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 114
and provided further that the above uses shall not include the operation of a feedlot or other
commercial feeding of animals. This definition is not intended to comply with Oregon State
Laws relating to Farm Uses.
Airport Approach Safety Zone: a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway
center line and extending outward and upward from each end of the Primary Surface. The inner
edge of the approach surface is the same width as the Primary Surface and extends to a width
of: 1,250 feet for Utility Runway having only visual approaches; 1500 feet for a runway other
than a Utility Runway having only visual approaches; 2,000 feet for a Utility Runway having a
non- precision instrument approach; 3,500 feet for a non-precision instrument runway other
than utility, having visibility minimums greater than three-fourths of a statute mile; 4,000 feet
for a non-precision instrument runway having visibility minimums as low as three-fourths
statute mile; and 16,000 feet for precision instrument runways. The Airport Approach Safety
Zone extends for a horizontal distance for 5,000 feet at a slope of 20 feet outward for each foot
upward (20:1) for all utility and visual runways.
Airport Hazard: any structure, tree or use of land which exceeds height limits established by the
Airport Imaginary Surfaces.
Airport Imaginary Surfaces: those imaginary areas in space which are defined by the Airport
Approach Safety Zone, Transitional Zones, Horizontal Zone, Clear Zone and Conical Surface
and in which any object extending above these imaginary surfaces is an obstruction.
Alley: a public right of way through a block which affords access to abutting property at the
rear or sides thereof. Normally used as secondary access, but primary access may be approved
by the Planning Commission after consideration of public safety or improved traffic
circulation.
Altered: “Structurally Altered.”
Alteration: the addition to, removal of or from, or physical modification or repair of any
exterior part or portion of a site or structure governed by this Title. Sign changes shall be
considered a form of alteration.
Alterations: any change in size, shape, method of illumination, position, location, construction
or supporting structure.
Ambient: something that surrounds, as in the level of light, dust or noise.
Amusement, Commercial: any amusement enterprise, in an indoor or outdoor setting, offering
entertainment or games of skill to the general public, for a fee or charge; this term includes, but
is not limited to, a golf driving range, archery range and miniature golf course, bowling alley,
movie theater, or pool hall.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 115
Ancillary Unit: a detached accessory building, or an accessory unit attached to the main
structure that is designed, constructed and used to provide long term accommodations. An
ancillary unit may contain a kitchen facility, laundry or bathroom and may be rented.
An Ancillary Unit is a small building no bigger than 800 sq ft or 50% of the floor area of the
dwelling (whichever is the lesser) and must be dependent on the main dwelling.
Ancillary Units are not to be self-contained and must share at least one facility (laundry,
bathroom or kitchen) with the main dwelling.
The Ancillary Units needs to be a close distance to the dwelling (typically where a garage
would be located, a short walk away) and appear as part of the dwelling rather than a separate
building.
An Ancillary Unit must rely on the main dwelling for services, access and parking facilities. An
approximate guide would be a maximum of 30-45 feet away, but applications are assessed on a
case by case basis.
Ancillary Units are also known as: granny flats, studios, ancillary apartments, sleep out etc.
Animal Hospital: a place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are
cared for during the time of such treatment. Use as a kennel shall be limited to short-time
boarding and shall be only incidental to such hospital use. See also Section 26(2)
Antenna: a specific exterior transmitting or receiving device used to capture, transmit, or
receive radio frequency signals, microwave signals, and/or other communications energy
transmitted from, or to be received by, other antennas. This includes, but is not limited to,
Omni-directional ("Whip") antennas, directional ("panel") antennas, parabolic ("dish")
antennas.
Antenna Array: two or more antennas.
Antenna Support Structure: a structure or device specifically designed, constructed and/or
erected for the purpose of attaching, mounting or otherwise affixing antennas at a height,
altitude or elevation which is above the base of such structure. Such support structures shall
include, but are not limited to the following:
Lattice tower: a vertical support structure consisting of a network of crossed metal
braces, forming a tower with three, four, or more sides.
Guyed tower: a monopole or lattice tower that is tied to the ground or to the surface by
diagonal cables.
Monopole: a vertical support structure consisting of a single vertical metal, concrete, or
wooden pole, pipe, tube or cylindrical structure, typically round or square, and driven
into the ground or mounted upon or attached to a foundation.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 116
Antique Shop: an establishment offering for sale articles such as glass, china, furniture, or
similar furnishing and decorations, which have value and significance as a result of age, design,
or sentiment.
Apartment: a dwelling unit in a multiple-family building.
Apartment Unit: three or more contiguous dwelling units, under common ownership, each unit
being occupied by not more than one family.
Apartment Accessory Uses: permitted uses accessory to an apartment building shall include a
recreation room, employees' washroom, manager's office, and laundry facilities for tenants
only.
Appeal: request for review of a Planning Staff, Planning Commission, or City Council decision
or any interpretation of any provision of this Code.
Appliance: large or small household goods including washers, dryers, refrigerators, freezers,
ranges, TVs, toasters, electric irons, and the like.
Application: a formal request to the City for development, administered through a form to be
filled out by an applicant, approved by the City Planner; such as an application for a Land Use
Development Permit, a Zoning Clearance Permit.
Arcade: an arched or covered passageway; often along building fronts or between streets.
Area of Illumination: the area illuminated by lighting in certain areas of a site plan.
Area of Shallow Flooding: a designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not
exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be
evident. AO is characterized as sheet flow and AH indicates ponding.
Area of Special Flood Hazard: the land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one
percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special Flood Hazard Area designation
on maps always includes the letters A or V.
Architectural Significance: the term : that the building or structure: (1) portrays the
environment of a group of people in an era of history characterized by a distinctive
architectural style; (2) embodies those distinguishing characteristics of an architectural-type
specimen; (3) is the work of an architect or master builder whose individual work has
influenced the development of the city; or, (4) contains elements of an architectural design,
detail, materials or craftsmanship which represent a significant innovation.
Articulate/Articulation: the jointing and interrelating of building spaces through offsets,
projections, overhangs, extensions and similar features.
Assembly or Meeting Hall: a building used for social, organizational, ecumenical, business or
educational purposes.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 117
Assessor: the County Assessor of Tillamook County.
Attached: architecture joined to or by a wall, especially by sharing a wall with another
building; not freestanding
Automobile: a motor vehicle such a passenger car, truck or trailer.
Automobile, Boat or Trailer Sales Lot: an open lot used for display, sale or rental of new or
used motor vehicles, boats or trailers in operative condition and where no repair work is done.
Automobile-Oriented Use: automobiles and/or other motor vehicles are an integral part of the
use. These uses include vehicle repair, sales, rental, storage, and service; and drive-up, drivein,
and drive-through facilities.
Automobile Repair, Major: the general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor
vehicles or trailers; collision service including body, frame, or fender straightening or repair;
overall painting or paint shop.
Automobile Repair, Minor: upholstering of, replacement of parts for, and motor service to
passenger cars and trucks not exceeding one and one-half (1 ½ tons capacity, but not including
any operation named under "Automobile Repair, Major", or any other similar operation thereto.
Automobile Service Station or Filling Station: a building or lot having pumps and storage tanks
where fuels, oils, or accessories for motor vehicles are dispensed, sold, or offered for sale at
retail only, and where repair service is secondary. See also Section 23.
Automobile Wrecking: the dismantling or disassembling of motor vehicles or trailers, or the
storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles, or
their parts.
Awning: a shade structure that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a
doorway or window from the elements, and is supported by either posts or columns and/or by a
permanent structure.
Balcony: a platform projecting from the exterior wall, enclosed by a railing, supported by
brackets or columns or cantilevered out.
Barber and Beauty Shop: a facility, licensed by the state, where haircutting, hairdressing,
shaving, trimming beards, facials, manicures, and/or related serves are performed.
Base Course: a course of specified aggregate material of planned thickness placed upon the
subgrades.
Base Flood: the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the "100-year flood."
Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 118
Base Flood Elevation: the crest elevation, in relation to mean sea level, expected to be reached
by the base flood, also known as the regulatory flood elevation.
Basement: any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Bed and Breakfast: any establishment located in a structure designed for a single family
residence, regardless of whether the owner or operator of the establishment resides in such
structure, which:
a. Has one (1) or more rooms for rent on a daily basis to the public; and
b. Offers a breakfast meal as part of the cost of the room;
c. Serves only one breakfast meal a day to guest, staff and owners, only.
d. License requirements per OAR Chapter 333, Division 170.
Berm: an earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen undesirable views, and/or
decrease noise.
Beveled Building Corner: a rounded or flat edge on a building usually at a street corner; may
include an entrance, windows, pillars or other architectural details and ornamentation.
Bicycle Facilities: a general term denoting improvements and provisions made to accommodate
or encourage bicycling, including parking facilities and all bikeways.
Bicycle Path: a path that is physically separated from the roadway and designed exclusively for
non-motorized traffic.
Bikeway: any road, path or way that is in some manner specifically open to bicycle travel,
regardless of whether such facilities are designated for the exclusive use of bicycles or are
shared with other transportation modes. The five types of bikeways are:
a. Multi-use Path. A paved way (typically 10 to 12-feet wide) that is physically separated from
motorized vehicular traffic; typically shared with pedestrians, skaters, and other nonmotorized
users.
b. Bike Lane. A portion of the roadway (typically 4 to 6-feet wide) that has been designated
by permanent striping and pavement markings for the exclusive use of bicycles.
c. Shoulder Bikeway. The paved shoulder of a roadway that is 4 feet or wider; typically
shared with pedestrians in rural areas.
d. Shared Roadway. A travel lane that is shared by bicyclists and motor vehicles.
e. Multi-use Trail. An unpaved path that accommodates all-terrain bicycles; typically shared
with pedestrians.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 119
Billboard: the same as “Advertising Structure.”
Blacksmith Shop: a shop for a worker of iron, forging iron, repairing the iron work on a wheel,
barrel, or making and shaping plow shares or draft animal shoes and a horse shoer. See machine
or welding shop.
Block: a parcel of land or group of lots bounded by intersecting streets.
Board: the Board of County Commissioners of Tillamook County, Oregon.
Boarding or Rooming House: a residential building, other than a hotel or motel, where lodging
and/or meals are provided to tenants in one or more rooms for periods of thirty days or more,
and for which a fee is charged.
Boat Yard: a place where boats are constructed, dismantled, stored, serviced or repaired,
including maintenance work thereon.
Bollard: a post of metal, wood or masonry that is used to separate or direct traffic (vehicles,
pedestrians and/or bicycles). Bollards are usually decorative and may contain sidewalk or
pathway lighting.
Boulevard: a street with broad open space areas; typically with planted medians.
Buffer: a combination of physical space and vertical elements, such as plants, berms, fences, or
walls, the purpose of which is to separate and screen incompatible land uses from each other.
Buildable Area (as it relates to the calculation of required landscaping): the area of a lot
remaining after other zoning requirement, including, but not limited to setback, off street
parking, and ingress/egress have been met.
Building: a structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or
property of any kind, but not including swimming pools, fences, and patios.
Building footprint: the outline of a building as measured with the shape of its foundation.
Building Height: See “ Height of Building” definition.
Building Inspector: the Building Inspector of the City of Tillamook, Oregon, as designated by
the City Council.
Building Line: a line on the plat map indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures
may not be erected.
Building Lot: a lot occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or a group of
such buildings and accessory buildings, together with such open spaces as are required by this
Code, and having the required frontage on a street.
Building, Main: a building within which is conducted the principal use permitted on the lot, as
provided in this Code.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 120
Building Mass: the aggregate size of a building or the total height, width and depth of all its
parts.
Building Pad: a vacant building site on a lot with other building sites.
Building Scale: the dimensional relationship of a building and its component parts to other
buildings.
Bulletin Board: A sign of a permanent nature, but which accommodates changeable copy,
indicating the names of persons associated with, events, conducted upon or products or services
offered upon, the premises upon which the sign is located.
Bush or Shrub: a planting whose primary purpose is decorative and whose normal height will
not be in excess of ten (10) feet.
Business: a commercial or industrial enterprise.
Business or Professional Office: an office of a professional providing a service to the public,
including but not limited to medical or dental offices, architectural, engineering or surveying
office; certified public accountant or tax preparer's office, realty or insurance office; business or
computer consultant.
Business Frontage: the lineal front footage of the building or a portion thereof, devoted to a
specific business or enterprise, and having an entrance/exit opening to the general public.
Cabana: a stationary, lightweight structure which may be prefabricated, or demountable, with
two or more walls, used adjacent to and in conjunction with a mobile home to provide for
additional living space, meant to be moved with the mobile home.
Cabinet, carpentry and woodwork shop, custom: shop for the repair or creation of individual
items of furniture and wooden home furnishings on a custom basis; not a factory, planing mill,
or similar woodworking plant.
Camping or Recreational Vehicle: vacation trailer, park trailer, self-propelled vehicle, or
structure equipped with wheels for highway use which is designed for human occupancy and is
being used for temporary vacation/recreational or emergency purposes, as allowable by this
Code, but not for residential purposes, and may be equipped with plumbing, sink, or toilet.
Capacity: maximum holding or service ability, as used for transportation, utilities, parks and
other public facilities.
Capacity Tower: a tower lower than a "Coverage Tower" with lower antennas and reduced
power output, added to fill in the service ability not covered by a "Coverage Tower".
Cartoon: a caricature of an animate or inanimate object.
Cell Tower: please see Utility Facility, Wireless Communication Facility.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 121
Cemetery: land dedicated for burial purposes, including mortuary, crematory, mausoleum, and
columbarium, when operated within the boundary of a cemetery.
Certified Arborist: an arborist having been certified by the International Society of
Arboriculture.
Change of Use as relates to a non-conforming use: visible or audible changes that would affect
surrounding properties and neighbors, including, but not limited to traffic, parking, noise level,
lighting, signing, smoke, dust, odor, vibration, soot, heat or glare. An application for such
change of use may be granted administratively or by the Planning Commission in accordance
with provisions of Section 27 of this Code.
Church: a permanently located building commonly used for religious worship and religious
training, fully enclosed with walls (including windows and doors) and having a roof (canvas or
fabric excluded), and conforming to applicable legal requirements affecting design and
construction. A church is considered a public facility.
City: the City of Tillamook City, State of Oregon.
City Council or Council: the City Council of the City of Tillamook
City, Oregon.
City Engineer: the City Engineer of the City of Tillamook City, Oregon, as designated by the
City Council.
City Manager: the duly appointed administrative officer of the City of Tillamook or a person
designated by him/her to fulfill his/her obligations as set forth in this Code.
City Planner: the duly appointed city planner of the City of Tillamook, or the City Planning
Commission.
City Recorder: The City Recorder of the City of Tillamook City, Oregon.
Clear Vision Area: identified in this Code under Interpretations and
Exceptions.
Clear Zone: an area that extends from the primary surface to a point where the approach
surface is 50 feet above the runway and elevation.
Clinic Medical, Dental or Optical: facility for examining, consulting with, and treating patients,
including offices, laboratories, and outpatient facilities, but not including hospital beds for
overnight care or treatment.
a) Critical Clinic: a facility for extensive and continuous care and treatment, and
closely monitored health care provided to critically ill patients
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 122
b) Emergency Clinic: a facility for the performance of acts or procedures under emergency
conditions in the observation, immediate care and counsel of persons who are ill or
injured or who have disabilities.
c) Urgent Care Clinic: a facility for the delivery of ambulatory care in a facility dedicated to
the delivery of medical care outside of a hospital emergency department, usually on an
unscheduled, walk-in basis. Urgent care centers are primarily used to treat patients who
have an injury or illness that requires immediate care but is not serious enough to
warrant a visit to an emergency department.
d) Walk-in Clinic: a facility, often associated with a hospital or medical school, that is
devoted to the diagnosis and care of outpatients.
Club: an association of persons (whether or not incorporated, religious or otherwise, for a
common purpose, but not including groups which are organized primarily to render a service
carried on as a business for profit.
Co-location (collocation): the use of a personal wireless service utility facility or wireless
communication facility by two or more wireless communications service providers for more
than one type of communication technology and/or placement of two or more wireless service
facilities on adjacent properties, or utilization of a single antenna support structure, alternative
antenna support structure, or an underground conduit or duct by more than one Wireless
communications service provider.
Commercial: any use of land or structure involving buying/selling of goods or services as the
primary activity.
Commercial Enterprise: any use of land, structures or natural resources for profit, or non-profit
making activities not residential, public facility, or industrial in character.
Commercial Retail: any commercial enterprise of, relating to, or engaged in the sale of
commodities or goods in small quantities directly to the ultimate consumer.
Commercial Service: any commercial enterprise which provides a useful labor that does not
produce or involve the sale of a tangible commodity or good.
Commission or Planning Commission or Planning and Zoning Commission: the Planning and
Zoning Commission of the City of Tillamook City, Oregon.
Common Open Space: an open area within a development, designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of all residents of the development, or for the use and enjoyment of the public in
general.
Community Building and Community Center: a facility whether owned or not by a
governmental agency or a nonprofit community organization, for the purpose of public
assembly, used for meetings, recreation or education.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 123
Compatibility: aspects of buildings and other constructed features which, by material, shape,
scale, and architectural detail, tend to support the ambient quality of the City of Tillamook.
Compatibility may be achieved through building design, setbacks, screening, materials choices,
building orientation, site design, or other design solutions.
Comprehensive Plan: the Tillamook City Comprehensive Plan is the official document adopted
by the City which delineates the general long-range policies on how the City’s future
development should occur. The Tillamook City Comprehensive Plan interrelates all functional
and natural systems and lands, including, but not limited to, sewer and water systems,
transportation systems, education systems, and recreational management programs. The City
Comprehensive Plan includes several parts among which are the following: an inventory, a
policy element which includes the City’s policies on future development, community plans,
functional plans, a plan map, and implementing measures.
Comprehensive: all-inclusive, both in terms of the geographic area covered and functional and
natural activities and systems occurring in the area covered by the Plan.
Conditional uses: are those uses which may be appropriate, desirable, convenient or necessary
in the zone district in which they are allowed, but which by reason of their height or bulk,
intensity of use or the creation of traffic hazards or parking problems or other adverse
conditions may be injurious to the public safety, welfare, comfort and convenience unless
appropriate conditions are imposed.
Condominium: a structure containing more than one dwelling unit, each of which is owned
individually, exclusive of the land of the land upon which the structure is located.
Conflict of Interest: as described in ORS 244.135, when the prospect of personal gain prevents a
member of some public body from carrying out the purposes of that body in a fair and objective
fashion, Oregon Law requires that a Planning Commissioner not take part in a decision in
which he or she may have such a conflict, reference ORS 244.135 regarding cities.
Conical Surface: an area that extends 20 feet outward for each one foot upward (20:1) for 4,000
feet beginning at the edge of the horizontal surface (5,000 feet from the center of each end of the
Primary Surface of each visual and utility runway at 150 feet above the airport elevation) an
upward extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation.
Consolidation: the act of aggregating two or more tax lots or tracts of land into one or more
parcels.
Construction sign: a sign stating the names, addresses or telephone numbers of those
individuals or businesses directly associated with a construction project on the premises.
Contiguous: lots, parcels, or lots and parcels that have a common boundary. "Contiguous"
includes, but is not limited to, lots, parcels, or lots and parcels separated only by an alley,
street, or other right of way or flagpole. Lots or parcels are not contiguous if their common
boundary is an arterial or collector street.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 124
Contract Annexation: a binding agreement between a city and county which requires the parties
to accomplish specified tasks prior to and/or after property identified in the contract is annexed
by City action into city jurisdiction.
Convenience Store: A small retail store that is open long hours and that typically sells staple
groceries, snacks, and sometimes gasoline.
Conversion Plan: a binding plan which shows how a parcel can be ultimately divided into the
maximum practical number of lots allowed by the zoning district; and shows how a proposed
land division will be compatible with the allowable ultimate land division, and provides all of
the graphic information required for a land subdivision or a partition, based on the ultimate
number of lots allowable under the zoning district. A critical purpose of such a plan is to
preserve future rights-of-way, easements, and utility corridors.
Cooking Facility: an arrangement within a residential unit which provides, but is not limited to,
the following features: refrigeration capability; hot plate, electrical frying pan, toaster oven,
crock pot, counter top burners, stove or microwave; and facilities for washing and cleaning.
Cottage Industry: an industry where the creation of products and services is home-based, rather
than factory-based. These products and services created by cottage industry are often unique and
distinctive given the fact that they are usually not mass-produced.
County: the County of Tillamook County, State of Oregon.
Country Club: a club organized and operated primarily for social indoor and outdoor recreation
purposes, including incidental accessory uses and structures.
Court: an open unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or group of
buildings.
Coverage Tower: a wireless communication facility tower for initial deployment of a large
area. "Coverage Towers" operate at high power levels and are tall.
Creek (see "Stream").
Criterion: a legal thresh-hold against which an application is compared in order to determine its
adequacy.
Critical Facility: include, but are not limited to schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire
and emergency response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous
materials or hazardous waste. A critical facility is a facility for which even a slight chance of
flooding might be too great.
Crop and Tree Farming: the use of land for horticultural uses.
Curb cut: a driveway opening where a curb is provided along a street.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 125
Curvilinear: means represented by curved lines.
D.B.H. (Diameter at Breast Height): circumference of the tree's trunk(s) at four and a half feet
above grade/ground level, and dividing by 3.14.
Day: unless otherwise specified by this Code or statute, all references to days: calendar days.
References to days involving deadlines apply to normal department business hours. When a
deadline falls on a holiday or weekend, it shall be presumed to be extended to the next working
day of the department.
Day Care Center: an institution maintained under public or private auspices and licensed by the
state, for which care is provided on a daily basis for three or more children under sixteen years
of age. Note Day care centers providing care for more than six children result in an educational
("E" occupancy) status for the structure under the Uniform Building Code and the National
Electrical Code. (See "Family Day Care Providers' Home").
Deciduous: a tree or shrub that sheds its leaves seasonally.
Dedication: the designation of land by its owner(s) for any public use as shown on a
subdivision plat or deed. The term may also be used for dedication to a private homeowners
association.
Demolish or Demolition: to raze, destroy, dismantle, deface or in any other manner cause
partial or total ruin of a structure.
Density: the number of dwelling units, expressed in a ratio to land area. Density is computed by
dividing the number of dwelling units by total gross acreage of the site. (Example twenty
dwelling units divided by five acres, equals a density of four units per acre.)
Developable: buildable land as identified by the City's Comprehensive Plan. This shall include
both vacant land and land likely to be redeveloped.
Developer: a person or other legal entity who subdivides or partitions land, or constructs on
more than one parcel of land.
Development: any manmade change to improved or unimproved tracts of land, including, but
not limited to, construction of buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation, or drilling operations located within the area.
Interim: existing, serving, or effective for not more than 3 years and having an
improvement value of not greater than $30,000.
Permanent: Not interim development
Development permit: any permit or authorization issued by the city as a prerequisite for
undertaking any development. It includes permits and authorizations customarily known as
certificates of appropriateness, building permits, zoning or rezoning permits, variances,
conditional use permits, street plans, plat approvals, subdivision or planned unit development
permits.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 126
Development Schedule: a construction timeline schedule submitted by the applicant showing all
major events. If the project is to be constructed in phases, a schedule shall be submitted for
each phase. Areas designated for staged development shall be indicated on the Tentative Plan.
It shall indicate the approximate date when construction of a Planned Unit Development is
expected to begin and end, or if developed in phases, the development schedule for each phase
shall be keyed to a plan that indicates phasing boundaries. It coordinates the improvement of the
common open space, and the construction of buildings and other structures in the common open
space with the construction of the primary structures in the Planned Unit Development.
Direct illumination: a source of illumination directed towards such signs so that the beam of
light falls upon the exterior surface of the sign.
Director: the City Manager or his designated representative.
District: a portion of the territory of the City of Tillamook City within which certain uniform
regulations and requirements of various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this
Code.
a. That certain uses are required to be a specified distance from "any R
District" as provided in this Code, the term "an R District" shall include any R-7.5, R-5.0
and R-O District.
b. The term "any C District" shall include any C-N, C-H C-C District.
c. The term "any I District" shall include any I-L or I-G District.
Divide: to separate land into two or more parcels or lots for the purpose of transferring a
substantial interest in land.
Division: the act or process of dividing land or a tract that has been divided.
Door: a movable structure used for opening and closing an entrance or for giving access to
something.
Downslope: of or having 10% or greater slope from an adjoining property line to point of
setback.
Double Frontage: a term used to describe a lot or parcel which has road access and frontage at
each end. Corner lots are not considered to have double frontage unless they front roads on
three sides. Alley access is not considered "frontage" in this definition.
Drinking Establishment: an establishment, the primary activity of which is the sale and
consumption on the premises of beer, wine, or other liquors, and where food service, if any, is
secondary to the sale of beer, wine, or other liquors. Synonymous with bar, lounge, or tavern.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 127
Drip line: the area on the ground below every tree that would be affected if water were dripping
off of the tree's leaves and branches on a calm day. From a plan view, the area on the ground
covered by the tree canopy.
Driveway: a legally and physically defined area available and practical for motor vehicle
ingress and egress to the building site from a road.
Drug Store or Pharmacy: facility for preparing, preserving, compounding, and dispensing drugs
and medicines; and, may include the display and sale of other merchandise, such as cosmetics,
notions, fountain service, and similar items.
Dry Cleaner or Laundry, Commercial: a plant for cleaning garments, fabrics, rugs, draperies, or
other similar items on a commercial or bulk basis.
Dry Cleaning or Laundry Shop, Small Custom: an establishment for custom cleaning only of
individual garments, fabrics, rugs, draperies, or other similar items, and not a bulk or
commercial type plant.
Durable, Dustless Surface: a permanently surfaced area of asphalt, concrete, brick, cobblestone,
oil-matte, and/or chip-seal for the standing and maneuvering of vehicles in all zones maintained
adequately for all weather uses.
Dwelling: a building, or portion thereof, designed or used for human occupancy as a residence
for one or more persons, not including vehicles, travel trailers, or recreational/camping vehicles.
a. Dwelling, Single Family: a building, on a separately platted lot, designed or used for
residential purposes by not more than one family, although potentially including one
ancillary dwelling unit. Each single-family dwelling must have separate utility services.
b. Dwelling, Two-Family, or Duplex: a building designated and used for residential purposes
with two (2) attached dwelling units on one lot or parcel by not more than two families and
containing two dwelling units only.
c. Dwelling, Triplex: a building designed and used for residential purposes with three (3)
attached dwelling units on one lot or parcel.
d. Attached Single-Family: two or more single-family dwellings on individual lots or parcels
with common end walls. See "a", above.
e. Dwelling, Multiple Family: a building containing two or more dwelling units, including
units that are located one over the other.
f. Dwelling, Seasonal: a dwelling unit not used as a principal residence that may be occupied
weekends and for brief periods during the year.
g. Dwelling, Townhouse: a single-family dwelling unit, on a separately platted lot, with use
and occupancy identical to all other single-family dwellings, except without the required
yard setbacks in the side yard. Fire separations are required between each townhouse, and
such required fire separation may be obtained by two separate one-hour fire resistive walls,
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 128
or a single masonry common wall, having a two-hour fire resistive rating. Said fire walls
shall have no penetrations whatsoever. Each townhouse must have separate utility services;
however, general utility services, on that land owned and maintained by a homeowner's
association, will be allowed. Each common wall shall be covered by a set of deed
restrictions.
Dwelling Unit: one or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as a separate
living quarter, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities provided within the unit for the
exclusive use of the occupants maintaining the household.
Easement: a non-possessory interest in the land of another which entitles the owner of the
interest to a limited use or enjoyment of the other's land and to protection from interference
with this use.
Eating Establishment: synonymous with restaurant, but does not include drinking
establishment.
Elevated Building: a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above
ground level by foundation walls, sheer walls, post piers, pilings, or columns.
Elevation a building face, or scaled drawing of the same, from grade to roof ridgeline.
Emergency Medical Facility: a first aid station or headquarters for an ambulance service, which
offers emergency outpatient treatment only.
Emergency Water Storage Facility: a facility for the storage of water used for fire protection
and suppression. Such facility may consist of a storage tank, whether elevated, above ground,
or underground, a swimming pool, or other reasonable means to store an emergency water
supply on the premises.
Emergency Measures: unforeseen or sudden occurrences usually caused by civil unrest or
natural disaster, esp. of a danger demanding immediate remedy or action.
Engine or Motor Repair Shop: a shop for the repair of engines or motors. Term includes
electric or fuel power motors.
Equipment, Heavy: farm, forestry, or construction machinery weighing in excess of 10,000
pounds.
Evergreen: a plant with foliage that persists and remains green year-round.
Ex Parte Contact: private meetings or discussions between a member of a reviewing body and a
person or persons who have some interest in a case to be heard by that body. Oregon law doesn't
forbid such contact but requires that decision makers disclose them publicly. ORS 227.180 is the
pertinent statute for cities.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 129
Family: an individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or legal
guardianship using one kitchen, and providing meals or lodging to not more than two additional
persons, excluding servants, or a group of not more than five unrelated persons, living together
as one housekeeping unit, using one kitchen. The maximum occupancy allowed in special group
homes that permitted outright by State Law in single or multifamily zones shall not exceed the
number of persons allowed by State statute.
Family Day Care Center: a day care facility where care is provided in the home of the provider
to fewer than 13 children, including children of the provider, regardless of full or part-time
status.
Farm Use: the current employment of land for the purpose of obtaining a profit in money by
raising, harvesting, and selling crops or by the feeding, breeding, management and sale of, or the
produce of, livestock, poultry, fur-bearing animals or honeybees or for dairying and the sale of
dairy products or any other agricultural or horticultural use of animal husbandry or any
combination thereof.
"Farm Use" includes the preparation and storage of the products raised on such land for man's
use and animal use and disposal by marketing or otherwise.
Feed Store, Retail (No Mill): facility for the sale of grain, prepared feed, and forage for pets,
livestock, and fowl, but not involving the grinding, mixing, or commercial compounding of
such items, and the sale of additional pet items, gardening supplies and farm equipment.
Fell: to remove or sever a tree or to use any procedure the natural result of which is to cause the
death or other substantial destruction of the tree. Fell does not in any context include normal
trimming or pruning.
Fence, Sight Obscuring: any fence which contains any sort of non-transparent paneling, lath,
sheeting, planking, posts, fabric or organic material either dead or alive, etc., of any material
which is not necessary for the support of the fence, shall be termed sight obscuring. This shall
not include chain link or other similar fences which are maintained clear and clean of any
material, either organic or inorganic.
Fill: the placement by man of sand, sediment, concrete, or other material, usually in submerged
lands or wetlands, to create new uplands or raise the elevation of land. Fill shall also include a
properly engineered sanitary landfill.
Final Map: a map prepared in accordance with this Code, which is designated to be filed with
the Tillamook County Clerk and the State of Oregon.
Fish Habitat: those areas upon which fish depend in order to meet their requirements for
spawning, rearing, food supply, and migration (According to Oregon Administrative Rule 660-
23-090(1).
Fish Use: an area inhabited at any time of the year by anadromous or game fish species or fish
that are listed as threatened or endangered species under the federal or state endangered species
acts. Fish use is determined from Oregon Department of Forestry Stream Classification maps.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 130
Flag Lot: a "panhandle" shaped lot or parcel with its widest area set back some distance from a
road, and having a thin strip of land connecting to the road to provide legal access.
Flagpole: the thin strip of land connecting the widest area of a flag lot to a road. The flagpole
shall be considered a part of the tax lot for purposes of calculating total lot area.
Flood or Flooding: a general and temporary condition of partial complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or,
b. The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Hazard Boundary Map: an official map of a community issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency where the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e. mudflow),
and related erosion areas having hazards have been designated as Zone A, M, and/or E.
Flood Insurance: the insurance coverage provided under the Federal Flood Insurance program.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (Firm): an official map of a community on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
Floodplain: the area adjoining a stream, river, or lake that is subject to regional flooding. A
regional flood is standard statistical calculation used by engineers to determine the probability
of severe flooding. It represents the largest flood which has a one percent chance of occurring
in any one year in an area as a result of periods of higher than normal rainfall or stream flows,
high winds, rapid snow melt, natural stream blockages, or combinations thereof.
Floodplain 100Year: the land within the City subject to a one percent chance of flooding in any
given year, including the floodway and floodway fringe.
Floodprone: areas likely to be flooded by virtue of their location adjoining a river, stream, or
other water course or water body to the extent where the level of hazard exceeds acceptable
designated floodplain, floodway, and approximate method floodplain, torrential flood hazard
area identified by the Department of Geology and Mineral Industries, and other areas both
within or outside of FEMA mapped areas which are either known to be flood prone or where
flood hazard conditions may be more extreme than indicated by FEMA and development
would jeopardize life or property.
Floodproofing: any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved
real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Floodway: the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 131
Floor Area: the maximum horizontal area of living space, to include guest house and/or
ancillary unit, not to include decks, balconies, porches, exterior stairways, garages, carports,
and storage.
Floor Area Ratio (FAR): the gross floor area of all buildings or structures on a lot divided by
the total lot area.
Fluorescent colors: extra bright and glowing type colors; includes "dayglow" orange,
fluorescent green, etc.
Fluorescent lighting: light provided by fluorescent tubes. Fluorescent lighting is a type of
electric discharge lamp consisting of a glass tube filled with a mixture of argon and mercury
vapor. Fluorescent lamps are cooler and more efficient than incandescent lamps.
Food Store, Retail Sale: an establishment where diversified foods and associated items are kept
and displayed for retail sales. Synonymous with grocery store, supermarket, and convenience
grocery.
Foster Family Home, as defined by OAR 412-22-010 (4): any State-certified home maintained
by a person who has under his or her care any child unattended by parents or a guardian for the
purpose of providing such child with care, food, and lodging. Such homes include foster, family,
group, and shelter homes.
Foundation (permanent): primary support for a structure through which the imposed load is
transmitted to the footing or earth.
Fraternal or Lodge Building: a building for a chartered private service organization, club,
society, or order.
Frontage: that portion of a parcel of property or building which abuts a dedicated public street
or highway.
a) Building Frontage: the single wall surface of a building facing a given direction.
b) Double Frontage: a parcel of property or building which abuts two (2) dedicated
public streets or highways.
Fuel Alcohol Production: the distillation of fuel alcohol from agricultural products, byproducts,
or waste.
Fuel break: an area maintained around buildings and structures for fire protection, which is
cleared of dry brush and grass. The fuel break may contain ornamental shrubbery, specimen
trees, lawn, or other plants used as ground cover, provided the plant material does not provide a
means of rapidly transmitting fire from native growth to buildings and structures, or from
development to surrounding rural lands.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 132
Garage: an attached or accessory structure, designed primarily for storage of the family
automobile(s). Also used for the storage of additional items, personal shop activities, but
limited to non-habitable uses.
Garden Shop and Plant Sales, Display, or Greenhouse: a facility for the growing, display, and
sale of garden and/or flower seeds, plants, nursery stock, and related items, which may include a
glassed enclosure for the cultivation or protection of tender plants.
Government Facility: projects, activities, and facilities deemed to be necessary for the
maintenance of city, county, state, or federal purposes consistent with Comprehensive Plan
policies. Government facilities shall include federal, state, county or municipal offices or
facilities. See also "Public Facility"
Government Offices: projects and activities deemed to be necessary for the maintenance of
city, county, state, or federal purposes consistent with Comprehensive Plan policies, and shall
include federal, state, county or municipal offices.
Grade: See “ Grade (Natural)” definition.
Grade (Natural): the elevation of the ground level in its natural state, before construction,
filling, or excavation.
Grocery Store: See food store.
Gross Floor Area (GFA): the gross floor area of a building is the same (in square feet) of the
area at each floor level, including cellars, basements, mezzanines, penthouses, corridors,
lobbies, stores, and offices, that are included within the principal outside faces of exterior
walls, not including architectural setbacks or projections. Included are all stories or areas that
have floor surfaces with clear standing head room (6 feet, 6 inches, minimum) regardless of
their use. Where a ground level area, or part thereof, within the principal outside faces of the
exterior wall is left unenclosed, the gross floor area of the unenclosed portion is said to be
considered as a part of the overall square footage of the building. All unroofed areas and
unenclosed roofed- over spaces, except as defined above, are to be excluded from the area
calculations. Any roofed-over areas with three or more sides and used for storage of materials
or goods shall be included in the gross floor area.
Ground Cover: a plant material or non-plant material (e.g. mulch, bark chips, dust) that is used
to cover bare ground.
Group Home: a licensed home maintained and supervised by adults for the purpose of providing
care, food, and lodging for children under the age of 18 years, unattended by parent(s) or
guardian(s), where the number of unrelated persons living together as one household commonly
exceeds five. The maximum occupancy allowed in group homes shall not exceed the number of
persons allowed by State statute. ORS 443.400.
Guest House: living quarters within an accessory structure, located on the same tax lot as the
main dwelling, and occupied solely by members of the owner's family or temporary guests. A
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 133
guest house contains no kitchen or kitchen facilities. A guest house must conform to the
dwelling density and standards of the zoning district.
Guest Suites: an accommodation with two or more contiguous rooms comprising a
compartment, with or without doors between such rooms, that provides living, sleeping,
sanitary, and storage facilities.
Habitable Floor: any floor which is or can be made suitable for living purposes. These areas may
be walled and are suitable for use as a place of working, sleeping, cooking, recreation, or the
like, usually having access to heat, plumbing, and electricity. It includes foyers, hallways,
restrooms, closets, storage, and other common areas within a building. Habitable floor does not
include mechanical rooms, elevators and fireplaces.
Hammerhead turnaround: a "T" or "L" shaped dead-end street that allows for vehicles to turn
around.
Handcraft, Ceramic Sculpture or Similar Art Work Studio or Facility: facility to create custom,
artistic or decorative objects such as leather goods, jewelry, glass, ceramic or other oven-fired
nonmetallic mineral products, woodwork or other carved, three-dimensional works of art, made
by hand.
Hazardous Waste: discarded, useless, or unwanted materials or residues in solid, liquid, or
gaseous state and their empty containers which are classified as hazardous pursuant to ORS
459.410, OAR 34063100 to 135, and these rules. A hazardous material is a substance this same
definition applies to except that it is not a waste.
Health Related Center or Spa: a facility which offers health related treatment, education,
recreation, with equipment and facilities for exercising and improving physical fitness, not
including long-term or emergency care.
Hedge: any combination of non-annual plantings intended to form an obstruction to ingress or
egress, and/or vision, such plantings providing no physical or visual space between individual
plantings and where branches or foliage of one planting physically contact adjacent plantings.
Height of Building: the height of all structures measured vertically from the natural grade at the
lowest exposed portion of the foundation to the uppermost point of the roof edge or peak, wall,
parapet, mansard, or other feature perpendicular to that grade.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 134
Heritage Tree: all broadleaf trees (except poplar trees) equal or greater than two feet DBH (for
multi-stem trees, if the sum of the areas of all stems four inches in diameter or larger at DBH is
greater than 3 square feet, it is a heritage tree). All conifers equal or greater than three feet DBH.
Also any documented historically significant trees or trees that are rare or of outstanding size
and/or form for their species, as noted in the adopted Heritage Tree list.
Historic Rehabilitation: the act or process of returning a property to a state of utility through
repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient, contemporary use, while preserving
those portions or features of the property which are significant to its historical, architectural,
and cultural values.
Historical Significance: the term : that the site or structure (1) has character interest or value, as
part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the City, State or Nation; (2) is the
site of an historic event with an effect upon society, (3) is identified with a person or group of
persons who had some influence on society; or (4) exemplifies the cultural, political, economic,
social or historic heritage of the community.
Historic Resource: any building, structure, or site having historic or architectural significance
as defined by OAR 660-023-0200(7).
Home Occupation: an accessory use, usually of a nonresidential nature, carried on in a dwelling
unit except where otherwise allowed by this Code, and which:
a. Is incidental to the primary occupancy of the home as a dwelling,
b. Is for gainful employment involving the manufacture, provision or sale of goods and/or
services,
c. Does not take on an outward appearance or manifest any characteristics of a business or
operation of a retail nature; and conforms to the standards specified for home occupations.
Home Schooling: homeschool, home education or home learning is the education of children at
home, typically by parents but sometimes by tutors, an academic curriculum at home rather than
in other formal settings of public or private school.
Horizontal Surface: a horizontal plan 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the
perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet from the center of each end of
the Primary Surface of each visual or utility runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines
tangent to those arcs.
Hospital: any institution, place, building, or agency which maintains and operates organized
facilities for twenty (20) or more persons for the diagnosis, care and treatment of human illness,
including convalescence and including care during and after pregnancy, or which maintains
and operates organized facilities for any such purpose, and to which persons may be admitted
for overnight stay or for a longer period. A hospital is considered a Critical Care Facility and
an Urgent Care Facility.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 135
Hotel: an establishment that provides lodging as a temporary abiding place, containing guest
rooms or units, furnishing customary hotel services such as linen, maid service, and the use and
upkeep of furniture and usually meals and other services for travelers and other paying guests.
Hydraulics: a study of the mechanical behavior of water in physical systems and processes. In
floodplain management, hydraulics refers to determination of the lateral and vertical extent of a
particular flood. Hydraulics also encompasses the flow characteristics around and through
hydraulic structures such as bridges, culverts and weirs.
Hydrological Study/Hydrologic Analysis: an analysis used to estimate flood flow rates in a
floodplain to develop a reasonable estimate of the future conditions of the 1 percent annual
chance flood flow, relying on rainfall runoff simulations with altered land use conditions.
Common methods are stream gage analysis, rainfall-runoff models, or a combination of the two.
All of the currently accepted hydrology models for peak flow determination can be used to
estimate future conditions by changing land cover/use parameters. All runoff models should be
calibrated to past flood events before they are used for base flood determination. It is
recommended that a conservative assumption be used that all of the areas in the watershed will
be developed as planned. This information can be used in the hydrologic model’s land use-toland
cover relationships to describe a build-out condition within the watershed. These flood
studies are necessarily dependent on past precipitation and flow records, which do not provide
information on flows generated under different climatic conditions.
Illustration: a line drawing or silhouette of a realistic object.
Incompatibility of land uses: an issue arising from the proximity or direct association of
contradictory, incongruous, or discordant land uses or activities, including the impacts of noise,
vibration, smoke, odors, toxic matter, radiation, and similar environmental conditions.
Immediate Danger of Collapse of a Tree: that a tree may already be leaning, with the;
surrounding soil heaving, and/or there is a significant likelihood that the tree will topple or
otherwise fail and cause damage to the surroundings. Immediate Danger of Collapse does not
include hazardous conditions that can be alleviated by pruning or treatment.
Impervious surface: development that does not allow for water infiltration (e.g. pavement,
roofs, etc.) and any material which reduces and prevents absorption of stormwater into
previously undeveloped land.
Industrial: any use of land, structure, or natural resources involving the manufacturing,
processing, or assembly of semi-finished or finished products.
Infill: the development of vacant bypassed lands located in an area that is mainly developed.
Intensity: the floor area ratio (FAR). Floor area ratios are used as a measure of the intensity of
the site being developed. The ratio is generated by dividing the building area by the parcel area,
being sure to use the same units
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 136
Junk Yard : a place where waste, discarded, or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged,
baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including auto wrecking yards, house wrecking yards,
used lumber yards and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural
steel materials and equipment; but not including such places where such uses are conducted
entirely within a completely enclosed building, and not including pawn shops and
establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used furniture and household equipment, used
cars in operative conditions, or salvaged materials incidental to manufacturing operations.
Kennel: a facility. 1. In which dogs are given training for which a fee is charged, or 2. Operated,
not for profit, and intended to provide temporary care for lost, strayed, or abandoned animals; or
3. In which dogs, which are not licensed under ORS 609.100 (1), are kept, when such dogs are
kept for farm use, breeding or sale; or 4. Which is a business conducted for the purpose of
boarding and/or sale of dogs or cats.
Kindergarten: Public or private school or class for children usually from four to six years old.
Kitchen: any room, all or any part of which is designed, built, equipped, used or intended to be
used for the preparation of food and/or the washing of dishes.
Laboratory, Manufacturing: operations involving the compounding of products such as
perfumes and pharmaceuticals, and the development and assembly of instruments and similar
items.
Laboratory, Scientific Testing Precision: facility which performs scientific tests or analysis or
experimental studies.
Land Division: the process of dividing land to create parcels or lots. Please see Partition Land
for further details. See also Partition.
a. Expedited Land Division Process. a land division process with distinct procedures and
requirements from the quasi-judicial process (see administrative).
Land Use: the main activity that occurs on a piece of land, or the structure in which the activity
occurs.
Landscaping: not only trees, grass, bushes, shrubs, flowers and garden areas, but also the
arrangement of fountains, patios, decks, street furniture and ornamental concrete, or stonework
areas, and artificial turf, mulch or carpeting, but excludes artificial plants, shrubs, bushes or
flowers.
Landscape or Plant Nursery: facility for raising and marketing plants, trees, shrubs, bulbs, and
related materials.
Lawn: grass or similar materials maintained as a ground cover of less than 6 inches in height,
and generally managed to restrict the growth of shrubs and trees that inhibit the growth of
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 137
grasses and forbs. For purposes of this Code, lawn is not considered native vegetation
regardless of the species used.
Legislative Decision: matters involving the creation, revision, or large scale implementation of
public policy, zone changes and comprehensive plan amendments which apply to entire
districts. Legislative decisions are initially considered by the Planning Commission whose job it
shall be to provide a recommendation to the City Council, with the final decision being made by
the City Council.
Light Fabrication and Assembly Process: manufacturing which does not involve the generation
outside the property of noise, odor, vibration, dust or hazard. The term includes, but is not
limited to, the manufacture of electronic components, jewelry, clothing, trimming decorations
and any similar item.
Light Industrial: any industrial enterprise where activities and operations in no manner affect in a
detrimental way any of the surrounding properties and where any adverse impacts are restricted
to the subject property. Such uses shall not be adverse due to odor, particulate matter, smoke,
noise, vibration, appearance, or similar impacts. Vehicular access to and use of streets shall be
no greater than that generated by a commercial enterprise.
Loading Space: an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building for the temporary
parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, and
which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access.
Local Improvement District (LID): a small district formed for the purpose of carrying out local
improvements (paving of streets, construction of storm sewers, development of a park, etc.).
Property owners within the LID are assessed for the cost of the improvements in accordance
with ORS 223.387-223.485.
Local Utilities: the usual electric power, telephone, gas, water, sewer drainage lines, and those
inline facilities such as gas regulating stations and water pumping stations.
Lowest Floor: the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in
an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non- elevation design requirements of this Code found at Section 20,5B(1)b.
Lot: a unit or parcel of land used or capable of being used under the regulations of this Code,
lawfully created by a subdivision or ordinances in effect at the time of its creation.
Lot Area : the computed area contained within the lot boundary lines, measured in a horizontal
plane; said area to be exclusive of street or alley right-of-way.
Lot, Corner: a lot, parcel, or portion thereof, situated at the intersection of two or more streets.
Lot Coverage: that percentage of the total lot area covered by structures as herein defined.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 138
Lot Depth: the horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines. In the case of a
corner lot, the depth shall be the length of its longest front lot line.
Lot, Flag: a lot or parcel which has access to a road, street or easement, by means of a narrow
strip of lot or easement.
Lot, Interior: a lot or parcel of land other than a corner lot.
Lot Line: the property line bounding a lot or parcel.
Lot Line, Front: the property line separating the lot or parcel from the road or street, other than
an alley. In the case of a corner lot or parcel or a lot with double frontage, the shortest property
line along a street or road which has been improved and for which addresses have already been
assigned, other than an alley. In the case of a flag lot or other parcel or lot, where the majority of
the lot or parcel does not front on a road, the front lot or parcel line shall be one of the shortest
lines, if a rectangular lot or parcel.
Lot Line, Rear: a property line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot or parcel
line. In the case of an irregular, triangular, or other shaped lot or parcel, a line ten feet in length
within the lot or parcel, parallel to, and at a maximum distance from, the front lot or parcel line.
Lot Line, Side: any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
Lot of Record: a lot held in separate ownership as shown on the records of the County Assessor
at the time of the passage of an Code or regulation establishing the zoning district in which the
lot is located.
Lot, Through: an interior lot having a frontage on two (2) streets and/or highways.
Lot Width: horizontal distances between the side lot lines or parcel lines measured within the
lot or parcel boundaries or the main distance between the side lot lines within the buildable
area. In the case of a corner lot, lot width: the main horizontal distance between the longest
front lot line and the opposite lot line not abutting the street.
Lowest Floor: the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in
an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non- elevation design requirements of this Code.
Lumber Yard: facility for stocking and selling lumber and other materials needed for building.
Term includes hardware and building materials and supplies.
Machine Shop: facility in which material is processed by machining, cutting, grinding,
welding, or similar processing. Term includes blacksmith shop, electric motor repair, and gun
shop.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 139
Machinery Sales and Service: facility for repairing equipment and selling and/or servicing
machinery.
Maintain: to cause or allow to continue in existence. When the context indicates, the word: to
preserve and care for a structure, through improvement, alterations of site conditions or to such
an extent that it remains attractive, safe and presentable and carries out the purpose for which it
was installed, constructed or required.
Management Unit: a discrete geographic area, defined by physical characteristics and features,
within which particular uses and activities are promoted, encouraged, protected, or enhanced,
and others are discouraged, restricted, or prohibited.
Manufactured Dwelling:
a. A Residential Trailer, a structure constructed for movement on the public highways, that
has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, is
being used for residential purposes and was constructed before January 1, 1962.
b. A Mobile Home, a structure constructed for movement on the public highways, that has
sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, is being
used for residential purposes and was constructed between January 1, 1962 and June 16,
1976, and met the construction requirements of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the
time of construction.
c. A Manufactured Home, a structure constructed for movement on the public highways, that
has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, is
being used for residential purposes and was constructed in accordance with federal
manufactured housing construction and safety standards regulations in effect at the time of
construction.
Manufactured Dwelling Park: any place where four or more mobile homes are located within
500 feet of one another on a lot, tract or parcel of land under the same ownership, the primary
purpose of which is to rent space or keep space for rent to any person for a charge or fee paid or
to be paid for the rental or use of facilities or to offer space free in connection with securing the
trade or patronage of such person.
"Manufactured Dwelling Park" does not include a lot or lots located within a subdivision being
rented or leased for occupancy by no more than one mobile home per lot if the subdivision was
approved by the City of Tillamook. (added per Ord. 1121, effective 2/22/92)
Manufactured Home Accessory Building or Structure: any awning, portable, demountable, or
permanent cabana, ramada, carport, porch skirting, or steps established for use of the occupant
of the manufactured dwelling and which are designed or intended to be attached to and which
depend, in whole or in part, upon the manufactured dwelling for structural support.
Man: as used by this Code the word man refers generally to humans and is inclusive of
both the masculine and feminine, unless the context otherwise requires.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 140
Map: a final diagram, drawing or other writing concerning a major or minor partition.
a. Comprehensive Plan Map: a generalized, coordinated land use map and policy statement of
the governing body of a local government that interrelates all functional and natural systems
and activities relating to the use of lands, including but not limited to sewer and water
systems, transportation systems, educational facilities, recreational facilities, and natural
resources and air and water quality management programs.
b. Flood Map: the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for a community issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency
c. Wetlands Map: the City map with graphic representations of the type, size and location of
the wetlands in the City of Tillamook
d. Zoning Map: the City map that depicts current zoning designations in the City of
Tillamook.
Marquee: a permanent, roofed, non-enclosed structure projecting over an entrance to a building
and not separately attached to the ground surface.
Massing or Building Mass: the height, width, and depth of a structure. Often used in
comparison to the relative masses of the buildings around the subject structure, hence
"massing."
Master Plan: a long-range plan or long range site plan which provides for development of an
applicant's property or properties or specified area of the City.
Medical Services: establishments primarily engaged in the provision of personal health services
ranging from prevention, diagnosis, and treatment, or rehabilitation services provided by
physicians, dentist, nurses, and other health personnel as well as the provision of medical testing
and analysis services. Typical uses include medical offices, dental laboratories, health
maintenance organizations, or detoxification centers, Critical care facilities, Emergency Care
facilities, Urgent Care facilities, and Walk-in facilities.
Ministerial Decision: decisions made by the Planning Director or designated staff where there is
clear and objective criteria and the decision requires no use of discretion. These decisions are
made without public notice or public hearing. See Administrative Decisions.
Microfacility: an attached wireless communication facility which consists of antennas equal to
or less than four (4) feet in height, or six (6) feet in height for omni-directional antennas and
with an area of not more than 580 square inches.
Mineral Resources: precious metals and other earth or natural materials other than aggregate
resources.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 141
Minifacility: an attached wireless communication facility which consists of antennas equal to or
less than ten (10) feet in height, or a parabolic antenna up to one (1) meter in diameter and with
an area of not more than fifty (50) square feet as viewed from any one point.
Mini-Warehouse/Storage Units: a structure or structures divided into units, used only for
storage of goods by an individual or business on a rental basis.
Mitigation: to avoid, rectify, repair or compensate for negative impacts, which result from other
actions and restoration of riparian areas, enhanced buffer treatment or similar measures.
a. Off-Site Mitigation means mitigation undertaken in areas distant from or coterminous with a
development site.
b. On-Site Mitigation means mitigation undertaken within the lot or parcel affected by a
development action.
Mitigation Plan: a detailed plan to compensate for identified adverse impacts on water
resources, riparian setback areas, and wetlands that result from alteration, development,
excavation or vegetation removal within the Wetland-Riparian overlay district. A Mitigation
Plan must be prepared by qualified biologists (According OAR 660-23-090(1).
Mobile Home/Modular Home: a structure or vehicle fabricated on a permanent chassis that is
transportable in one or more sections; is designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required facilities, has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing
facilities, or any combination thereof; and is intended for human occupancy or is being used for
residential purposes.
Mobile Home Park: (As described in ORS 446.003) Any place where four or more such homes
are located within 500 feet of each other on a lot, tract, or parcel of land under the same
ownership, the primary purpose of which is:
a. To rent or lease space for mobile homes for a charge or fee paid or
b. To be paid for the rental, lease, or use of facilities for mobile homes; or
c. To offer space free for location of mobile homes in connection with securing the trade or
patronage of such person, but not including those used exclusively for farm labor or
recreational camps.
Mobile Unit Food and Beverage Carts: A mobile kitchen and food service establishment that is a
vehicle- mounted or wheeled, capable of being readily moved and set up for the purpose of
selling and marketing prepared food and beverage.
Mobile Unit Food and Beverage Cart Users: Owners and operators of individual and affiliated
Mobile Unit Food and Beverage Carts, along with their employees.
Motel: a building or group of buildings used for transient residential purposes containing guest
rooms and/or dwelling units with automobile storage space provided in connection therewith,
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 142
which building or group is designed, intended, or used primarily for the accommodation of
transient automobile travelers with lodging for motorists in rooms usually having direct access to
an open parking area; including groups designated as auto cabins, motor courts, motor hotels and
similar designations.
Mural: a large picture, painting or wallpaper pattern painted or affixed directly on an interior or
exterior wall or ceiling. The size of the mural usually is limited to the size of the surface on
which it is to be affixed.
Natural Hazard: natural areas that can cause dangerous or difficult development situations. For
example, natural hazard areas include steep slopes, unstable soils, landslides, flood areas.
Negotiate: to confer with another or others in order to come to terms or reach an agreement.
Neighborhood: a geographical area lived in by neighbors and usually having distinguishing
character.
Neighborhood identification: a sign located at the entry point to a single-family subdivision
comprising not less than two (2) acres, or a sign identifying a multiple-family development.
Neighborhood-scale design: site and building design elements that are dimensionally related to
housing and pedestrians, such as narrow streets with tree canopies, smaller parking areas, lower
building heights and similar neighborhood characteristics.
Neon light: a form of illumination using inert gases in glass tubes. Includes "black light" and
other neon lights.
Net Loss: a permanent loss of riparian functions provided by native riparian structure and
vegetation that results from a development action despite mitigation measures having been
taken.
Noise: a level of sound which disturbs, injures or endangers the health, safety or welfare of
others, capable of being heard at or beyond the boundary of property from which the noise
originates, results in the disturbance of peace, and exceeds sound in volume made by any make
and model of engine or machine that is not consistent with its new or stock, manufactured
condition.
Noise Sensitive Areas: areas used as a church, day care center, hospital, nursing care center,
school or place used for overnight accommodations of persons, including but not limited to,
individual homes, individual apartments, trailers and nursing homes.
Nonconforming Lots or Parcels: lots or parcels legally created prior to the effective date of a
land division or zoning regulation and not meeting the minimum lot area, width, or access
requirements of those regulations.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 143
Nonconforming Structure: a building, structure, or portion thereof, which lawfully existed prior
to adoption of a zoning regulation with which the structure does not conform. Such structures
may be nonconforming as to height, setback, lot coverage, or similar requirements of the zone.
Nonconforming Use: a use lawfully made prior to adoption of a zoning regulation with which
the use does not conform.
No-Rise Analysis: Any project in a floodway reviewed to determine if the project will increase
flood heights. An engineering analysis must be conducted before a permit can be issued. The
community's permit file must have a record of the results of this analysis, which can be in the
form of a No-rise Certification. This No-rise Certification must be supported by technical data
and signed by a registered professional engineer. The supporting technical data should be based
on the standard step-backwater computer model used to develop the 100-year floodway shown
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
Nuisance: an intentional, negligent or reckless act or failure to act by a person which interferes
with the use and/or enjoyment of the life or property of another person or which interferes with
the rights of the public and for which the law will presume resulting damage.
Nursing Home or Convalescent Home: facility providing care, rehabilitation services, and
minor treatment for more than five persons under the direction of a physician, licensed by the
state. A nursing home may furnish basic provisions of food and laundry. Term includes rest
home, home for the aged, and sanitorium.
OAR: Oregon Administrative Rules. The official compilation of rules and regulations having
the force of law in the state of Oregon. It is the regulatory and administrative corollary to
Oregon Revised Statutes, and is published pursuant to ORS 183.360 (3).
Off-street Parking: all off-street areas designed, used, required, or intended to be used for the
parking of motor vehicles. "Off-street Parking" areas shall be a durable and dustless, surfaced
and marked area.
On-street Parking: parking in the street right-of-way, typically in parking lanes or bays.
Parking may be "parallel" or "angled" in relation to the edge of the right-of-way or curb.
Open Space: any portion of a building lot not covered by a building, and shall more specifically
include parks, landscaped viewsheds, natural areas, former orchards or groves, outdoor parking
areas, covered and partially enclosed patios, terraces, and courtyards provided such areas have at
least one side open, and are available for public use and enjoyment in conjunction with
commercial use of the premises.
Ornamental Tree: a tree planted primarily for its ornamental value or for screening purposes;
tends to be smaller at maturity than a shade tree.
ORS: Oregon Revised Statutes – (State Law). The codified body of statutory law governing the
U.S. state of Oregon, as enacted by the Oregon Legislative Assembly, and occasionally by
citizen initiative. The statutes are subordinate to the Oregon Constitution.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 144
Overburden: soil, rock, sand, and similar materials that lie above natural deposits of minerals.
Overlay Zone: a special zone that is applied “over” or in addition to a base zone, of which such
properties are subject to the requirements of both the base zone and the overlay zone. Also
known as a “combining” zone.
Owner/Landowner: a person(s), partnership, or corporation possessing fee title to a tract of
land, or shown as owner of record on the latest tax rolls or deed records of the County, or
purchasing a parcel of property under written contract.
Parcel: includes a unit of land created:
a. by partitioning land as defined in ORS 92.010 in compliance with all applicable planning,
zoning, and partitioning ordinances or regulations, or
b. by deed or land sales contract, if there were no applicable planning, zoning or partitioning
ordinances or regulations.
The term parcel does not include a unit of land created solely to establish a separate tax
account.
Park or Playground: a recreation area or park owned or operated by a private entity, public
agency, or school district, and available to the general public.
Parking Area, Public: an open area, other than a street or other public way, used for the parking
of motor vehicles and available to the public whether for a fee, free or as an accommodation for
clients or customers.
Parking Space: a durable and dustless, permanently surfaced and marked area in a range
between seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet and nine (9) feet wide and fifteen (15) feet and twenty
(20) feet long, exclusive of maneuvering and access area, permanently reserved for the
temporary storage of one (1) automobile, and connected with a street by a surfaced driveway
which affords ingress and egress for automobiles.
a. A parking space for a compact vehicle shall be of the dimensions seven and one-half feet
by fifteen feet.
b. A parking space for disabled parking shall be of the dimensions thirteen feet by nineteen
feet.
c. A parking space for Recreational Vehicles shall be of the dimensions twelve feet by thirty
feet.
Parking Strip: the area between the street curb and sidewalk in the public right-of-way, utilized
for landscaping and street tree planting; also known as Planter Strip or Tree Lawn.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 145
Partition: either an act of partitioning land or an area or tract of land partitioned as defined in
this section. A partition does not include the creation of a street.
Partition Land: to divide land into two or three parcels within a calendar year, but does not
include a division of land that creates a road or results from a lien foreclosure, foreclosure of a
recorded contract for the sale of real property or the creation of cemetery lots; or an adjustment
of a property line by the relocation of a common boundary where an additional unit of land is
not created and where the existing unit of land reduced in size by the adjustment complies with
any applicable zoning Code. Partitioning of a lot or parcel or a portion thereof into more than
three parcels in a calendar year results in a subdivision.
Peddler: includes any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon,
automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or
from street to street, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish,
vegetables, fruits, garden truck farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for
sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers; or who, without traveling from place
to place, sells or offers the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car or other
vehicle or conveyance; or who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to
purchasers.
Pedestrian Facilities: improvements and provisions made to accommodate or encourage
walking, including sidewalks, accessways, crosswalks, ramps, paths, and trails. Pedestrian Way
or Pedestrian Pathway: a right-of-way for pedestrian traffic.
a. Reasonably Direct Pathway: a route that does not deviate unnecessarily from a straight line
or a route that does not involve a significant amount of out-of-direction travel for likely
users.
b. Safe and Convenient Pathways: bicycle and pedestrian routes that are reasonably free
from hazards and provide a reasonably direct route of travel between destinations.
Permittee: the person who is proposing to use or who is using the land pursuant to any permit
required herein.
Person: a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
Pet Shop: facility for the display and sale of small animals, fish, and birds as pets, and
accessories, but not involving commercial boarding or treating of any animal, fish, or bird.
Place of Public Assembly: a structure or place which the public may enter for such purposes as
deliberation, education, worship, shopping, entertainment, amusement, awaiting transportation
or similar activity.
Planned Unit Development: a development of primarily residential character which gives special
attention to areas not built upon by varying the orientation of structures for energy and space
conservation, and by allowing types of structures and uses which otherwise would not be
considered under conventional zoning specifications.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 146
Planning Commission: a commission appointed by the governing body of the City to be responsible
for the administration of planning as provided by ORS 227.020.
Planned Community: a development, as provided for in the Tillamook Zoning Regulations, of
residential, commercial, industrial, or a mixture of residential, commercial, industrial, and
semi-public units grouped in a fashion not customarily allowed by zoning or subdivision
regulations, and providing for variety and diversification in the relationship between buildings
and open spaces. Planned unit developments should each be planned as an entity, grouping
dwellings units, allowing an area for open space, mixing housing types, including mobile
homes, land uses, and should be designed to preserve natural features.
Planter strip: a landscaped area for street trees and other plantings within the public right-ofway,
usually between the street and sidewalk. See also Parking Strip or Tree Lawn.
Plat: a diagram, drawing, replat, or other writing concerning a partition or subdivision
a. A "preliminary plat" is a plat submitted prior to actual application and is intended only for
department review or discussion.
b. A "Tentative plat" is a plat submitted as a part of an application for a partition or
subdivision, also referred to as a Tentative Plan.
c. A "final plat" is a plat which has been prepared for recordation after approval of the
tentative plat.
d. A "replat" is an alteration of a previously recorded plat. A property line adjustment is not a
replat. A partition of an existing lot is not a replat.
Platted Lot: a lot whose legal boundaries have been established by a
legally created plat which has been duly recorded in the office of the
Tillamook County Clerk.
Plaza: a public square or extra wide sidewalk (e.g. as on a street corner) that allows for special
events, outdoor seating, sidewalk sales, and similar pedestrian activities.
Pocket Park: a small park, usually less than one-half acre.
Pollard: a tree cut back to the trunk to promote the growth of a dense head of foliage.
Porch, Covered, : a covered entrance to a building. This includes an enclosed patio.
Portable Accessory Structure: any portable, demountable or permanent structure, including but
not limited to cabanas, ramadas, storage sheds, garages, awnings, carports, decks, steps, ramps,
piers and pilings, that is:
a. Owned and used solely by a tenant of a manufactured dwelling or floating home; or
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 147
b. Provided pursuant to a written rental agreement for the sole use of and maintenance by a
tenant of a manufactured dwelling or floating home.
Poultry Farm: any premises used for the breeding, raising, or maintaining of poultry for sale of
eggs or poultry.
Primary Surface: a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a
specially prepared hard surface, the Primary Surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that
runway. When the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the
Primary Surface ends at each runway. The width of the Primary Surface is 250 feet for Utility
Runways having only visual approaches and 500 feet for other than utility runways.
Preservation, Historic: the act or process of applying measures to sustain the existing form,
integrity, and material of an historic building, structure, or object, and the existing form and
vegetation cover of a site. It may include initial stabilization work, where necessary, as well as
ongoing maintenance of the historic building materials.
Primary revenue source: no less than seventy-five percent of gross total principal income
derived from a business.
Public Facility: projects, activities, and facilities deemed to be necessary for the maintenance of
other public purposes consistent with Comprehensive Plan policies. Such public facilities shall
include any activity undertaken or structure held, used, or controlled for public or quasi-public
purposes including but not limited to, churches, fraternal organizations or clubs, hospitals,
schools, nursing homes, federal, state, county or municipal facilities, recreation facilities, public
recreational uses, including ball fields (baseball, soccer, football, cricket, etc.), golf course, club
house, driving range, putting greens, pro shop, swimming pools, tennis and basketball courts,
walking paths and jogging/bike trails, public utilities, utility facilities. Such determination shall
be made without reference to the ownership of the structure or the realty upon which it is
situated. (OAR 660-011) A public facility includes water, sewer, and transportation facilities, but
does not include buildings, structures or equipment incidental to the direct operation of those
facilities.
Public right-of-way: the area commonly shared by pedestrians and vehicles for right of
passage. An easement for public travel or access including street, alley, walkway, driveway,
trail or any other public way; also, the land within the boundaries of such easement.
Public Utility: any corporation, company, individual, association of individuals, governmental
entity or its lessees, trustees or receivers, that owns, operates, manages or controls all or any part
of any plant or equipment for the conveyance of telegraph, telephone messages with or without
wires, for the transportation as common carriers or for the production, transmission, delivery or
furnishing of communication, heat, light, sewer, water or power, directly or indirectly, to the
public, and includes a structure, pipe, or transmission line, which provides the public with
electricity, gas, steam, heat, communication, water, sewage collection or other similar services.
Quasi-Judicial: an action or decision that requires substantial discretion or judgement in
applying the standards or criteria of this Code, and usually involves a public hearing.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 148
Radio, Television, or Microwave Towers: structures supporting antennae for transmitting or
receiving any portion of the radio spectrum, but excluding noncommercial installations for
home use of radio or television.
Ramada: a stationary structure having a roof extending over a mobile home or trailer which
may also extend over a patio or parking space for motor vehicles, and is used principally for
protection from sun and rain.
Real estate sign: a sign indicating that the premises on which the sign is located, or any portion
thereof, is for sale, lease or rent.
Rear Lot: a lot which at its widest point (measured by a parallel to the City Street of access or a
tangent to such street) lies with at least one-half its width behind another lot, i.e., a perpendicular
to the City street of access which intersects the lot in question at its widest point will pass
through another (front) lot for half or more than half of the width of the lot in question. (Refer
to the accompanying diagram at the end of this Section for clarification).
Reclamation: the employment in a mining operation of procedures designed to provide for
rehabilitation of the earth's surface by plant cover, soil stability, water resources, and other
measures appropriate to the subsequent beneficial use of the reclaimed lands.
Reclamation Plan: a written and graphic proposal for rehabilitation of the mined area, further
defined as being one of the below: 1. Natural Reclamation Plan A reclamation and/or
rehabilitation process in which the primary purpose is to restore the land to a natural appearing
landscape consistent with surrounding terrain. Rehabilitation to an agricultural use is considered
a natural reclamation plan. 2. Second Use Plan A reclamation and/or rehabilitation process that
involves development of the land to a specific use.
Recreation Club or Area, Private: a building, park, or recreation area, the use of which is
restricted to private membership such as by a church, neighborhood association, fraternal or
social organization, and which may contain the facilities as normally provided in a public park
or playground.
Recreational Facility: facilities deemed to be necessary for the maintenance of recreational
purposes consistent with Comprehensive Plan policies including public and private recreational
uses, including ball fields (baseball, soccer, football, cricket, etc), golf course, club house,
driving range, putting greens, pro shop, swimming pools, tennis and basketball courts, walking
paths and jogging/bike trails. Such determination shall be made without reference to the
ownership of the structure or the realty upon which it is situated.
Recreational Vehicle: a vacation trailer or other vehicular or portable unit which is either
self- propelled or towed, or is carried by a motor vehicle and which is intended for human
occupancy, and is designed for vacation or recreational purposes, but not residential use (See
"Camping or Recreational Vehicle), and is: a. Built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
c. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; or
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 149
d. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Recreational Vehicle Park or Campground: an area where facilities are provided to
accommodate temporary recreational trailers, motor homes, campers, and/or tents and selfpropelled
motorized vehicles are parked and used for the purpose of supplying to the public a
temporary location while traveling, vacationing or recreating.
Rectory: a place of residence for the pastor of a church.
Recycling Dropbox: an enclosed and covered container for the depositing and temporary
storage of recyclable materials, including but not limited to paper, glass, metal cans, or other
recoverable material.
Residential: any use of land or structure of or relating to a place where people dwell.
Residential Care, Training, or Treatment Facility: any facility which provides care, training, or
treatment for six (6) or more physically, mentally, emotionally, or behaviorally disabled
individuals as defined by ORS 443.400. Facilities that provide for five (5) or less are addressed
as ADULT FOSTER HOMES or FOSTER FAMILY HOMES.
Residence Home for Aged: a facility for the care of six (6) or more persons suffering from
infirmities of age or illness where care is provided on a prolonged or permanent basis.
Residential Home: as provided by Oregon Revised Statutes, a residence licensed by the State for
the care of five or fewer physically or mentally handicapped persons, including staff personnel,
is permitted in residential or commercial zones (excluding resource lands) subject to the normal
requirements for a residence. Residents and staff need not be related to each other or any other
home resident. Handicapped means that a person suffers from a functional limitation in one or
more major life activities.
Residential or Day Treatment Facility: a facility licensed by the State for the care of five or more
related or unrelated persons who are physically or emotionally handicapped by functional
limitations in one or more major life activities. Term includes shelter care facility.
Resource Land: any land that has been identified and designated on the Tillamook County
Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Map(s) as Forest Resource, Woodland Resource, Open Space
Reserve, Exclusive Farm Use, or Aggregate Resource is considered resource land. This
definition shall not be construed to exclude from protection under the provisions of city, state or
county law other identified resources which have not been zoned, such as riparian habitat,
natural areas, critical winter deer and elk range, historic sites, structures, corridors, or scenic
areas.
Resource Tree: all broadleaf trees (except alder and poplar trees) equal or greater than one feet
DBH (for multi-stem trees, if the sum of the areas of all stems four inches in diameter or larger
at DBH is greater than 113 square inches, it is a heritage tree). All conifers equal or greater than
eighteen inches DBH are resource trees.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 150
Restore: revitalizing, returning or replacing original attributes and amenities, such as natural
biological productivity, aesthetic and cultural resources, which have been diminished or lost by
past alterations, activities or catastrophic events.
a. Active restoration involves the use of specific positive remedial actions, such as removing
fills, installing water treatment facilities, or rebuilding deteriorated urban waterfront areas.
b. Passive restoration is the use of natural processes, sequences and timing of which occurs
after the removal or reduction of adverse stresses without other specific positive remedial
action.
Retail Sales: the sale or rental of commonly used goods and merchandise for person or
household use. Typical uses include department stores, apparel stores, furniture stores,
hardware stores, or florists.
Retirement Home: facility providing living quarters, either owned or rented, to persons 62
years of age or older. Such facility may be a single structure or a group of structures, and may
include limited medical, recreational, and commercial services if such services are limited to
the residents and their guests. This type of facility should be developed as a planned unit
development.
Right-of-way: the area between the boundary lines of a street.
Riparian Area: the area adjacent to a river, lake or stream, consisting of the area of transition
from an aquatic ecosystem to a terrestrial ecosystem (According to Oregon Administrative Rule
(OAR) 660-23-090(1).
Riparian Corridor: a Goal 5 resource that includes the water areas, fish habitat, adjacent riparian
areas, and wetlands within the riparian area boundary (According OAR 660-23-090(1).
River (see "Stream").
Road Approach Permit: a formal agreement between the developer/land owner and either the
state, county or city concerning the private use of public right-of-way and facilities for access to
adjoining property. The terms "road approach permit" and "approach road permits" are
interchangeable in the context of this title, and includes both driveways and intersecting roads.
Roadside Stand: a temporary structure designed or used for the display or sale of merchandise
and/or produce, or agricultural products produced on the premises upon which such a stand is
located.
Roadway: the portion of a street right-of-way developed for vehicular traffic.
Root zone: any area within the drip line of any tree and any area within 20 feet of any resource
tree trunk, whichever is further from the tree trunk.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 151
Row Houses: a series of individual houses having architectural unity and a common wall
between each unit.
Scale: the relationship of a particular project or development, in terms of size, height, bulk,
intensity, and aesthetics, to its surroundings.
School: any institution for learning, whether public or private, meeting State of Oregon
accreditation standards.
School, Business: a business enterprise, not a public or private school, offering instruction and
training in a service or art, such as secretary, barber, commercial artist, but not including
commercial trades or crafts.
School, Commercial, Vocational, Trade or Craft: a business enterprise, not a public, private, or
business school, offering instruction and training in a trade such as welding, brick laying,
machinery operation, and other similar manual trades.
School, Home: education in the children's home, taught for a period equivalent to that required
of children attending public schools the courses of study usually taught in grades 1 through 12
in the public school by a parent, legal guardian, or private teacher.
School, (Public/Private): an educational institution, licensed or regulated by the state, which has
a curriculum, including kindergarten, elementary, secondary, or higher education; or, one that
provides special training and/or care suitable to persons with above average intelligence, or
defective, delinquent, or dependent persons such as retarded, dyslexic, autistic, or brain damaged
persons, but does not include business, commercial, trade, or craft schools.
Screen: a method of reducing the impact of noise and unsightly visual intrusions with less
offensive or more harmonious elements, such as plants, berms, fences, walls, or any
appropriate combination thereof.
Second Hand Store, Used Furniture or Rummage Shop Facility or Pawnshop: facility for the
sale of second hand or used items.
Secondary Use: a use which is supplementary or subordinate to an allowed principal use in that
it functions to furnish direct aid or support to the use.
Senior Housing: housing designated and/or managed for persons over the age of 55.
Sensitive Fish and/or Wildlife Habitat: areas important to the survival of a species, or group of
species, and habitats with a limited area.
Service Station: commercial facility which offers petroleum products and limited accessory
sales of products for motor vehicle use, including limited vehicle repair service to the public.
Setback: the distance from a right-of-way of a public or private road, or from a lot line to any
point of a building.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 152
Sewage: water-carried wastes from a home, business operation or community.
Sewage Treatment Plant: facilities for the treatment and disposal of sewage.
Shade Tree: usually a deciduous tree planted primarily for its high crown of foliage or overhead
canopy.
Shared driveway: when land uses on two or more lots or parcels share one driveway. An
easement or tract (owned in common) may be created for this purpose.
Shelter Care Facility: a home licensed by the state to provide for short term emergency care for
no more than nine children at any one time. See also halfway house or residential/day treatment
facility.
Shopping Center: three (3) or more commercial retail or service establishments on a single unit
of land.
Shrub: a woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems from the ground or
small branches near the ground, may be deciduous or evergreen.
Sign: a presentation or representation, other than a house number, by words, letters, figures,
designs, pictures, or colors, publicly displayed so as to give notice relative to a person, a
business, an article of merchandise, a service, an assemblage, a solicitation, or a request for aid
or other type of advertising; any notice or advertisement, pictorial or otherwise, used as an
outdoor display for the purpose of advertising a property or the establishment or enterprise,
including goods and services, upon which the signs are exhibited. This includes the board,
metal, or surface upon which the sign is painted, included, or attached; or any material used to
support the sign. This definition shall not include official notices issued by a court or public
body or officer, or directional, warning or information signs or structures required by or
authorized by the law or by federal, state, county or city authority.
a. Blinking sign: a sign which shines with intermittent or momentary brief beams or flashes of
light, flashing on and off.
b. Building register sign: A sign which identifies four or more businesses contained within a
single building structure or complex.
c. Flashing sign: a sign with sequential light source giving off light suddenly or in transient
bursts where the period of time of illumination is equal to the period of non-illumination,
and is used solely to attract attention in a non-informative way.
d. Flashing sign: A sign incorporating intermittent electrical impulses to a source of
illumination, or revolving in a manner which creates the illusion of flashing, or which
changes color or intensity of illumination.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 153
e. Fluttering sign: a sign which moves, vibrates, in quick, irregular motions, with irregular
spasms or trembling motions.
f. Rotating sign: a sign which turns/revolves around as on an axis or center point.
g. Wind sign or device: Any sign or device in the nature of a series of one, two or more
banners, flags or other objects, fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subject to
pressure by wind or breeze.
Sign, Area of: in determining whether a sign is within the area limitations of this title, the area of
the total exterior surface shall be measured and computed in square feet; provided, that where
the sign has two or more faces, the area of the total exterior surface shall be measured and
divided by the number of faces; and provided further, that if the interior angle between the two
planes of two faces exceeds one hundred thirty-five degrees, they shall be deemed a single face
for the purposes hereof. Measurement shall be made at the extreme horizontal and vertical limit
of a sign.
Sidewalk: a pedestrian walkway.
Site: a property (or group of adjacent parcels or lots under the same ownership) that is subject
to a permit application under this Code.
Site Design Review, Development Review, Plan Review: please see Section 22.
Site Plan: a plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, all of
the uses proposed for a special parcel of land.
Slope: gradient of a line describing its steepness, incline, or grade.
Slope Easement: an area adjoining a road which is affected by the road fill or cut, but is not
within the road easement or right-of-way.
Solar Energy System: any device, structure, mechanism, or series of mechanisms which uses
solar radiation as a source for heating, cooling, or electrical energy.
Solar Orientation: the layout and design of parcels and siting of a structure on building lots to
take advantage of solar insolation for optimal utilization of the sun as an energy source.
Specimen Tree: a particularly impressive or unusual example of a species due to its size, shade,
age, or any other trait that epitomizes the character of the species.
Speculation Support Structure: an antenna support structure designed for the purpose of
providing location mounts for wireless communication facilities without a binding commitment
or option to lease a location upon the tower by a licensed service provider at the time of initial
application.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 154
Standards: standards are code requirements, such as rules governing the size or dimensions of a
lot or parcel, or the placement of buildings or activities thereon.
Start of Construction: includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit
was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundation or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Steep slopes: slopes of greater than 25 percent.
Step-backwater analysis: an option used in a No-Rise Analysis/Certification to calculate BFE’s if
more than one (1) cross section is warranted to cover the extent of the property. Generally, if the
property parallels more than 500 feet of a flooding source, this option is used.
Storefront character: the character expressed by buildings placed close to the street with
ground-floor display windows, weather protection (e.g. awnings or canopies), corner building
entrances or recessed entries, and similar features.
Storm Water Facility: a detention and/or retention pond, swale, or other surface water feature
that provides storage during high rainfall events.
Story: any area that can be reasonably considered habitable and has floor surface with clear
standing head room (6 feet, 6 inches, minimum) regardless of their use.
Stream: a channel such as a river or creek that carries flowing surface water including perennial
streams and intermittent streams with defined channels, and excluding man-made irrigation and
drainage channels (According OAR 660-23-090(1).
Streams, Class I and II
1. Class I Stream Waters which are valuable for domestic use, are important for angling
or other recreation, and/or used by significant numbers of fish for spawning, rearing, or
migration routes as designated by the State of Oregon. Stream flows may be perennial or
intermittent.
2. Class II Stream: Any headwater streams or minor drainages that generally have
limited or no direct value for angling or other recreation as designated by the State of
Oregon. They are used by only a few, if any, fish for spawning or rearing. Their principal
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 155
value is their influence on water quality or quantity downstream in Class I waters. Stream
flow may be perennial or intermittent.
Streets (or Roads): the following definitions apply to roads (none of these definitions is
intended to supersede ORS 368.001):
a. Road: the entire right-of-way of any public or private way that provides ingress to or egress
from property by means of vehicles or other means or that provides travel between places by
mean of vehicles. "Road" includes, but is not limited to: Ways described as streets,
highways, throughways or alleys,
Road related structures that are in the right of way such as tunnels, culverts or similar
structures: and structures that provide for continuity of the right of way such as bridges.
b. Alley: a narrow street, with a sixteen (16) to twenty (20) foot right-of-way and the minimum
of a twelve (12) foot travel lane, through a block primarily for vehicular access to the back or
side of properties.
c. Arterial: a road which carries traffic through and between major centers of activity in urban,
suburban, and rural areas.
d. Collector: a road which is used primarily as a connector from local roads to one or more
arterials.
e. County Road: a public road under the jurisdiction of a county that has been designated as a
county road under ORS 368.016.
f. Cul-de-sac: a local or limited local road having only one outlet with a turnaround at the
opposite end, and which is not intended to be extended or continued.
g. Dead-end Street: a road or street with no outlet to other roads or streets.
h. Frontage Road: a road which is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial or other limited access
road or a railroad right-of-way, and which provides access to abutting properties.
i. Public Road: a road over which the public has a right of use that is a matter of public
record.
j. Stubbed Road: a road having only one outlet, but which is intended to be extended or
continued.
k. Through Street: a road or street that connects to another road. Not all through streets are
arterials.
Street frontage: the lineal dimension in feet of the property upon which a structure is built that
fronts the street.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 156
Street Furniture/Furnishings: benches, lighting, bicycle racks, drinking fountains, mailboxes,
kiosks, and similar pedestrian amenities located within a street right-of-way.
Street Line: a property line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and an adjacent street or
private way.
Street Tree: a tree on land located within a dedicated right-of-way along either side of a street,
avenue, or other way within a dedicated utility easement of the City.
Street Vendor: any person duly licensed upon a public sidewalk or other public way or place
carrying, conveying or transporting merchandise which is offered for sale from a mobile type
device or as a pedestrian.
Structure: anything, such as a building or other major improvement that is constructed, built, or
installed; an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or
composed of parts joined together in some definite manner which requires location on the
ground or is attached such as a structural addition, to something having a location on the ground,
including swimming and wading pools, and covered patios. This does not include outdoor areas
such as paved areas, driveways or walks, and other minor improvements, such as fences, utility
poles, flagpoles, or irrigation system components, that are not customarily regulated through
zoning ordinances. For land use regulatory purposes, the term structure shall also include gas or
liquid storage tanks but shall exclude fences six feet in height or less and uncovered patios.
Structural, Alteration: any change in the supporting members of a building, such as a bearing
wall, column, beam or girder, floor or ceiling joist, roof rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations,
piles, or retaining walls or similar components.
Studio, Broadcasting and/or Recording: facility for broadcasting live or prerecorded programs by
radio and/or television and/or recording on records, tapes, video tapes or other suitable media.
Such facility may perform activities necessary for recording programming and receiving of radio
and/or television signals.
Subdivide Land: to divide an area or tract of land into four or more lots (three with a road)
within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of
land under a single ownership at the beginning of such year.
Subdivision: either an act of subdividing land or an area or tract of land subdivided.
Subgrade: that portion of the graded roadbed upon which the base, surfacing, or pavement is to
be placed.
Substantial Damage: damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring
the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement: any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either,
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 157
a. Before the improvement, reconstruction or repair is started; or,
b. If the structure has been damaged and is being repaired, reconstructed or improved before
the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of the building commences, whether or not the alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure.
The term does not, however, include either:
c. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions, or
d. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State
Inventory of Historic Places.
Surface Mining: all or any part of the process of removal, by extraction of minerals from the
surface of the earth. Removal of overburden or diversion of water necessary to expose the
deposit of minerals is considered part of the process. Leveling, grading, filling, or removing
earth materials in conjunction with farm use, or onsite construction projects are not considered
surface mining.
Swale: a type of storm water facility. Usually a swale is a broad, shallow depression with
plants that filter and process contaminants.
Swimming Pools, Private: a swimming pool, constructed for the exclusive use of the residents
and guests of single-family, duplex, townhouse, or apartment dwellings.
Tax Lot: a parcel, lot or other unit of land as created by the County Assessor for the purpose of
taxation. A tax lot may also be a lot or parcel when created at a property owner's request for the
purpose of land division consistent with applicable planning and zoning regulations in effect at
that time.
Telephone Exchange, Switching and Transmitting Equipment: non-attended switching or
transmitting telephone service, but not including business office facilities, storage or repair
shops or yards.
Temporary: temporary: 27 days or less in any 12 month period, unless otherwise specified by a
provision of this Code; a land use that is not permanent and only allowed f or this li mi ted
time period.
Temporary Field or Construction Office: temporary office and temporary material storage use
in connection with the property. This use may be permitted for a specified period of time in
accordance with a permit issued by the Building Official.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 158
Temporary Mobile Home: a mobile home which is utilized as an additional dwelling on the
same parcel for an infirm or disabled person who requires 24 hour care or the person providing
that care, according to a certification by an Oregon licensed medical doctor or responsible state
licensed medical agency.
Tent: a fabric shelter supported by poles or rope, which is designed for human occupancy and
to be used temporarily for recreational or emergency purposes, but not for permanent or
residential purposes.
Tentative Plans: the preliminary proposal for a subdivision which includes the information
specified in Section 22.
Top-of-bank: a clearly recognizable sharp break in the stream bank. It has the same meaning as
"bankfull stage"; the stage or elevation at which water overflows the natural banks of streams and
begins to inundate the upland. In the absence of physical evidence, the two-year recurrence
interval flood elevation may be used to approximate the bankfull stage (According OAR 660- 23-
090(1).
Townhouse: a single-family dwelling unit constructed in a row of attached units separated by
property lines and with open space on at least two (2) sides.
Tract, private/public: a piece of land set aside in a separate area for dedication to the public, a
homeowner's association, or other entity (e.g. open space, recreation facilities, sensitive lands,
etc.).
Top Course: a course of specified aggregate material of planned thickness placed immediately
below the pavement or surface.
Transient: an individual who occupies a site for a period of twenty-seven days or less, counting
portions of days as full days, and cannot demonstrate the intention and legal ability to construct a
permanent dwelling upon that site.
Transitional Zones: an area that extends seven feet outward for each one foot upward (7:1)
beginning on each side of the Primary Surface which point is the same elevation as the runway
surface, and from the sides of the approach surfaces thence extending upward to a height of 150
feet above the airport elevation (Horizontal Surface).
Transportation Facilities and improvements: the physical improvements used to move people
and goods from one place to another (e.g. streets, railroad tracks, sidewalks, pathways, bike
lanes, airports, transit stations, bus stops, etc). Transportation improvements include the
following:
a. Normal operation, maintenance;
b. Installation of improvements within the existing right-of-way;
c. Projects identified in the adopted Transportation System Plan not requiring future land use
review and approval;
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 159
d. Landscaping as part of a transportation facility;
e. Emergency Measures;
f. Street or road construction as part of an approved subdivision or partition;
g. Transportation projects that are not designated improvements in the Transportation System
Plan; (Conditional Use Permit for Transportation System Facilities and Improvements) and
h. Transportation projects that are not designed and constructed as part of an approved
subdivision or partition (Conditional Use Permit for Transportation System Facilities and
Improvements).
Transportation Mode: the method of transportation (e.g. automobile, train, bus, walking,
bicycling, etc.).
Travel Trailer: a "Recreational Vehicle"
Tree: any woody plant having a trunk six (6) caliper inches or larger in diameter at breast height
(DBH). If a tree splits into multiple trunks above ground, but below 4.5 feet, the trunk is
measured at its most narrow point beneath the split, and is considered one (1) tree if greater than
six (6) inches DBH. Plants commonly planted as shrubs, including but not limited to English
Laurel, Photinia, Arborvitae, Poison Oak, English Holly, and English Ivy shall not be considered
a "tree". Trees specifically planted and maintained as a hedge shall additionally not
be considered a "tree". Tree types are described further in Code #1266. Different
classifications of trees include the following:
a. Dead Tree: A lifeless tree. Such evidence of lifelessness may include unseasonable lack of
foliage, brittle dry branches, or lack of any growth during the growing season.
b. Heritage Tree: A tree listed on the Official City of Tillamook Heritage Tree.
c. Park Tree: A tree, shrub, bush or other woody vegetation located in a public park or other
area owned by the City having an individual name, and all other areas owned by the City,
or to which the public has free access as a park.
d. Private Tree: A tree, shrub, bush or other woody vegetation located on private property
other than a dedicated right-of-way or City utility easement or public parks and grounds.
e. Significant Tree: A tree having a trunk eighteen (18) caliper inches or larger in diameter.
f. Street Tree: A tree, shrub, bush or other woody vegetation on land lying within a dedicated
right-of-way along either side of a street, avenue, or other way within a dedicated utility
easement of the City.
Tree Cut-out: the area between the street and a sidewalk in the public right-of-way, for street
tree planting, as described further in Ordinance #1266; also known as Tree Well.
Tree Lawn: the area between the street curb and sidewalk in the public right-of-way, utilized
for landscaping and street tree planting; also known as Parking Strip or Planter Strip.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 160
Tree Removal: to cut down a tree, or remove 50% or more of the crown, trunk, or root system
of a tree; or to damage a tree so as to cause the tree to decline and/or die. "Removal" includes
topping. "Removal" includes but is not limited to damage inflicted upon a root system by
application of toxic substances, operation of equipment and vehicles, storage of materials,
change of natural grade due to unapproved excavation or filling, or unapproved alteration of
natural physical conditions. "Removal" does not include normal trimming or pruning of trees.
Tree Topping: the severe cutting back of a tree's limbs to stubs three (3) inches or larger in
diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the natural canopy and
disfigure the tree. Topping does not include the practice of "pollarding" when conducted in
accordance with the standards established by the International Society of Arboriculture.
Tree Well: the area between the street and a sidewalk in the public right-of-way, for street tree
planting, as described further in Ordinance #1266. Also known as Tree Cut-out.
Underlying Zone: the base zone district; the parent zone district.
Unhealthful Conditions: conditions and circumstances that are detrimental, not conducive to
good health.
Urban Growth Area (UGA): land that is inside the City's Urban Growth Boundary but outside
the City Limits. Land in the UGA is considered "urbanizable land".
Urban Growth Boundary: A site specific line imposed on the Official Comprehensive Plan and
Zoning map of the City of Tillamook, which identifies and encompasses urban and urbanizable
lands in or adjacent to each incorporated city in the County.
Urban Land: those lands which normally have an incorporated city.
Such areas may include lands adjacent to and outside the incorporated city and may also:
a. have concentrations of persons who generally reside and work in the area; and
b. have supporting public facilities and services.
Urban Services Area: the area within the UGB that is served by urban services and facilities of
the City.
Urbanized Land: land within the Urban Growth Boundary which is identified and:
a. determined to be necessary and suitable for future urban land;
b. can be served by public facilities; and
c. is needed for the expansion of an urban land area.
Use: the purpose for which land, roadways or a structure is designed, arranged, or intended, or
for which it is occupied or maintained, whether on a permanent or temporary basis.
Utility Facility: those necessary appurtenances including related rights-of-way for the
transmission of electric power, gas, water, sewerage, telephone and other inline facilities needed
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 161
for the operation of such facilities, such as gas regulating stations, pumping stations, power or
communication substations, dams, reservoirs, and related power houses. Additionally, a utility
facility means any energy device and/or system that generates energy from renewable energy
resources including solar, hydro, wind, biofuels, wood, geothermal, or similar sources.
Vacate plat/street: to abandon a subdivision or street right-of-way. For example, vacation of a
public right-of-way that is not needed or cannot be used for a street or other public purpose. A
plat may be vacated, returning the property to an undivided condition.
Variance: a deviation from the requirements of this Code which may be granted according to
the provisions of Section 32.
Vehicular Storage: a vehicular storage area and area for the storage of abandoned, impounded,
dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles.
Violation: an act of any person which is prohibited or prevented by the Tillamook
Comprehensive Plan, Land Development Regulations or other federal, state, or county law, or
the failure of any person to act as required by the Comprehensive Plan, Land Development
Regulations or other federal, state or county law.
Visual Obstruction: any fence, hedge, tree, shrub, device, wall or structure, exceeding three (3)
feet in height above the elevation of the top of the curb, which dangerously limits the visibility
of persons in motor vehicles on said streets or alleys. This does not include trees kept trimmed
of branches to a minimum height of at least six (6) feet. See also Section 26.
Vision Clearance Area: a triangular area at the street or highway corner of a corner lot, or the
alley-street intersection of a lot, the space being defined by a line across the corner, the ends of
which are on the edge of the street or alley right-of-way lines an equal and specified distance
from the corner and containing no planting, wall structures or temporary or permanent
obstruction exceeding three (3) feet in height above the curb level (see Section 29 (5).
Wall: an upright structure of masonry, wood, plaster, or other building material serving to
enclose, divide, or protect an area, especially a vertical construction forming an inner partition
or exterior siding of a building.
Water area: the area between the banks of a lake, pond, river, perennial or fish-bearing
intermittent stream (According OAR 660-23-090(1).
Wetlands: those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted to life in saturated soil conditions (This definition has
been selected from OAR 660-23-090(1)). There are two types of wetlands:
a. A "Significant Wetland" is a wetland that appears on the City of Tillamook Wetlands and
Riparian Inventory Maps.
b. A "Non-Significant Wetland" is a wetland that does not meet the Division of State Lands
(DSL) definition of a Locally Significant Wetland. Non-Significant Wetlands are not
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 162
regulated by the Section pertaining to wetlands in this Code, but do require DSL
notification under ORS 227.350 and 21.1.11.
A "Wetland" is also defined by the Federal Clean Water Act (Section 404) and OAR 141-85-
010. Wetlands include land areas where water is the dominant factor determining the nature of
soil development and the types of plant and animal communities.
Wholesale, Storage, and Distributing: establishments or places of business primarily engaged in
the wholesaling, storage, distribution and handling of materials and equipment other than live
animals and plants.
Width, of a Building: the shortest side of elevation dimension measured horizontally.
Wildlife: wild mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians.
Window: all the glass included with one casement.
Winery, Commercial: a facility for the preparation, processing, marketing, and distribution of
wines; may include a tasting room and sales area.
Wireless communication facilities shall include cell towers, antennae, monopoles, "coverage"
towers, and "capacity" towers, and related facilities, including microfacilities and minifacilities,
and equipment used for radio signal transmission and receiving. A Wireless communication
facility is considered a "Utility Facility".
Woodlands, existing: existing trees and shrubs of a number, size, and species that accomplish
the same general function as new plantings.
Yard: any open space on the same lot with a building or a dwelling group, which open space is
unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure from the ground upward to the sky, except for
the projections as permitted in Section 26 (6) of this Code.
a. Yard, Front: A yard between side lot lines, measured horizontally at right angles from the
front lot line, to the nearest point of a building or other structure. (See also lot line, front.)
b. Yard, Rear: A yard between side lot lines, measured horizontally at right angles from the
rear lot line, to the nearest point of a main building.
c. Yard, Required: Open space on a lot, which is unobstructed from the ground upward,
except as otherwise provided in this Code.
d. Yard, Side: A yard between the front and rear yards, measured horizontally at right angles
from the rear lot line, to the nearest point of a main building.
Zone: a section/district of the City in which certain land uses are permitted and other are
prohibited by the Code.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 163
Zone Change: an action to change the type of zoning on one or more pieces of land. A "Zone
Change" is considered to be a legislative action initiated by a Planning Commission decision.
Zoning Code: a set of land-use regulations enacted by the City including districts within
which the type, location, density, bulk, height, and lot coverage of land uses are restricted.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 164
§153.037 ESTUARY STANDARDS, REQUIREMENTS AND SHORELAND OVERLAY
DISTRICT
1. Purpose. The purpose of the Estuary Standards and Requirements and Shorelands Overlay
District is to bring under special review those projects involving development within
designated estuaries in an effort to recognize, protect, maintain, and where appropriate, restore
the unique environmental, economic and social values of said estuaries.
2. Scope. Recognition, protection, maintenance and restoration where appropriate, of the unique
environmental, economic and social values of the designated estuaries in the City. Estuary
Standards shall be applied to all estuarine waters, intertidal areas, submerged and submersible
lands and tidal wetlands up to the line of non-aquatic vegetation or the Mean Higher High
Water (MHHW) line, whichever is most landward.
3. Standards. For all areas designated as estuary, Section 3.1-- of the Tillamook County
Development Code shall apply by reference and shall be made a part of this Development
Code.
A. The Conditional use provisions of §153.070 of this Code shall be applied in this
Development Code.
B. Tillamook Bay Estuary Management Unit Designation Maps and Tillamook Bay Estuary
Zoning Maps H, I and J of Tillamook County Code No. 33.
4. Shoreland Overlay Zone (SHO). For all areas designated as shorelands, Section 3.090 of the
Tillamook County Development Code shall apply by reference and shall be made a part of this
Development Code.
The City of Tillamook incorporates by reference the County shoreland overlay zone into its
proposed appended county coastal ordinances in order to fully address the coastal ordinances.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 165
§153.038 FLOOD HAZARD OVERLAY ZONE, OR FHO DISTRICT
1. PURPOSE. It is the purpose of this section of the development code from the City of
Tillamook to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in areas of special flood
hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of
areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood
hazard; and,
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility
for their actions.
2. FINDINGS OF FACT. The flood hazard areas of Tillamook City are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health, and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection
and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
A. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special
flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately
anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated,
or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
B. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance
includes methods and provisions for:
1) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in
flood heights or velocities;
2) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be
protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 166
3) Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains; stream channels, and natural
protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
4) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase
flood damage; and
5) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally
divert flood waters or may increase flood hazards in other areas.
3. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION. The legislature of the State of Oregon has in ORS
Chapter 227 delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore,
the City of Tillamook, Oregon does ordain as follows:
4. DEFINITIONS. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Code shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this
Code its most reasonable application. Many of these definitions also appear in Section
§153.036, Definitions, of this development code. All the definitions listed below apply to this
section.
A. Appeal means a request for a review of the City Manager's interpretation of any provision
of this section of the development code.
B. Area of Shallow Flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on
a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1 percent or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does
not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
C. Area of Special Flood Hazard means the land in the flood plain within a community
subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Designation on
maps always includes the letters A or V.
D. Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level)
on all sides.
E. Base Flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year. Also referred to as the "100-year flood." Designation on maps always
includes the letters A or V.
F. Below Grade Crawlspace means an enclosed area below the Base Flood Elevation in
which the interior grade does not exceed 2 feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade
and the height, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the bottom of the
lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor does not exceed 4 feet at any
point.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 167
G. Critical Facility means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too
great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to schools, nursing homes, hospitals,
police, fire and emergency response installations, installations which produce, use or store
hazardous materials or hazardous waste.
H. Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
I. Elevated Building means for insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its
lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, sheer walls, post
piers, pilings, or columns.
J. Flood or Flooding means
1. a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters
b. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
c. Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are approximately caused by flooding as
defined in paragraph (1)(b) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid
and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is
carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.
2. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of
water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in
a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by a unanticipated
force of nature, such as flash flooding or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some
similarly unusually and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined
in paragraph (1)(a) of this definition.
K. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
L. Flood Insurance Study can also mean Flood elevation study, which means an
examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards, and if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and
determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood‐related erosion hazards.
M. Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
N. Foundation (permanent) means primary support for a structure through which the
imposed load is transmitted to the footing or earth.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 168
O. Lowest Floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a
building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the
structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Code
found at Section 153.038 (7)(B)-(1)(b).
P. Manufactured Home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when attached to the required utilities. For insurance purposes the term
“manufactured home” does not include “recreational vehicle”.
Q. Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
R. New Construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an
initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes,
new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
S. Recreational Vehicle means a vehicle which is:
1) Built on a single chassis;
2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
T. Start of Construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements
under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97‐348)), includes substantial
improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns,
or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 169
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building.
U. Structure means a walled and roofed building, a manufactured dwelling, a modular or
temporary building, or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
V. Substantial Damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed
50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
W. Substantial Improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement.
This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of
the actual repair work performed.
1) The market value of the structure is:
a. the real market value of the structure prior to the start of the initial
repair or improvement, or
b. in the case of damage, the real market value of the structure prior to the
damage occurring, or
2) Substantial Improvement does not include either:
a. any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications, which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure
safe living conditions, or;
b. any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic
structure.”
X. Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this Code which permits
construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this ordinance.
5. GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Lands to Which This Code Applies. This Code shall apply to all areas of special flood
hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Tillamook.
B. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood
hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering
report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Tillamook County, Oregon and
incorporated areas”, dated September 28, 2018, and as amended with accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), as subsequently amended by FEMA, are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this Code. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at
City Hall, 210 Laurel Avenue in Tillamook, Oregon.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 170
C. Penalties for Noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located,
extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Code and
other applicable regulations. Unless otherwise indicated, non-compliance with the
provisions of this Code (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) is classified as a violation punishable by a fine set by
resolution.
D. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This Code is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or
impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Code
and another Code, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
E. In the Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this Code, all provisions shall
be:
1) Considered as minimum requirements;
2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,
1) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
F. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this
Code is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Code does not imply that land
outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This Code shall not create liability on the part of
Tillamook City, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Code or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
6. ADMINISTRATION
A. Establishment of Development Permit
1) Development Permit Required. A development permit, such as the City Zoning
Clearance Permit, City Flood Hazard Development Permit, Tillamook County
Construction Permit, shall be obtained before construction or development begins
within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 3B. The permit shall
be for all structures including manufactured homes, as set forth in the "Definitions",
and for all development including fill and other activities, also as set forth in the
"Definitions."
2) Application for Development Permit. Application for a development permit shall be
made on forms furnished by the City Manager and may include but not be limited to;
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 171
materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, all of
the following information is required:
a) Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement)
of all structures;
b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
flood proofed;
c) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood
proofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood proofing
criteria in Section 153.038 (7) (B)(2) and
d) Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as
a result of proposed development.
B. Designation of the Local Administration. The City Manager is hereby appointed to
administer and implement this Code by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions. The City Manager may delegate
to appropriately trained staff.
C. Duties and Responsibilities of the City Manager. Duties of the City Manager
shall include, but not be limited to:
1) Permit Review
a) Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this
ordinance have been satisfied.
b) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those Federal, State, or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required.
c) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is
located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment
provisions of Section 153.038 (7)(C) are met.
2) Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided
in accordance with Section 153.038 (5)(B), BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE
AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD, the City Manager may obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal,
State or other source, in order to administer Sections 153.038(7)(B),
SPECIFIC STANDARDS, and 153.038(7)(C), ENCROACHMENTS.
3) Information to be Obtained and Maintained
a) Where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study or
required as in Section 153.038(6)(C)(2), obtain and record the actual elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a
basement.
b) For all new or substantially improved flood proofed structures:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 172
1) Verify, record, and maintain the actual elevation and elevation
certification (in relation to mean sea level), and
2) Maintain the flood proofing certifications required in Section
153.038(7)(B)(2).
c) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
ordinance.
d) For manufactured homes, maintain the anchoring certifications required in
Section 153.038(7)(A)(1)(c).
4) Alteration of Watercourses
a) Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Land Conservation and
Development prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion ofsaid
watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
5) Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where needed, as to exact
location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions).
The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 153.038(6)(D).
D. Variance Procedure
1) Appeal Board
a) The Tillamook City Planning Commission as established by Tillamook City shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
Code.
b) The Tillamook City Planning Commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by
the City Manager in the enforcement or administration of this Code.
c) In reviewing upon such applications, the Tillamook City Planning Commission
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in
other sections of this Code, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and
the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 173
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not
subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain
management program for that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport
of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the
site; and,
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
d) The Tillamook City Planning Commission may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this Code.
e) The City shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
2) Conditions for Variances
a) Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard
may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected
on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing Section
153.038(7)(D)(1) (c)(1-11) been fully considered. As the lot size increases the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
b) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of
structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory
of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in this section.
c) Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge would result.
d) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
e) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant;
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense,
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 174
create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
f) Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the
general zoning law principle that they pertain to the structure, its inhabitants,
economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely
populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations
should be quite rare.
g) Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited
circumstances to allow a lesser degree of flood proofing than water tight or dry
flood proofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low
damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria except 4D-(2) a, and
otherwise complies with Sections 153.038(7)(A)(1) and 153.038(7)(A)(2)
GENERAL STANDARDS.
7. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
A. General Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are
required:
1) Anchoring
a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
b) All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (Reference FEMA's
"Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas" guidebook for additional
techniques.
c) A registered architect or engineer shall certify that the anchoring system is in
conformance with "a" or "b" above prior to final inspection.
2) Construction Materials and Methods
a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with
materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
c) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other
service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 175
d) An elevation certificate for all new construction and substantial improvements
shall be provided to the City for both pre-construction (Part 1) and the final lowest
floor certification (Part 2) by the property owner.
3) Utilities
a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the
systems into flood waters; and,
c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding.
5) Subdivision Proposals
a) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
b) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer,gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood
damage;
c) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood damage; and,
d) Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from
another authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and
other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or 5 acres (whichever
is less).
6) Review of Building Permits. Where elevation data is not available either through the
Flood Insurance Study or from another authoritative source [Section 153.038(6)(C)
(2)], applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed
construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a
local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of
past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in
these zones may result in higher insurance rates.
B. Specific Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data
has been provided as set forth in Section 153.038(5)(B), Basis for Establishing the Areas
of Special Flood Hazard or Section 153.038(6)(C)(2), Use of Other Base Flood Data, the
following provisions are required:
1) Residential Construction
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 176
a) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall
have the lowest flood, including basement, elevated to two feet above base flood
elevation as determined with an elevation certificate.
b) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are
prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exist of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be
provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
2) Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation as
determined with an elevation certificate; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall:
a) Be flood proofed so that below the base flood level the structure is water tight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy;
c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and
methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for
meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of
the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be
provided to the official as set forth in Section 153.038(6)(C)(3)(b).
d) Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not flood proofed, must meet the same
standards for space below the lowest floor as described in Section
153.038(7)(B)(1)(b).
e) Applicants flood proofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood
insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the flood
proofed level (e.g. a building constructed to the base flood level will be rated as
one foot below that level).
3) Manufactured Homes
a) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-
30, AH, and AE shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 177
floor of the manufactured home is two feet above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance
with the provisions of Section 153.038(7)(A)(1).
b) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites shall be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the bottom of the longitudinal
chassis frame beam shall be at or above the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and be
securely anchored to an adequately designed foundation system to resist
floatation, collapse and lateral movement. Electrical crossover connections shall
be a minimum of 12 inches above the BFE. Crossover ducts are allowed below
the BFE, but shall be constructed to prevent floodwaters from entering or
accumulating within system components. This may require an engineer’s
certification.
c) If the manufactured dwelling is supported on solid foundation walls, the ground
area reserved for the placement of a manufactured dwelling shall be a minimum
of two feet above BFE unless the foundation walls are designed
to automatically equalize hydrostatic forces by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided;
2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade, and;
3)Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
4) Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles may occupy a site in a Special Flood Hazard
Area for periods of 180 consecutive days or greater providing they are fully licensed and
ready for highway use, on its wheels or a jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
Recreational vehicles that do not meet these criteria become manufactured homes and must be
anchored and elevated pursuant to Section §153.038 (7)(A)(1)(b) of this Code.
5) Floodways. Floodways are designated within areas of special flood hazard established in
Section 153.038(5)(B). Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity
of floodwaters that carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential the following
provisions apply:
a) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements,
and other development unless thorough hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice by a registered
professional civil engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 178
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
(1) The supporting technical data for “no-rise” certification shall be based upon a
step-back water analysis and conveyance compensation analysis as required by
FEMA and the procedures for “No-Rise” certification for proposed
developments in the regulatory floodway.
b) If subsection "a" above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provision
of Section 153.038(7).
B. Encroachments. The cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of
the base flood more than one foot at any point within the flood zone.
1) Zones with Base Flood Elevations but No Regulatory Floodway
a. In areas within Zones A1‐30 and AE on the community’s FIRM with a Base
Flood Elevation but where no regulatory Floodway has been
designated, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development
(including fill) shall be prohibited, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
b. Applicants of proposed projects that increase the Base Flood Elevation more
than one foot shall obtain from FEMA a Conditional Letter of Map Revision
(CLOMR) before the project may be permitted. As soon as possible, but no later
than 6 months after project completion, an application for a Letter of Map Revision
(LOMR) shall be submitted by the applicant to FEMA. The applicant is
responsible for paying any costs associated with the CLOMR and LOMR process.
D. Standards for Shallow Flooding Areas (AO Zones). Shallow flooding areas appear on
FIRM's as AO zones with depth designations. The base flood depths in these zones range
from 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, or where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is usually
characterized as sheet flow. In these areas, the following provisions apply:
1) New construction and substantial improvements of residential structures with AO
zones shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade of the building site, to or above the depth number specified on the
FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
2) New construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures within
AO zones shall either:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 179
a) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent
grade of the building site, to or above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at
least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely flood proofed
to or above that level so that any space below that level is water tight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects
of buoyancy. If this method is used, compliance shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect as in Section 153.038(7)(B)(2)(c).
c) Require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures.
E. Critical Facility. Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible,
located outside the limits of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)(100-year floodplain).
Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facility construction within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated three (3) feet above BFE or to the height of the 500-year flood,
whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the
height utilized above the BFE. Flood proofing and sealing measures must be taken to
ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access
routes elevated to or above the level of the BFE shall be provided to all critical facilities to
the extent possible.
8. RESTRICTIONS
A. Restrictions. Restrictions regarding height, rear yards, side yards, front yard setbacks,
minimum lot area, signs, vision clearance and parking space shall be the same as set forth
in each specific zone located within the Flood Hazard Overlay Zone area.
B. Prohibited Uses. It shall be unlawful to erect, alter, maintain or establish in a flood hazard
overlay zone any building, use or occupancy not permitted or allowed in the foregoing
provisions, except existing non-conforming uses, which may continue as provided in
Section §153.074.
9. REQUIREMENT TO SUBMIT NEW TECHNICAL DATA
A. Within six months of project completion, an applicant who obtains a Conditional Letter of
Map Revision (CLOMR) from FEMA, or whose development alters a watercourse,
modifies floodplain boundaries, or Base Flood Elevations shall obtain from FEMA a
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) reflecting the as‐built changes to the FIS and/or FIRM.
B. It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data prepared in a format required
for a CLOMR or LOMR and to submit such data to FEMA on the appropriate FEMA
Form MT‐2 application forms. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall
be the responsibility of the applicant.
C. Applicants shall be responsible for all costs associated with obtaining a CLOMR or
LOMR from FEMA.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 180
D. The Floodplain Administrator shall be under no obligation to sign the Community
Acknowledgement Form, which is part of the CLOMR/LOMR application, until the
applicant demonstrates that the project will or has met all applicable requirements of this
Code.
10. SEVERABILITY
A. The Code is hereby declared to be severable. Should any portion of this ordinance be
declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall continue
in full force and effect and shall be read to carry out the purpose(s) of the Code before the
declaration of partial invalidity.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 181
§153.050 INTERPRETATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
1. General Exceptions to Lot Size Requirements. If at the time of passage of the original Zoning Code
dated July 28, 1980, or annexation to the city, a legally created lot or the aggregate of contiguous
lots or land parcels held in a single ownership, has an area or dimension less than required for the
zoning district in which the property is located, the lot or aggregate holdings may be occupied by
any permitted use in the district subject to compliance with all other requirements of the district,
provided however, that the use of a lot in an R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O Zone District which has an area
deficiency shall be limited to a single-family dwelling.
2. Accessory Structures and Uses.
A. A greenhouse or hot house may be maintained accessory to a dwelling provided there are no sales.
B. A guest house may be maintained accessory to a dwelling provided there are no cooking facilities
in the guest house.
C. Sight obscuring fences, as per §153.003 (Definitions), may be located in a required front yard or
in a vision clearance area provided that they shall not exceed three (3) feet in height measured
from the top of the curb.
3. Exception to Height Regulations. Height limitations set forth elsewhere in this Code shall not apply
to: Barns, silos, or other farm buildings and structures, water towers and tanks, provided they are
not less than 50 feet from every lot line; chimneys, church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes,
smokestacks, flagpoles, grain elevators, cooling towers, monuments, fire hose towers, masts,
aerials, elevator shafts and other similar projections; and outdoor theater screens, provided said
screens contain no advertising matter other than the name of the theater.
4. Access. Except as permitted by other provisions of this Code, no lot shall contain any building used
in whole or in part for residential purposes unless said lot abuts a street or an alley for a distance of
at least 40 feet.
5. Vision Clearance Area. Vision Clearance Area shall be provided within the triangular corner, two
sides of which are the intersecting right-of-way lines, and the third side, the connection of points on
those right-of-way lines the following distance from the point of intersection of those two lines (See
Figures 1 and 2.)
A. In a residential district, the minimum distance shall be 20 feet at street intersections or, at
intersections including an alley, 10 feet, measured from the property line.
B. In all other districts where yards are required, the minimum distance shall be 15 feet or at
intersections including an alley, 10 feet, except that when the angle of intersection between streets
other than an alley is less than 30 degrees, the distance shall be 25 feet, measured from the
property line.
In districts where no yards are required, the minimum distance shall be 10 feet, measured
from the property line.
C. Vision clearance area shall contain no plantings, fences, walls, structures or temporary or
permanent obstructions exceeding three (3) feet in height measured from the top of the curb,
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 182
except that street trees exceeding this height may be located in this area provided all branches and
foliage are removed to a height of ten (10) feet above the grade, and a maximum of two (2) sign
support posts not exceeding eight (8) inches in diameter may be located in this area provided that
no portion of the sign or signboard may extend below six (6) feet above the grade.
CI. In the public right-of-way, for objects located in the sidewalk area, the minimum distance
shall be 30 feet at street intersections measured from the curb tangent point where the arc
and ray, or straight curb meet.
CII. Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to permit a sight obstruction within any required
yard area at a street or alley intersection interfering with the view of operators of motor
vehicles on the streets or alleys to such an extent as to constitute a traffic hazard. If the
planning commission finds that this is the case, it shall have the authority to order the
removal or modification of any such obstruction within any such required yard area.
CIII. The order shall be effective upon delivery of written notice to the owner of the property
giving the owner ten days after delivery of the notice in which to remove or modify the
obstruction; provided, that said notice may be given by certified letter addressed to the
owner at the address indicated in the records of the Tillamook County department of
assessment and taxation, and the ten-day period shall run from the date of mailing of such
notice. Any decision of the planning commission may be appealed in writing to the city
council, if written notice of appeal is filed with the city recorder within ten days after the
giving of the notice to remove or modify.
6. Exception to Yard Requirements.
A. Projects into required yards. Certain architectural features may project into required yards or
courts as follows:
1) Cornices, canopies, eaves, belt courses, sills, or other similar architectural features, or
fireplaces, but they may not in any case extend more than eighteen (18) inches into any
required yard areas.
2) Fire escapes, open uncovered porches, balconies, landing places or outside stairways may
not in any case extend more than eighteen (18) inches into any required side or rear yards,
and not exceeding six (6) feet into any required front yard. This is not to be construed as
prohibiting open porches or stoops not exceeding eighteen (18) inches in height and not
approaching closer than eighteen (18) inches to any lot line.
B. Residential use in Commercial or industrial Zoning Districts. Any structure in a "C" or "I"
District designed and used for residential purposes shall comply with the requirements of the R-O
District. Structures in any "C" or "I" District which contain dwelling units not on the ground floor
need not comply with residential district yard requirements, provided such structures comply with
other applicable codes or regulations as may exist concerning the health and safety aspects of the
dwelling units.
C. Front Yard Exceptions. The following exceptions to the front yard requirements are
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 183
authorized for a lot in any zone district:
1) If there are dwellings on both abutting lots with front yards of less than the required depth
for the zone district, the front yard of the lot may equal the average front yard of the
abutting lots.
2) If there is a dwelling on one abutting lot with a front yard of less depth than the required
depth for the zone district, the front yard for the lot may equal a depth halfway between
the depth of the abutting lot and the required front yard depth.
D. Structures Within Yards. Decks, walkways or uncovered porches, 12 inches or less in height
above grade, may be located within a required yard no closer than five (5) feet from the property
line.
E. Portable accessory structure or object.
1) Portable accessory structures or objects may be located in a rear yard or street-side yard
setback provided all of the following are met:
a. Such structures or objects, with the exception of basketball hoops, shall be less than10’
in height. Basketball hoops shall be less than 20’ in height; and
b. Shall have structural walls located no closer than five (5) feet from the property
line;and
c. Shall have a footprint of less than 200 square feet.
7. Authorization for Similar Uses. The Planning Commission may rule by resolution that a use, not
specifically named in the allowed uses of a district shall be included among the allowed uses, if the
use is of the same general type and is similar to the allowed uses.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 184
8. Existing Uses. Except as hereinafter specified, any use, building or structure lawfully existing at
the time of the enactment of this code , may be continued even though such use, building or
structure
may not conform to the provisions of the original Zoning Code dated July 28, 1980,
for the district in which it is located; provided however, that this section does not apply to any use,
building or structure established in violation of any zoning Code previously in effect. Any
change of use shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this Development Code.
9. Pending Building Permits. Nothing herein shall require any change in the location, site plans,
building plans, construction, size, or designated use of any development, building, structure or
part thereof, for which the required official approval has been granted prior to the adoption of the
original Zoning Code dated July 28, 1980, or which was lawfully permitted within an area prior
to annexation thereof to the City of Tillamook. Unless construction on such building or structure
within the City begins within one (1) year after the adoption of the original Zoning Code dated
July 28, 1980, no such existing permit shall be deemed to allow any building or use which would
not conform to the requirements of this Development Code.
10. Existing Land Restrictions. It is not intended by this Code to interfere with or abrogate or annul
any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided however, that where
this
Code imposed a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon height of
buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances,
rules,
regulations, or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this Code shall govern.
11. The following illustrations are provided for further description.
A. Clear Vision Area
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 185
B. Yards.
C. Lots.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 186
D. Block.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 187
§153.051 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
1. Purpose. The purpose and intent of the Development Standards is to bring those projects
involving building design and the development of land under special review where development
impacts that may cause a conflict between uses in the same adjoining district are be minimized,
and to promote the general welfare by directing attention to site planning, and giving regard to
the natural environment and the elements of creative design to assist in conserving and
enhancing the appearance of the city, and to support the promotion and maintenance of
healthful and safe conditions upon surrounding properties and neighborhoods, thereby affecting
the public health, safety, and general welfare. Review of Site Plans is intended to promote
functional, safe, and attractive developments, which maximize compatibility with surrounding
developments and uses and with the natural environment. Review of Site Plans mitigates
potential land use conflicts resulting from proposed development through specific conditions
attached by the review body. Review of Site Plans focuses on the layout of a proposed
development, including building placement, setbacks, location of parking areas, pedestrian
access, external storage areas, external lighting (including LED), open areas, and landscaping.
2. Scope. The provisions of this Section shall be applicable to:
A. The creation, dedication or construction of all new public or private streets in all
subdivisions, partitions or other developments in the City of Tillamook
B. The extension or widening of existing public or private street rights-of-way, easements, or
street improvements including those which may be proposed by an individual, or which
may be required by the City in association with other development approvals.
C. The construction or modification of any utilities or sidewalks or private street easements
with the provision of an adequate area for sidewalks, sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
water lines, natural gas lines, power lines and other utilities commonly and appropriately
placed in such rights-of-way and for the drainage of surface water from all residential,
commercial and industrial development; to minimize erosion; to reduce degradation of
water quality due to sediments and pollutants in storm water runoff.
D. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all land partitions and subdivisions, planned
unit developments, conditional use permits, multi-family dwelling developments, multiple
use structures and development, commercial developments, and industrial development; and
to the reconstruction or expansion of such developments.
3. Modification of these Site Development Standards.
A. The application of these standards to a particular development shall be modified as follows:
1) Development standards, which are unique to a particular use, or special use, shall be set
forth within the district or in that section governing the use.
2) Those development standards which are unique to a particular district shall be set forth
in the Section governing that district.
4. Public Works Design Standards.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 188
A. All developments will comply with any applicable portions of the most current city design
and public facilities standards.
B. Application of Public Works Design Standards. Standards for the provision and utilization
of public facilities or services available within the City of Tillamook shall apply to all land
developments in accordance with the following table of reference. No development permit
shall be approved unless the following improvements are provided prior to occupancy or
operation.
Public Facilities Improvement Requirements Table
Fire Street Water Sewer Storm Street
Hydrant Improvements Hookup Hookup Drainage Lights
Single Family Dwelling & Duplex No C-2
Multi-family Dwelling Yes Yes
New Commercial Building Yes Yes Yes Yes
Yes Yes
Yes Yes
Yes Yes Commercial Expansion
Yes No
Yes Yes
C-1 C-3 Yes Yes
Yes Yes
New Industrial Building Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Industrial Expansion C-1 C-3
Yes Yes Yes Yes
Partition, Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Subdivisions, PUD, and Manufactured Home Park Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Legend: No = Not required; Yes Required;
C = Conditional, as noted:
C-1. Fire Hydrants for Commercial or Industrial Expansions
One or more fire hydrants are required when the total floor area of a new or expanded building exceeds 2,500 square feet, or the proposed use is classified as Hazardous (H) in the Uniform
Building Code c Uniform Fire Code.
C-2. Street Improvements for Single Family Dwellings & Duplexes
New single-family dwellings & duplexes, which require a street extension, must provide street improvements to City street standards.
C-3. Street Improvements for Commercial or Industrial Expansions
Lots fronting on County roads must obtain access permits from the Tillamook County Public Works Department.
The City will require improvement to full City standards when the use meets any of the following criteria:
a. The use generates an average of 100+ trips per day per 1000 gross square feet of building as documented in the most recent Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers or other qualified source; or
b. The use includes daily shipping and delivery trips by vehicles over 20,000 pounds gross vehicle weight.
5. Standards for Improvements. In addition to other requirements, all improvements shall conform
to the requirements of this Code and any other improvement standards or specifications adopted
by the city, and shall be installed in accordance with the following procedure:
A. Improvement work including excavation, clearing of trees or other work shall not be
commenced until plans have been checked for adequacy and approved by the city. To the
extent necessary for evaluation of the proposal, the plans may be required before approval
of the tentative plan of a subdivision or partition. All plans shall be prepared in accordance
with requirements of the city.
B. Improvement work shall not be commenced until the city has been notified in advance, and
if work has been discontinued for any reason it shall not be resumed until the city has been
notified.
C. All required improvements shall be constructed under the inspection, and to the satisfaction,
of the city. The city may require changes in typical section and details if unusual conditions
arise during construction, which warrant such change in the interests of the city.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 189
D. All underground utilities, sanitary sewers and storm drains installed in streets shall be
constructed prior to the surfacing of such streets. Stubs for service connections for all
underground utilities and sanitary sewers shall be placed to such length as will obviate
the necessity for disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made.
E. Fire Hydrant standards
1. The maximum distance between a new primary building and the nearest Fire Hydrant
shall be 250 feet for residential development and 150 feet for commercial development.
If the above standards cannot be met, the installation of an additional hydrant that
would satisfy the applicable standard shall be required of the applicant.
2. Hydrants shall have a 250 foot maximum spacing between hydrants. Any such new
Fire Hydrant shall have a minimum flow of 1,000 gallons per minute and shall be on a
minimum 8-inch waterline. All other specifications not listed must be engineered to
meet American Insurance Association (A. I. A.) or N. F. P.A. standards.
F. Utility Standards
1. All new electric, telephone, and cable connections are subject to approval by the
City Public Works Supervisor and shall be placed underground.
2. Utilities shall be restricted to one side of the street in new developments, or the closest
side of the utility must be at least 10 feet from where trees are to be planted. Utilities
should be in areas of compacted soils, such as under roadbeds or sidewalks, to
discourage roots in the utility zone. Where underground utilities cannot avoid being
placed within the drip line of resource trees, tunneling, a minimum of two feet in
depth, or hand digging trenches with all roots one inch or larger left intact and smaller
roots cleanly cut on the tree side of the trench, shall be the means of installing these
utility lines.
3. Service lines from the right-of-way shall be located as far as possible from all trees or
designated tree planting locations. If utilities must be placed within drip lines of
significant or heritage trees, lines shall be tunneled at a minimum of two feet in depth
(keeping as far from the tree trunk as possible, but in no circumstance within five feet
of the tree trunk).
4. For a period of five years after the overlay or reconstruction of a City street, there shall
be no cutting of the pavement for the installation of utilities lines without the approval
of the City Public Works Director.
G. Grading standards.
The grading of the street right-of-way and lot constructed at the time of the subdivision or
development construction shall be under the supervision of an engineer, geologist, or
landscape architect who is knowledgeable and skilled in the treatment of soils, soil
stabilization and soil erosion. Due consideration shall be given to the existing terrain,
cross slope and vegetation. Excessive grading of the right-of-way or the lot areas or
removal of
large amounts of vegetation will not be permitted. Approval of the grading plan by the
city engineer and the planning commission shall be given prior to any construction.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 190
6. Improvement Requirements.
Improvements to be installed at the expense of the applicant or land owner and at the time
of development, subdivision or partition:
A. Streets. Public streets, including alleys, within the subdivision and public streets adjacent
but only partially within the Subdivision shall be improved. Upon completion of the street
improvement, monuments shall be re-established and protected in monument boxes at
every public street intersection and all points of curvature and points of tangency on their
center lines.
B. Drainage System. If any portion of any land proposed for development is subject to
flood hazard, poor drainage, or geologic hazards an adequate system of drainage must
be provided, and may include storm drains, retention ponds, dikes, or pumps.
C. Structures. Structures specified as necessary by the city for drainage, access and
public safety, shall be installed.
D. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed to conform to city standards unless a variance
has been granted by the City Council.
E. Sewers. Sanitary sewer facilities connecting with the existing city sewer system and
storm water sewers, of design, layout and location approved by the Tillamook City Public
Works Design Standards shall be installed.
F. Water. Water mains and fire hydrants of design, layout and location approved by the
city shall be installed.
G. Street Lighting. Street lighting of an approved type (including LED) shall be installed
on all street locations approved by the City.
H. Street Name Signs. All streets shall be legibly marked with street names signs not less
than two (2) in number at each intersection, according to specifications furnished by the
City.
I. Improvements of Easements. Whenever the safety of adjoining property may demand, any
easement for drainage or flood control purposes shall be improved in a manner approved
by the City.
J. Underground Utilities. All utilities shall be installed underground, if unless determined to
be economically infeasible upon review by the Planning Commission.
7. Storm Drainage.
A. Plan for Storm Drainage and Erosion Control.
1) No construction of any facilities in a development shall be permitted until a storm
drainage and erosion control plan for the project is prepared by an engineer registered
in the State of Oregon and approved by the City. Due to its percolation and absorption
properties which help to slow and dissipate storm runoff, open space is hereby
regarded as a public facility and a valuable aspect of the City's infrastructure. This
plan shall contain at a minimum:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 191
a. The methods to be used to minimize the amount of runoff, filtration, and
pollution created from the development both during and after construction.
b. Plans for the construction of storm sewers, open drainage channels and other
facilities which depict line sizes, profiles, construction specifications and other such
information as is necessary for the City to review the adequacy of the storm
drainage plans.
c. Calculations used by the engineer in sizing storm drainage facilities.
General Standards: All development shall be planned, designed, constructed and maintained to
conform to the standards described in the City Stormwater Master Plan and the City Public Works
Standards to:
a. Protect and preserve existing natural drainage channels identified on the City
Stormwater Master Plan. Protection shall be assured by not altering existing
channels and providing a 20 foot setback from the banks of the existing
channel.
1. Exceptions include the continuation of existing practices and development
already within the 20 foot setback, emergency repairs to the drainage channel
and routine maintenance or replacement of existing facilities as approved by
the City Public Works Director;
b. Protect development from flood hazards as required in Section 20 of the Code ;
c. Provide a system by which water within the development will be controlled without
causing damage or harm to the natural environment, or to property or persons
within the drainage basin;
d. Assure that waters drained from the development are substantially free of
pollutants, through such construction and drainage techniques as sedimentation
ponds, reseeding, pleasing of grading;
e. Assure that waters are drained from the development in such a manner that will not
cause erosion to any greater extent than would occur in the absence of
development;
f. Provide dry wells, French drains, or similar methods, as necessary to
supplement storm drainage systems;
g. Avoid placement of surface detention or retention facilities in road rights-of-way.
In order to prevent degradation of a natural watercourse, the City may require the
watercourse to be bridged or spanned.
In the event a development or any part thereof is traversed by any watercourse, channel, stream or
creek, gulch or other natural drainage channel, adequate easements for storm drainage purposes
shall be provided to the City. This does not imply maintenance by the City.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 192
4) Channel obstructions are not allowed except as approved for the creation of detention or
retention facilities approved under the provisions of this Code. Fences with swing gates may be
utilized.
5) Prior to acceptance of a storm sewer system by the City, the storm sewers shall
be flushed and inspected by the City. All costs shall be born by the developer.
Utility Lines and Facilities.
A. Standards.
1) The location, design, installation and maintenance of all utility lines and facilities
shall be carried out with minimum feasible disturbances of soil and site.
2) All development, which has a need for water service, shall install water facilities
and grant necessary easements pursuant to the requirements of the City.
3) All development, which has a need for electricity, gas and communications services
shall install them pursuant to the requirements of the district or company serving the
development. Except where otherwise prohibited by the utility district or company,
all such facilities shall be underground.
4) All development, which has a need for public/private sanitary sewers, shall install the
facilities pursuant to the requirements of the city. Installation of such facilities shall be
coordinated with the extension of necessary water services and storm drainage
facilities. No storm drainage conveyances shall be outlet or connected to the City's
sanitary sewer system.
5) All land divisions or other development requiring subsurface disposal systems shall
be prohibited except for:
a. Development of land divisions shall conform to the requirements of that district.
b. Parcels which have unique topographic or other natural features, which make
sewer extension impractical as, determined on a case-by case basis by the City
Public Works Director.
6) All developments proposing sub-surface sewage disposal shall receive approval for
the system from the City of Tillamook. Said systems shall be installed pursuant to
ORS 454.605 and 454.745 and Chapters 171, 523 and 828, and the Oregon
Administrative Rules 340, Division 7.
B. Utility Easements. Easements for sewers, drainage, water mains, public utility installations,
including overhead or underground systems, and other like public purposes, shall be
dedicated, reserved or granted by the land developer in widths not less than five feet on
each side of rear lots or parcel lines, alongside lot or parcel lines and in planting strips
wherever necessary, of lesser width as approved by the City.
Access Management. Access shall be managed to maintain an adequate “level of service” and to
maintain the “functional classification” of roadways as required by the City of Tillamook
Transportation System Plan (TSP).
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 193
A. The City or other agency with access permit jurisdiction may require the closing or
consolidation of existing curb cuts or other vehicle access points, recording of reciprocal
access easements (i.e., for shared driveways), development of a frontage street, installation
of traffic control devices, and/or other mitigation as a condition of granting an access
permit, to ensure the safe and efficient operation of the street and highway system. Access
to and from off-street parking areas shall not permit backing onto a public street.
B. Access Options. When vehicle access is required for development (i.e., for off-street
parking, delivery, service, drive-through facilities, etc.), access shall be provided by one of
the following methods (a minimum of 10 feet per lane is required). These methods are
“options” to the developer/subdivider.
1. Option 1. Access is from an existing or proposed alley or mid-block lane. If a property
has access to an alley or lane, alley access is preferred.
2. Option 2. Access is from a private street or driveway connected to an adjoining
property that has direct access to a public street (i.e., “shared driveway”). A public
access easement covering the driveway shall be recorded in this case to assure access to
the closest public street for all users of the private street/drive.
3. Option 3. Access is from a public street adjacent to the development parcel. If
practicable, the owner/developer may be required to close or consolidate an existing
access point as a condition of approving a new access. Street accesses shall comply
with the access spacing standards in Subsection 6, below.
C. Subdivisions Fronting onto an Arterial Street. New residential land divisions fronting onto
an arterial street shall be required to provide alleys or secondary (local or collector) streets
for access to individual lots. When alleys or secondary streets cannot be constructed due to
topographic or other physical constraints, access may be provided by consolidating
driveways for clusters of two or more lots (e.g., includes flag lots and mid-block lanes).
D. Through Lots and Parcels. When a lot has frontage onto two or more streets, access shall
be provided first from the street with the lowest classification. For example, access shall be
provided from a local street before a collector or arterial street. Except for corner lots, the
creation of new double-frontage lots shall be prohibited in the Open Space Land Use
District (O District); Single Family Residential (R 7.5 and R-5.0); Multiple Use Residential
(R-O); Neighborhood Commercial District (C-N); Highway Commercial District (C-H);
Central Commercial District (C-C District); Town Center District (TC); Light Industrial
(IL); General Industrial (I-G) unless topographic or physical constraints require the
formation of such lots. When double-frontage lots are permitted in these zones, a landscape
buffer with trees and/or shrubs and ground cover not less than 20 feet wide shall be
provided between the back yard fence/wall and the sidewalk or street; maintenance shall be
assured by the owner (i.e., through homeowner’s association, etc.).
E. Access Spacing: Driveway accesses shall be separated from other driveways and street
intersections in accordance with the following standards and procedures:
1. Local Streets. A minimum of 10 feet] separation (as measured from the sides of
the driveway/street) shall be required on local streets (i.e. streets not designated as
collectors or arterials).
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 194
2. Collector Streets. Access spacing on collector, and at controlled intersections (i.e.
with four-way stop sign or traffic signal shall be 50 feet for a collector.
3. Arterials. Access spacing on arterial streets, and at controlled intersections (i.e. with
four-way stop sign or traffic signal shall be 100 feet. Access to Highway 101 shall be
subject to the applicable standards and policies contained in the Oregon Highway
Plan.
4. Number of Access Points. For single-family (detached and attached), two-family, and
three-family housing types, one street access point is permitted per lot, when alley
access cannot otherwise be provided; except that two access points may be permitted
for two-family and three-family housing on corner lots (i.e., no more than one access
per street), subject to the access spacing standards in Subsection ‘6’, above. The
number of street access points for multiple family, commercial, industrial, and
public/institutional developments shall be minimized to protect the function, safety and
operation of the street(s) and sidewalk(s) for all users. Shared access may be required,
in conformance with Section I, below, in order to maintain the required access spacing,
and minimize the number of access points.
10. Land for Public Purposes.
A. The City Planning Commission or City Manager Designate, may require the reservation
for public acquisition, at a cost not to exceed acreage values in the area prior to
subdivision, or appropriate areas within the subdivision for a period not to exceed one year
providing the city has an interest or has been advised of interest on the part of the state
highway commission, school district or other public agency to acquire a portion of the
area within the proposed subdivision for a public purpose, including substantial assurance
that positive steps will be taken in the reasonable future for the acquisition.
B. The City planning commission may require the dedication of suitable areas for parks,
playgrounds, and transportation rights-of-way, subject to rough proportionality with the
impacts being created.
11. Minimum Street Standards for the creation of roads, easements and rights-of-way. Please
refer to the most recently adopted City design standards. All streets shall be graded for the
appropriate development standard. The developer shall improve the extension of all streets to
the centerline of existing streets with which subdivision or development streets intersect.
A. General. The location, width and grade of streets shall be considered in relation to
existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and
safety, to the proposed use of the land to be served by the streets and to the
comprehensive plan adopted by the city. The street system shall assure an adequate
traffic circulation system. Intersection angles, grades, tangents, and curves shall be
appropriate for the traffic to be carried and to the terrain. The arrangement of streets in a
subdivision shall either:
l. Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in
surrounding areas, or
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 195
2. Conform to the City Comprehensive Plan to meet a particular situation where
topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets
impractical.
B. Minimum right-of-way. Unless otherwise indicated in the Comprehensive Plan, the widths
of the streets, alleys, and other public ways, in feet, shall comply with the requirements of
the standard drawings in the City of Tillamook's Transportation Systems Plan (TSP). Where
existing conditions of topography or the size and shape of land parcels, or other like
physical conditions, make it otherwise impractical to provide buildable lots, the planning
commission may accept a narrower right-of-way with suitable allowance for increased
width at strategic locations for turning lanes, parking bays, or similar special design
features.
C. Reserve strips. Reserve strips or street plugs controlling the access to streets shall be
required for the protection of the public welfare and for substantial property rights. The
control and disposal of the land composing such strips or street plugs shall be placed within
the jurisdiction of the city, by deed, under conditions approved by the planning commission
or city council.
D. Alignment. All streets, as far as practicable, shall be in alignment with existing streets by
continuations of the centerlines thereof. The staggering of street alignment resulting in
"T" intersections shall, wherever practical, leave a minimum distance of 200 feet between
the centerlines of the streets.
E. Future extension of streets. Where necessary to give access to or permit a satisfactory
future subdivision of adjoining land, streets shall be extended to the boundary of the
subdivision or development. Reserve strips and street plugs shall be required to preserve
the objectives of street extension. The planning commission may require the improvement
of a suitable turnaround at the temporary dead end.
F. Intersection angles. Streets shall be laid out to intersect at 90 degrees, except where
topography requires a lesser angle, but in no case less than 60 degrees. Streets shall have
at least 30 feet of tangent adjacent to the intersection unless the topography justifies a
lesser distance.
G. Intersection corner rounding. The property line at each block corner shall be rounded with
a curve adequate to allow a radius of not less than 25 feet at the edge of road surface and
provide utility and sidewalk space. A greater radius at the edge and corresponding block
corner radius may be required if the streets intersect at other than right angles.
H. Curve radius. Centerline radii of curves shall be not less than 300 feet on arterial streets,
200 feet on collector streets or 100 feet on all other streets and shall be to an even 10 feet.
I. Grades. No street or highway shall have a grade of more than twelve percent (12%)
unless, because of topographical conditions, the planning commission determines that a
grade in excess of twelve percent is necessary.
J. Half-streets. Half-streets, while generally not acceptable, may be approved when essential
to the reasonable development of the subdivision, when in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations, and when the planning commission finds it will be
practical to require the development of the other half when the adjoining property is
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 196
subdivided. Whenever a half-street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of
the street shall be platted within such tract. Reserve strips and street plugs shall be required
to preserve the objectives of the half-streets.
K. Cul-de-sac. A cul-de-sac, while generally not acceptable, may be approved when essential
to the reasonable development of the project, when in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations, and shall be as short as possible.
a. Cul-de-sacs shall only be allowed when one or more of the following conditions exist:
• Physical or topographic conditions make a street connection impracticable. Such
conditions include but are not limited to freeways, railroads, steep slopes (greater
than 20% grade) wetlands or other bodies or water where a connection could not
reasonably be provided.
• Buildings or other existing development on adjacent lands physically preclude a
connection now or in the future considering the potential for redevelopment; or
• Where streets would violate provisions of leases, easements, covenants, restrictions
or other agreements existing as of the date of adoption of the City’s Transportation
System Plan, which precluded a required street connection.
b. Cul-de-sacs shall have maximum lengths of 600 feet. All cul-de-sacs shall
terminate with circular turnarounds.
c. Cul-de-sacs or dead-end hammerhead streets shall be connected with walking or bicycle
paths in accordance with Section 15, Pedestrian and Bicycle Access and Circulation.
L. Existing streets. Whenever existing streets adjacent to or within a proposed development
area are of inadequate width, additional right-of-way shall be provided at the time of
development. No street with pavement less than two years old shall be cut to install any
utilities unless approval is given by the City Public Works Director.
M. Street names. No street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the
names of existing streets in Tillamook and vicinity except for extensions of existing streets.
Streets which are an extension of, or are in alignment with, existing streets shall have the
same name as the existing street. Street names and numbers shall conform to the
established pattern in the city and shall be subject to the approval of the planning
commission.
N. Marginal access streets. Where a subdivision or development abuts or contains an existing
or proposed arterial street, the planning commission may require marginal access streets,
reverse frontage lots with suitable depth, screen planting contained in a non-access
reservation along the front, rear or side property line, or such other treatment as may be
necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of
through and local traffic.
O. Alleys. Alleys are encouraged where feasible.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 197
P. The following cross-section drawings show the standards for each type of roadway in the
City.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 198
12. Approval of streets and ways.
A. Creation of streets.
1. The creation of a street shall be in conformance with the requirements for the
development, except that the planning commission may approve the creation of a street
to be established by deed without full compliance with the regulations applicable to a
development when the planning commission has sufficient assurance that the proposed
street or enlargement thereof shall be improved to city standards and when the City
Planning Commission finds any of the following conditions exist:
a. The establishment of the street, or, the extension or widening thereof, is initiated by
the city council and declared essential for the purpose of general traffic circulation
and the partitioning of land is of incidental effect rather than the primary objective of
the street.
b. The tract in which the street is to be dedicated is an isolated township of one (1) acre
or less.
2. In those cases where approval of a street may be given without full compliance with the
regulations applicable to developments, a copy of the proposed deed shall be submitted
to the city at least five (5) days prior to the planning commission meeting at which
consideration is requested. The deed and such information as may be submitted shall be
reviewed by the City Planning Commission and if not in conflict with the standards of
these regulations, shall be approved with conditions necessary to preserve these
standards. Upon approval, the City Planning Commission shall forward the said deed to
the City Council with recommendations that the same be accepted, and with further
recommendations as to the improvement requirements and assurance thereof which the
planning commission recommends as a condition to acceptance of this street.
B. Before Finalization and acceptance of any site plan approval, conditional use permit,
planned unit development, final plat of a subdivision, final map of a partition; commercial
and industrial site development, multi-family dwellings and multiple use structure
development, the applicant shall install required street and sidewalk improvements and
repair existing streets and other existing public facilities damaged in the development of the
property.
13. Blocks
A. General. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be designed with due regard to
providing building sites for the use contemplated, consideration of needs for convenient
access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic, and recognition of the limitations and
opportunities of topography.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 199
B. Maximum Block Size. In commercial - Neighborhood Commercial (C-N), Town Center
(TC), and Central Commercial (C-C)), the maximum block length along Local and
Collector streets shall be 500 ft. In all other zones, block length along Local and Collector
streets shall not exceed 600 feet between street corner lines of rectilinear developments
unless it is adjacent to an arterial street or unless the topography of the location of adjoining
streets justified as exception. Along an Arterial street, the maximum block length shall be
1,800 feet.
C. Minimum Block size along Arterial streets. The recommended minimum length of blocks
along an arterial street is 1,000 feet. A block shall have sufficient width to provide for two
tiers of building sites unless topography or the location of adjoining streets justifies an
exception.
14. Lots.
A. Size and shape. Lot size, shape, width and orientation shall be appropriate for the location
of the subdivision or development, solar orientation and for the type of use contemplated.
The width of every lot shall comply with the requirements of the zoning code. Lots shall
have an average depth of not less than 100 feet unless existing conditions or topographic
conditions make it mandatory that lots be reduced in depth, in which case the lot depth may
not be less than 80 feet. These minimum standards shall apply with the following
exceptions:
1. In areas that will not be served by a public sewer, minimum lot size-shall be
increased to conform with the requirements of the Tillamook County Health
Department and shall take into consideration problems of water supply and
sewage disposal.
2. Where property is zoned and planned for industrial or commercial use, other
standards may be permitted at the discretion of the planning commission. Depth
and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial
purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking
facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated.
3. The lot layout shall be in agreement with the area designations shown on the
adopted Comprehensive Plan.
B. Lot side lines. The side lines of lots, as far as practicable, shall run at right angles to the
street upon which the lot faces.
15. Site and Building Design: The site and building design standards as listed in each of the City
of Tillamook zone districts are required.
A. Siting Standards: All new buildings should face the street except if conditions such as lot
size, shape, topography or other circumstances over which the applicant has no control
apply to the property. Primary ground floor entrances must orient to streets and/or the
pedestrian entrance shall be the visually predominant entrance. The original topography and
grade of building sites should be maintained. B. Signs. As per Section 24.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 200
C. Historic Resources
1) Sites currently listed on the Statewide Inventory of Historic Sites and Buildings, as well
as any future sites of historic importance, shall be subject to additional site review
criteria.
2) In addition to the requirements of this section, any demolition, interior remodeling or
alterations to an historic building, or development of an historic site shall be subject to
an additional public hearing. At the time of mailing of the public notice, the City shall
give 45 day notice to the State Historical Preservation Office and local historic interest
groups of the proposed development in order to determine an appropriate course of
action. The testimony of these groups shall be included in the staff report to the
Planning Commission.
D. Utility Service.
1) It shall be required that electric, telephone and other utility lines shall be located
underground except if conditions such as topography or other circumstances over which
the applicant has no control apply to the property.
2) Utility lines and installations remaining above the ground shall be located to the rear of
the site so as to have a harmonious relationship to adjacent and abutting properties and
the site.
3) Solid waste disposal containers shall be screened and placed away from public view in
an areas as indicated in site plan (as per subsection 6b(6).
E. Agricultural Buffering.
1) All rear lot lines abutting the Tillamook County F-1 Zone shall be fenced.
2) A 20 foot setback and additional landscaping shall be required to avoid conflicting uses
for agricultural protection except if conditions such as lot size, shape, topography or
other circumstances over which the applicant has no control apply to the property.
3) In conjunction with the abutting or adjacent Tillamook County F-1 Zone, as part of the
requirements for development, the following declaratory statement be entered into the
building permit and chain of title.
"The subject property is located adjacent to or abutting an area designated by Tillamook County and
recognized by Tillamook City for agricultural uses. Accepted farm practices in these adjacent or abutting
areas may create inconvenience for the owners of adjacent properties. However, Tillamook City does not
consider it the agricultural operator's responsibility to modify farm practices to accommodate owners or
occupants of surrounding property, with the exception of such operator's violation of existing federal and
state or local laws."
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 201
F. Wetlands Planning Area.
1) The intent of this subsection is to provide adequate protection for environmentally
sensitive areas in all zones within the UGB. Areas of concern include perennial streams,
sloughs, rivers, and wetlands with their associated fish and wildlife species and riparian
wetland vegetation. The location of these areas is shown in the "Wetland Planning Map
for the City of Tillamook City", adopted herein by this reference.
2) In the event of a proposed development within a wetland or setback area, a copy of the
proposed development as per Section 22 5(a-g) will be submitted to the O.D.F.W. for
review.
3) O.D.F.W. shall have a 30-day review period from the date of application in which to
provide written comments and recommendations on the proposed development. During
this review period, no site alteration shall be allowed to take place. The
recommendations issued by the O.D.F.W. will be presented as part of the staff
recommendation and shall be followed by the appropriate reviewing body in
determining the appropriate development action.
16. Pedestrian and Bicycle Access and Circulation
A. Purpose. The primary pedestrian and bicycle circulation plan is addressed in the City’s
adopted Transportation System Plan (TSP). The TSP provides for a Pedestrian System Plan
and a Bicycle System Plan to ensure safe, direct and convenient pedestrian and bicycle
circulation. New streets should be constructed to the standards specified in the TSP to
allow for pedestrian and bicycle access. New development, as stated in section 4 of these
development standards, shall provide a continuous pedestrian and/or multi-use pathway
system. The placement of a sidewalk or pathway along the frontage(s) of a subject property
is required. (Pathways only provide for pedestrian circulation. Multi-use pathways
accommodate pedestrians and bicycles.) The system of pathways shall be designed based
on the standards in Subsections (a) and (b) below:
B. Continuous Pathways. The pathway system shall extend throughout the development site,
and connect to all future phases of development, adjacent trails, public parks and open
space areas whenever possible. The developer may also be required to connect or stub
pathway(s) to adjacent streets and private property, in accordance with the provisions of
City Ordinances, Streets, and the Standards and Specifications document for the City.
C. Safe, Direct, and Convenient Pathways. Pathways within developments shall provide safe,
reasonably direct and convenient connections between primary building entrances, and all
adjacent streets.
D. Pathway connectivity. Pathways (for pedestrians and bicycles) shall be provided at or near
mid-block where the block length exceeds the length required by Street Standard of this
section. Pathways shall also be provided where cul-de-sacs or dead-end streets are planned,
to connect the ends of the streets together, to other streets, and/or to other developments as
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 202
per Cul-de-Sac standards of this section. Pathways used to comply with these standards
shall conform to the criteria listed in each zone.
E. Design and Construction. Pathways shall conform to with the City’s most current design
standards and all of the standards in 1 & 2 below:
1. Vehicle/Pathway Separation. Where pathways are parallel and adjacent to a driveway or
street (public or private), they shall be raised 6 inches and curbed, or separated from the
driveway/street by a 5-foot minimum strip with bollards, a landscape berm, or other
physical barrier. If a raised path is used, the ends of the raised portions must be
equipped with curb ramps.
2. Pathway Surface.
a. Pedestrian Pathway surfaces shall be concrete, asphalt, brick/masonry pavers, or
other durable surface, at least 5 feet wide, and shall conform to ADA requirements.
b. Multi-use paths (i.e., for bicycles and pedestrians) shall be the same materials as
listed in “a” above, at least 6 feet wide, and shall conform to ADA requirements. (See
also, City of Tillamook Street and Storm Drainage Design Standards Section 3.02,
Walks, Ramps, Driveways and Curb Cuts. No matter which surface is utilized, grading
and compaction shall be sufficient to allow the unimpeded passage of wheeled
vehicles such as bicycles, wheelchairs, and perambulators.
Figure 22-17 - Pathway Standards
3. Unless the pathway is shared between adjacent property owners, a minimum of five (5)
feet between the pathway surface and the property line is required.
4. All pathways shall be completed as part of development, not delayed to coincide with
individual building/housing construction.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 203
17. Agreements, Bonding and Assurances.
A. Construction plans. Construction drawings certified by a licensed civil engineer prepared on
24" x 36" base material showing in detail all improvements required to be constructed
including, but not limited to, streets, curbs and gutters, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water
distribution system, street tree locations, street lights and monuments, shall be submitted to
the city engineer who shall examine the same prior to conditional approval of the final map
by the Planner. Upon finding that the drawings conform with applicable city codes and other
construction requirements for such improvements and are in accord with sound engineering
principles and practices, the engineer shall submit the said plans to the Planner for approval.
No alteration or change of the construction drawings shall be made by the developer or the
city without the express mutual consent of both parties. No construction shall be started
prior to approval of said plans and specifications by the Planner. On completion of the
construction the developer shall submit to the city engineer a complete set of "as built"
drawings, in the manner prescribed by law.
B. Improvement procedures. In addition to other requirements, subdivision or development
improvements installed by the developer shall conform to the requirements of this section
and improvements standards and specifications adopted by the city, and where there is no
requirement or specification expressly set forth in this code or adopted by the city relating
to any such improvement or part thereof, the developer shall have the right to employ the
standards and specifications prepared by the American Public Works Association. The
improvements shall be installed in accordance with the following procedure:
1. Work shall not begin until plans have been checked for adequacy and
approved by the city. To the extent necessary for evaluation of the subdivision or
development proposal, the plans shall be required before the approval of the final
plat.
2. Work shall not begin until the city has been notified in advance. lf work has
been discontinued for any reason for a period of one year, it shall not be resumed
until the city has been notified.
3. Improvements shall be constructed under the inspection and to the
satisfaction of the city. The city may require changes in typical sections and details
if unusual conditions arise during the construction to warrant the change in the
public interest. The city reserves the right to:
a. Require the developer to provide supervision of the improvements by a
qualified engineer, or
b. Require the developer to deposit three percent of the anticipated
construction costs to be applied to the retention of a supervising engineer.
Said deposit shall be applied to the cost of the supervising engineer; if the
cost exceeds three percent the developer shall pay the additional; if it is less
than the three percent a refund will be made to the developer. When the
developer's engineer performs the inspection, a certification of construction
inspection shall be issued with the "as built" drawings.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 204
4. All underground utilities, sanitary sewers, and storm drains installed in streets
shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of such streets. Stubs for service
connections for all underground utilities and sanitary sewers shall be placed to such
length as will obviate the necessity for disturbing the street improvements when
service connections are made. Storm sewers that are required as a result of a drainage
study prepared by a registered professional engineer, shall be installed by the
developer.
5. A reproducible map showing all public improvements as built shall be filed
with the city upon completion of said improvements.
6. "As built" drawings of all improvements constructed within the development.
Said drawings shall define the exact location of all underground utilities and surface
drainage as they were constructed. The location of such utilities shall be determined
by the developer at the time of construction and independent of the utility company's
records. When utilities cross permanent structures such as sidewalks or curbs, the
location of the utility shall be indicated on the permanent structure.
C. On all projects where public improvements are required:
1. To assure full and faithful performance of the improvement agreement, the developer
shall file with the said agreement a personal undertaking signed by all persons having a
beneficial interest in the subject property, which undertaking shall be approved in form
by the city attorney and shall be one of the following:
a. Co-signed by at least one additional person who shall not be related to the developer
by blood or consanguinity. The developer and co-signer shall submit evidence of
financial responsibility in affidavit form which satisfies the city that the financial
resources of the surety signing the bond provide reasonable assurance of the ability of
the developer to proceed in accordance with the agreement; or
b. Co-signed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state of
Oregon, or,
c. Secured by the deposit of cash or cashier's check, governmental bearer bonds or other
like cash security available to the city in case of default in the undertaking, the
deposit to be in the penal amount of the bond or
d. A letter of assignment from an authorized financial institution. Letter of assignment
shall be held in force by the city until improvements are deemed complete by the city.
The city shall have access to funds guaranteed by the letter of assignment in case of
default in the undertaking and said letter of assignment shall only be terminated with
approval of the City;
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 205
2. Approve and release such bonds upon the completion of the project. A portion of a bond
may be released as components of the project are completed;
3. Require a development agreement containing the conditions of approval to be signed by
the developer and recorded with Tillamook County;
4. Require the applicant execute and file with the City Manager an agreement between
himself/herself and the City specifying the period within which required improvements
and repairs shall be completed and providing that, if the work is not completed within
that period specified, the City may complete the work and recover the full cost and
expense, together with court costs and attorney fees necessary to collect said amount
from the land developer.
a. The agreement shall also provide the reimbursement of the City for the cost of
inspection by the City of the improvements to be installed.
b. The agreement may also provide for the construction and improvements to be
completed in units and for an extension of time under the conditions therein
specified
D. Performance Bond. The bond shall be released when the city finds the completed project
conforms to the approved site development plan and all conditions of approval are satisfied.
In the event the developer shall fail to complete all improvement work in accordance with
the provisions of this code and the city shall have completed same, or if the developer shall
fail to reimburse the city for the cost of inspection, engineering and incidental expenses, and
to cover cost of replacement and repair of existing streets or other improvements damaged in
the development of the project, the city shall call on the surety for reimbursement, or shall
appropriate from any cash deposit funds for reimbursement. In any such case, if the amount
of surety bond or cash deposit shall exceed all cost and expense incurred by the city, it shall
release the remainder of such bond or cash deposit, and if the amount of the surety bond or
cash deposit shall be less than the cost and expense incurred by the city, the developer shall
be liable to the city for such difference.
E. Landscaping shall be installed within six months of issuance of occupancy permits, unless
security equal to the cost of the landscaping as determined by the planner is filed with the
city, assuring such installation within six months after occupancy.
1. Security may consist of a faithful performance bond payable to the city, cash, certified
check or such other assurance of completion approved by the city; and
2. If the installation of the landscaping is not completed within the six-month period, the
security may be used by the city to complete the installation.
F. The applicant shall ensure that all occupants of the completed project, whether permanent or
temporary, shall apply for and receive a city business license prior to initiating business.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 206
G. Guarantee. The developer shall guarantee all materials and equipment furnished and work
performed against any defect in materials and workmanship which becomes evident within
three (3) years after the acceptance of the work by the city. A warranty bond shall be
submitted to the City shall in the amount of 20 percent of total project cost and remain in full
force and effect during the guaranty period and correction of any faulty work shall be
promptly executed by the developer, or, if corrected by the city, shall be the responsibility of
the surety. In the case of a cash deposit the city council may determine, upon completion
of the improvement, whether all or a reasonable part of the deposit should be retained as a
reasonable security for such guarantee.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 207
§153.052 PROVISIONS APPLYING TO SPECIAL USES
1. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish limitations for special land uses which have
been identified because of particular characteristics. These characteristics, for special uses,
must be carefully regulated in terms of all development proposals. The standards in this
section relate to the special characteristics of the uses identified in this section and, unless
otherwise specified, are to be applied in addition to all other applicable standards prescribed in
this Development code. In the event that the standards contained in this section differ from
other applicable standards of this Development code, the more stringent standards shall prevail.
2. Automobile Service Stations. In addition to other standards of this Development code,
automobile service stations, where permitted outright or as a conditional use, shall comply with
the provisions of this section. Service stations shall be exempted from applicable district
regulations only insofar as the provisions in this section conflict with the appropriate district
regulations.
A. A sight-obscuring fence or wall not less than five (5) feet nor more than six (6) feet in
height shall be provided between the service station and abutting property in an R-7.5, R5.0
or R-O District. Said wall or fence shall be reduced to a three foot maximum in any
required front yard setback.
B. All lighting shall be of such illumination, direction and color as not to create a nuisance on
adjoining property or a traffic hazard.
C. Vision clearance area as per §153.050 shall be required at all access points.
3. Animal Hospitals, Kennels, Breeding Grounds and Veterinary Clinics. A veterinary clinic,
kennel, breeding ground or animal hospital shall not be located within 100 feet of a lot in any
R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District, and the applicant shall show that adequate measures and controls
shall be taken to prevent offensive noise and odor. No incineration of refuse shall be permitted
on the premises.
4. Barns, Coops, Corrals, and Hutches, Paddocks, Pens for Farm Animals, Livestock and Poultry
Farms and Eggeries.
A. Any building housing poultry or other smaller farm animals, such as coops, hutches, pens
shall be located not less than twenty-five feet from every lot line. Odor, dust, noise, flies or
drainage shall not be permitted to create or become a nuisance to surrounding property.
B. All barns, corrals, stables and paddocks housing livestock and larger farm animals shall be
located on the rear half of a lot and not closer than fifty feet to any property line. Odor,dust,
noise, flies or drainage shall not be permitted to create or become a nuisance to surrounding
property.
C. The keeping of any farm animals shall be in buildings that fully comply with building and
sanitary codes;
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 208
D. The keeping of any farm animals shall follow best animal husbandry practices as
determined by OSU Extension services.
E. Barns, Coops, Corrals, and Hutches, Paddocks, Pens for Farm Animals, Livestock and
Poultry Farms and Eggeries Farm and Animal Husbandry is allowed in the following zone
districts: OS, R-7.5, R-5.0, R-O, N-C, H-C, C-C, L-I, G-I.
5. Bed and Breakfast Establishments. A structure designed for a single-family residence where
one (1) or more rooms are available for transient lodging and where a morning meal is provided
to guests, staff and owners only. In addition to required parking per Section 25 of this
development code, the additional parking spaces shall not be located in the front yard and must
be asphalted. Signing shall be per §153.053 of this development code. All necessary State and
County permits, certifications, or requirements shall be obtained as a condition of approval of a
bed and breakfast service, including compliance with OAR Chapter 333, Division 170.
Minimal outward modification of the structure or grounds may be made only if such changes
are compatible with the character of the neighborhood and the intent of the zoning district in
which it is located, and with appropriate City approval where required. Such establishments
shall be owner-operated and occupied.
6. Cemetery, Crematory, Mausoleum, Columbarium. A cemetery, crematory, mausoleum or
columbarium shall have its principal access on a major street or road with ingress and egress so
designed as to minimize traffic congestion and shall provide required off-street parking space.
Cemeteries located within any R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District or abutting such "R" District shall
establish and maintain appropriate landscaping and screening to minimize the conflict with
abutting residential use.
7. Churches, Hospitals or Other Religious or Charitable Institutions. In any R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O
District, all buildings shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from a side or rear lot line and all
off-street parking facilities shall be adequately screened from abutting property, and no sign
shall exceed six (6) square feet in area or be internally illuminated.
8. Circuses, Carnivals, Animal Rides, Animal Displays, Amusement Rides, Flea Markets,
Christmas Tree Lots. A circus, carnival, animal ride, animal display or amusement ride or flea
market may be permitted for a term not to exceed 30 days in a "C" or "I" District, except an NC
District, with the written approval of the City Manager and an approved Zoning Clearance
Permit. Christmas tree sales lots may be permitted in an R-5.0 or R-O Zoning District after
receiving permission in writing from the City Manager and an approved Zoning Clearance
Permit. The City Manager may require suitable guarantees that any property used for said
purposes shall be restored to a neat and orderly condition after termination of said uses. The
City Manager's decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission through the General
Appeals procedure set forth in §153.076.
9. Community Building, Social Halls, Lodges, Fraternal Organizations and Clubs in an R-7.5,
R5.0 or R-O District. All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from a side or rear
lot line; there shall be no external evidence of any incidental commercial activities taking place
within the building. All off-street parking facilities shall be adequately screened from abutting
property, and no sign shall exceed six (6) square feet in area or be internally illuminated.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 209
10. Drive-In Theaters. Drive-in theaters shall be located only on an arterial street and shall provide
ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestions, shall be so screened from an
R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District or dwelling that any noise shall not disturb neighboring residents,
shall maintain signs and other lights only in such a way as not to disturb neighboring residents,
and shall be so designed that the screen will be set back from and shall not be clearly visible
from any highway.
11. Electric Car Charging Station: shall meet parking stall standards listed in §153.054 of this
development code.
12. Mobile Unit Food and Beverage Cart Standards: This section applies to Mobile Unit Food and
Beverage Carts. The definition for Mobile Unit Food and Beverage Carts is found in the
Definitions section. All Mobile Unit Food and Beverage Carts will comply with the Oregon
Health Authority requirements and all other applicable Fire and Life Safety codes.
Standards for Mobile Unit Food and Beverage Carts
A. Except for short-term sale for events of no greater than four (4) consecutive days,
Mobile Unit Food and Beverage Carts shall be on a paved surface such as, but not
limited to concrete, asphalt, pavers and other surfaces as approved by the City
Planner. If new paved surface is added to a site to accommodate a cart, the property
shall still be required to comply with applicable lot coverage, impervious surface,
and parking lot standards.
B. Carts shall not occupy pedestrian walkways or required landscape areas.
C. Carts shall not occupy parking needed to meet the minimum bicycle or automobile parking
requirement for another use. Blocking automobile access to parking spaces shall be
considered occupying the spaces.
D. If a site where a cart is located abuts a lot with a residential use, the cart use shall meet all
buffer widths required for a proposed commercial use. Buffer widths shall be
allowed to overlap with setback requirements.
E. The use shall provide adequate vision clearance as required by city standards.
F. Ingress and egress shall be safe and adequate when combined with the other uses of the
property as required.
G. Signage for Carts:
1. Shall comply with applicable zoning requirements with no more than seven (7) signs
aggregate per property.
2. Users shall be required to post City Mobile Unit Food and Beverage Cart permits;
City business licenses; and Tillamook County Health Department food service
licenses in a location visible to customers.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 210
H. Unless otherwise specified in this section, Mobile Unit Food and Beverage Carts shall be
exempt from a finding of adequate public facilities unless it is determined that the proposed use
exceeds the capacity of existing public facilities or causes unsafe conditions.
I. The City Planner may impose any approval conditions intended to minimize adverse
impacts created by the use on surrounding property and uses.
J. Carts are exempt from land-use district density, floor-area ratio and design guidelines
and standards.
K. Carts shall meet the setback requirements as required by Oregon Health Authority and
Fire and Life Safety Code requirements:
1. Land-use district minimum setbacks shall be met for the site perimeter.
2. Carts shall not be located within 25 feet of an active driveway entrance as measured
in all directions from where the driveway enters the site at the edge of the street right
of way.
3. Carts shall be located at least 3 feet from the right of way or back of sidewalk,
whichever provides the greater distance from the right of way.
4. Carts shall provide at least 6 feet between service windows or other customer
service points and an active drive aisle. The distance shall be measured
perpendicular to the service window/point.
5. Carts shall remain at least 6 feet away from other Mobile Unit Food and Beverage
Carts or Commercial Stands.
L. Carts shall not occupy fire lanes or drive aisles necessary for vehicular circulation
or fire/emergency vehicle access as determined by the City Planner.
M.Carts shall limit the visual effect of accessory items not used by customers, including butnot
limited to tanks, barrels and miscellaneous items, by using screening or storing them in
containers to substantially limit views of such items from the street. Screening could be
temporary fencing or landscaping (such as landscaping in pots or planters). Storage
containers could be small sheds or storage units. Screening shall be approved by the Police
Department in order to ensure surveillance of the site remains possible for crime prevention
purposes.
N. For drive-through carts, the following standards apply:
1. To ensure adequate distance for at least three vehicles to line up behind the vehicle
ordering at the drive-through, drive-through Mobile Unit Food and Beverage Carts
shall have at least 85 feet in queuing distance behind each drive-through window
where sales occur. Required queuing distance may be increased as determined by
the City Planner if a change in distance will promote traffic and pedestrian safety.
Queuing distance shall be measured from the initial edge of the service window or
point of service, along the queuing path, to where the driveway from the street
crosses from the right of way into the property. The measurement method can be
adjusted by the City Planner for unusual circumstances or if needed to meet the
intent of this standard.
2. Drive-through stacking lanes and service areas shall not be located between the
street and the Mobile Unit Food and Beverage Cart.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 211
O. The applicant shall provide a parking plan that includes an estimate of the parking demand on
the site and provide information about how parking demand will be accommodated, such as
through off-street parking or on-street parking on adjacent blocks. That analysis shall consider
parking needs of other uses on the site. Off-street parking may be required by the City
Planner if the applicant cannot demonstrate adequate parking is available to meet demand or it
has been determined that a renewing Mobile Unit Food and Beverage Cart has experienced
parking or related traffic issues on the site or on adjacent blocks. Should the applicant
disagree with the Planner’s decision, the applicant may request a Planning Commission
interpretation.
P. Carts shall have lighting to ensure a safe environment for customers. If permanent lighting,
such as parking lot lighting, already exists on the site, the City Planner may determine that
the lighting satisfies this requirement. Otherwise, lighting (such as temporary lighting), shall
be added that complies with the following:
1. At a minimum, areas intended to be occupied by customers, such as areas near
Mobile Unit Food and Beverage Cart service windows and customer seating, shall
be illuminated when carts are in operation during hours of darkness;
2. No direct light source shall be visible at the property line adjacent to residential at 3
feet above ground level;
3. Lighting fixtures shall be oriented and/or shielded so as not to create glare on
abutting properties; and
4. The Planner may modify lighting standards if such modifications are deemed
necessary and appropriate for the use and surrounding area and help meet the intent
of the standard.
Q. Carts and their accessory items visible from the street shall be kept in good repair and
be maintained in a safe and clean condition in compliance with the following:
1. Carts shall not have missing siding, skirting, or roofing.
2. Carts shall not have more than 10 percent of any side experiencing rust, peeling
paint, corrosion or other deterioration.
3. Carts shall not have components or attachments in disrepair in a manner that causes
an unsafe condition.
4. Tents and canopies associated with the carts shall not have:
a. Tears in the tent/canopy material that exceed 6 inches.
b. Mold on the material.
c. A lack of anchoring.
d. Broken or non-functioning supports.
S. All canopies, tents and rigid structures erected on Mobile Unit Food and Beverage Cart sites
shall comply with Building Code anchoring and engineering standards and Fire Code standards.
13. Gardening (such as a Community or Allotment Garden)/Horticulture (such as field crops,
orchards, berries, nursery or flower stock and other agricultural uses)/Animal Husbandry.
Allowed for non-commercial purposes subject to the requirements of 23 (B-F) below. For small
scale enterprises located in the R-0, R-7.5 or R-5.0 Zone District, temporary harvest time
display and sale of agricultural products, primarily based on products raised or grown on the
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 212
premises shall be subject to an application process with administrative approval. Limitation on
commercial use may be required. For Urban Farming, see 23 of this section.
14. Home Occupation. A lawful commercial activity or occupation conducted within a dwelling
and/or accessory building provided there is a dwelling on the property. Home occupations shall
be a secondary/accessory use of the premises, permitted by right in all residential units, subject
to the following standards:
A. Appearance of Residence:
1) The home occupation shall maintain the residential character of the building by assuring
that the occupation is conducted in such a manner as not to give an outward appearance
nor manifest any characteristic of a business in the ordinary meaning of the term nor
infringe upon the right of neighboring residents to enjoy the peaceful occupancy of their
homes.
2) The home occupation shall not result in any structural alterations or additions to a
structure that will change its primary use or building code occupancy classification.
3) The home occupation shall not violate any conditions of development approval (i.e.
prior development permit approval)
4) No products and/or equipment produced or used by the home occupation may be
displayed to be visible from outside any structure.
5) The home occupation shall not exceed 25% of the ground floor of the dwelling; or
occupy no more than 500 square feet of a garage, either attached or detached; or occupy
no more than 500 square feet of any other outbuilding;
6) Babysitting/Day care facilities with twelve (12) or fewer children shall be considered a
home occupation.
B. Storage:
1) Outside storage and use of yard areas for storage of tools, equipment and materials,
visible from the public right-of-way or from inside a residence located on adjacent
properties, is prohibited.
2) On-site storage of hazardous materials (including toxic, explosive, noxious, combustible
or flammable) beyond those normally incidental to residential use is prohibited.
3) Storage of inventory products and all other equipment, fixtures, and activities associated
with the home occupation shall be allowed in any structure.
4) Outside yard areas may be used for playground equipment for home occupations
involving the care of children by a baby sitter or day care facility.
C. Employees:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 213
1) The home occupation shall be operated by members of the family residing within the
dwelling with no more than one (1) full time, non-family equivalent employee at the home
occupation site at any given time.
2) Additional individuals may be employed by or associated with the home occupation, so long
as they do not report to the home occupation site or pick-up at/deliver to the home.
3) The home occupation site shall not be routinely used as a headquarters for the assembly of
employees for instruction or other purposes, including dispatch to other locations.
D. Advertising and Signs:
1) One (1) sign, according to §153.053 of this Development code, shall be allowed
for the home occupation. In no case shall the sign exceed the size of three (3) square
feet if inside or flush against the dwelling, or two (2) square feet if located
elsewhere.
2) No visual advertisement signs specifically indicating the home occupation
is anything more than a residential occurrence or advertising other products
shall be allowed.
3) No stock in trade shall be displayed upon the home occupation site.
E. Vehicles, Parking and Traffic:
1) One (1) commercially licensed vehicle associated with the home occupation is allowed
at the home occupation site. It shall be of a size that would not overhang into the public
right-of-way when parked in the driveway or another location on the home occupation
site.
2) There shall be no more than three commercial vehicle deliveries to or from the home
occupation site daily. There shall be no commercial vehicle deliveries during the hours
of 6 p.m. to 7 a.m.
3) There shall be no more than one client or customer's vehicle at any one time and no
more than eight (8) per day at the home occupation site.
4) Parking for the business is to be the same as for the normal residential occupancy, with
no additional parking for the establishment, either on, or off street. Traffic created by the
business or customers of the business shall not be of a volume or frequency that will
cause disturbance or inconvenience to nearby land uses. F. Business Hours:
1) There shall be no restrictions on business hours, except that clients or customers are
permitted at the home occupation from 7 a.m. to 6 p.m. only, subject to A & E above
and §153.054 of this Development code.
H. Prohibited Home Occupation Uses:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 214
1) Any activity that produces radio or television interference, noise, glare, vibration, smoke
or odor beyond allowable levels as determined by local, state or federal standards, or that
can be detected beyond the property line is prohibited.
2) Any activity involving on-site retail is prohibited, except the sale of items via
telecommunications and mail, or that are incidental to a permitted home occupation is
allowed. For example, the sale of lesson books or sheet music from music teachers, art
or craft supplies from arts or crafts instructors, computer software from computer
consultants, and similar incidental items for sale by the home business are allowed
subject to A - F above.
3) Any uses described in this section or uses with similar objectionable impacts because of
motor vehicle traffic, noise, glare, odor, dust, smoke or vibration is prohibited, such as:
a) Ambulance service;
b) Animal hospital, veterinary services, kennels or animal boarding;
c) Auto and other vehicle repair, including auto painting;
d) Beauty shops;
e) Barber shops;
f) Repair, reconditioning or storage of motorized vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles,
airplanes or large equipment on-site;
I. Enforcement:
1) Non-Compliance. Any home occupation, which does not comply with the requirements
of this Section and the provisions of the underlying district, shall be considered a
violation of this Development code and shall be subject to the penalties and remedies of
§153.099.
2) All uses conducted on the subject property shall comply with all requirements of the
Uniform Building Code, the Environmental Health Division and any other applicable
state or federal laws.
J. Revocation. The permit for a home occupation may be revoked by the City Planner for a
violation of any conditions above imposed or authorized, but the City Planner, before
revoking a permit, shall give the permittee reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard.
15. Housing for the Elderly or Handicapped. The purpose of this section is to establish standards
for housing, developments for the elderly within the R-5.0, R-O and C-C Districts. Housing
developments for the elderly shall be exempted from applicable district regulations only insofar
as the provisions in this section conflict with appropriate regulations.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 215
A. The minimum lot area for single and two-family dwellings shall be 5,000 square feet. For
each additional dwelling unit, the lot area shall be increased by 500 square feet. (This aspect
cannot be changed once granted like the parking below can, so you may wish to rethink this
one)
B. Off-street parking area ‘ .75 space per dwelling unit. Improved off-street parking ‘ .33 space
per dwelling unit.
As long as the multiple family development serves as housing for the elderly in terms of the
original intent for the development, the smaller parking requirement shall apply. Any
applicant must provide a site plan showing the total off-street parking area including access
and parking spaces in the event the development ceases to serve as housing for the elderly
or requires additional parking. In the event that the development ceases to serve as housing
for the elderly in terms of the original intent of the development, the larger off-street
parking area required in this section shall apply and shall be immediately improved and
developed. In the event that the improved off-street parking area does not meet the parking
needs of the development, the Planning Commission may require development of the total
or larger off-street parking area.
C. Site plan approval is required subject to the requirements of §153.073.
D. Proof is required that the development qualified for housing assistance under a
Governmental Housing Program for elderly or handicapped persons.
16. Landing Strips for Aircraft, Heliports. All landing strips for aircraft or heliports shall be so
designed and the runways and facilities so oriented, that the incidents of aircraft passing
directly over dwellings during their landing or taking off patterns is minimized. They shall be
located so that traffic, both land and air, shall not constitute a nuisance to neighboring uses. The
proponents shall show that adequate controls or measures will be taken to prevent offensive
noise, vibrations, dust or bright lights. New landing strips and heliports shall not be construed
to be a permitted use in any district established by this Development code unless and until a
Conditional Use Permit shall first have been secured.
17. Manufactured Home Standards on Individual Lots. A manufactured home permitted as a
dwelling on an individual lot shall be in compliance with the following standards and
regulations as a minimum. In such cases where the standards set forth in a specific zone are
more restrictive, the more restrictive standards shall govern. In all zones where permitted on
individual lots, manufactured homes shall meet the following special standards:
A. Be multi-sectional and enclose a space of not less than 1,000 square feet.
B. Have a roof with at least a pitch of 2 in 12.
C. Shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance is similar to
the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the
community or which is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding
dwellings as determined by the local permit approval authority.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 216
D. The manufactured home shall have a garage or carport constructed of like materials. A
jurisdiction may require an attached or detached garage in lieu of a carport where such is
consistent with the predominant construction of immediately surrounding dwellings.
E. The owner of the manufactured home shall be the owner of the lot on which the
manufactured home is located, except as approved by the Commission.
F. The manufactured home shall be provided with a bathroom, toilet, and bathtub or shower
which are connected to running water and to the Tillamook City sewage disposal system,
and which are located in a room or rooms which afford privacy to the occupant.
G. The manufactured home unit shall have the Oregon "Insignia of Compliance" as provided for
by state law. All pre-owned and pre-occupied units (i.e. used) shall be inspected by the
Building Official prior to installation and occupancy to insure compliance with applicable
standards required for the "Insignia of Compliance" and to insure that such units are in such a
condition as to not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare to adjoining
properties.
H. Each habitable room in the unit shall have an average ceiling height of not less than 7 feet, 0
inches, and no portion of the ceiling height in a habitable room shall be less than 6 feet, 10
inches.
I. The manufactured home shall be placed upon and securely anchored to a foundation having
permanence and strength equal to that provided by a concrete or masonry block foundation,
and such foundation shall be installed according to manufacturers' instructions approved by
the State Department of Commerce, and all road and transient lights, wheels and the hitch
shall be removed.
J. The manufactured home shall have a continuous perimeter of skirting that shall be composed
of the same material and finished as the exterior of the manufactured home or of brick,
concrete or masonry block within 30 days of placement of manufactured home. Such
skirting shall be secure against the entrance of animals, but there shall be provisions for
ventilation and access to the space under the unit.
K. All plumbing, electric and gas service connections shall be made according to instructions
approved by the State Department of Commerce.
L. All manufactured home accessory building and structures shall comply with Oregon State
Department of Commerce and Tillamook City Construction and installation standards.
Manufactured home accessory structures include porches and steps, awnings, cabanas,
carports, or any other structure or addition that depends in part on the manufactured home for
its structural support, or in any manner is immediately adjacent to or attached to the
manufactured home. Roofing and siding materials shall be of similar material and color and
complimentary to the existing manufactured home unit. Ramadas and cabanas are permitted.
M. The owner of the property shall remove the foundation and all accessory structures and
additions to the manufactured home and permanently disconnect sewer, water and other
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 217
utilities if the manufactured home is removed from its foundation unless otherwise authorized
by the City. In the event the owner fails to accomplish said work within 30 days from the date
on which the manufactured home is moved from its foundation, the City may perform such
work and place a lien against the property for the cost of such work. This condition shall not
apply in the event that the manufactured home is replaced on the original foundation or on the
original foundation as modified, or by another approved manufactured home within 30 days
of the original unit's removal. Said lien may be initiated by the City Manager.
18. Manufactured Home Subdivisions.
A. A manufactured home subdivision shall be a subdivision created by sale of lots for the
placement of manufactured homes in conjunction with traditional residences. A
manufactured home subdivision shall be created to the standards of the Tillamook City land
Division Standards Development code and all lots shall conform to the requirements of the
applicable zoning district. In no case shall any manufactured home subdivision be of lesser
standards than those specified for Manufactured Home Parks (See Section 3). Lots created
in a Manufactured Home Subdivision which do not meet the standard lot area for traditional
dwellings in a particular zoning district may be used only for a manufactured home and not
for any other form of dwelling.
B. There shall be no outdoor storage of furniture, tools, equipment, building materials, or
supplies belonging to the occupants of a manufactured home or any other person in a
manufactured home subdivision.
C. All streets in a Manufacture Home Subdivision shall conform to the standards specified in
the Tillamook City Street Standards Code.
19. Manufactured Dwelling Parks. A Manufactured Dwelling Park shall be for the rental of spaces
for the siting of manufactured dwellings containing at least 500 square feet of space. A
manufactured dwelling park shall be built to State standards in effect at the time of
construction, the following provisions, and any additional conditions set forth in the
Commission's approval prior to occupancy.
A. Evidence shall be provided that the park will be eligible for a Certificate of Sanitation as
required by State law.
B. The space provided for each manufactured dwelling shall be provided with piped potable
water and electrical and sewerage connections.
The number of spaces for manufactured dwellings shall not exceed twelve (12) for each
acre of the total area in the manufactured dwelling park, except that the Commission may
vary this density as follows:
1) If dedicated open space equals 50% or more of the total area of the park, a maximum
10% increase in units per acre may be granted.
2) If, in addition to No. 1, a maintained playground area with approved equipment, such as
goal posts, swings, slides, etc., is provided, the maximum increase in units per acre may
be increased an additional 5%.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 218
3) If, in addition to No. 1 and 2, an approved recreation/community building is provided,
an additional 10% increase of units/acre may be allowed (maximum total increase
possible ‘ 25%).
C. A manufactured dwelling shall occupy not more than 40% of the contiguous space provided
for the exclusive use of the occupants of the manufactured dwellings and exclusive use of
space provided for the common use of tenants, such as roadways, general use structures,
parking spaces, walkways, and areas for recreation and landscaping.
D. No manufactured dwelling in the park shall be located closer than 12 feet from another
manufactured dwelling or from a general use building in the park. No manufactured dwelling
accessory building or other building or structure on a manufactured dwelling space shall be
closer than 10 feet from a manufactured dwelling accessory building or other building or
structure on another manufactured dwelling space. No manufactured dwelling or other
building or structure shall be within 20 feet of a public street, property boundary or 10 feet of
another property boundary.
E. A manufactured dwelling permitted in the park shall be by the following standards as
determined by an inspection by the building official.
1) It shall have a State insignia indicating compliance with Oregon State Manufactured
Dwelling Construction Standards in effect at the time of manufacture, and including
compliance for reconstruction or equipment installation made after manufacture.
2) Notwithstanding deterioration which may have occurred due to misuse, neglect,
accident or other cause, the manufactured dwelling shall meet the State standards for
manufactured dwelling construction evidenced by the insignia.
3) It shall contain not less than 225 square feet of space as determined by measurement of
the exterior of the unit exclusive of any trailer hitch device.
4) It shall contain a bathroom, toilet, shower or tub, and sink in a kitchen or other food
preparation space.
F. A manufactured dwelling permitted in the park shall be provided with a continuous skirting,
and if a single-wide unit, shall be tied down with devices that meet State standards for tie
down devices.
G. There shall be no outdoor storage of furniture, tools, equipment, building materials or
supplies belonging to the occupants or management of the park.
H. If the park provides spaces for 50 or more manufactured dwelling units, each vehicular way
into the park shall be named and marked with signs which are similar in appearance to those
used to identify public streets. A map of the named vehicular ways shall be provided to the
fire department and 9-1-1.
I. If a manufactured dwelling space or permanent structure in a park within the Urban Growth
Boundary is more than 500 feet from a public fire hydrant, the park shall have water supply
mains designed to serve fire hydrants and hydrants shall be provided with 500 feet of such
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 219
space or structure. Each hydrant within the park shall be located on a vehicular way and shall
conform in design and capacity to the public hydrants in the City.
J. Open Space. A minimum of at least 2,500 square feet plus 100 square feet per manufactured
dwelling space shall be provided for a recreational play area group or community activities.
(no play area is required if the individual manufactured dwelling spaces contain in excess of
4,000 square feet.) The planning Commission may require this area to be protected from
streets, parking areas, or the like, by a fence or the equivalent, that conforms to fence
regulations, but at least 30 inches in height where allowed by fence standards. Unless
otherwise approved, no required open space area shall contain less than 2,500 square feet.
Recreation areas shall be improved with grass, plantings, surfacing or buildings suitable for
recreational use.
No recreation facility created within a manufactured dwelling park wholly to satisfy the
requirements of this section shall be open to, or offered in itself to, the general public.
K. Parking space requirement. A parking space shall be provided for each manufactured
dwelling space on the site. In addition, guest parking spaces shall also be provided in every
manufactured dwelling park within 200 feet of the manufactured dwelling spaces served
and at a ratio of one parking space for each two manufactured dwelling spaces.
L. All manufactured dwelling parks over 10 acres in size shall be located so as to have access
on a street designated as a minor collector or higher order street.
M. All manufactured dwelling parks containing a total site area of 20 acres or more shall
provide a secondary access to the trailer park. Such secondary access shall enter the public
street system at least 150 feet from the primary access.
N. Lighting shall be installed along the access ways of the trailer park and the recreation area
with lights 100 feet apart. Wire for service to light poles and manufactured dwelling spaces
shall be underground, except in the Flood Hazard Overlay Zone where wires for service
may be above ground as approved by the Commission.
O. Roadways within the park shall be paved and shall be not less than 30 feet in width if
parking is permitted on the margin of the roadway, or less than 20 feet in width if parking is
not permitted on the edge of the roadway, and an adequate designated area is provided and
improved for guest parking tenant recreational vehicles (such area shall be designed and
improved to provide not less than one parking space per each two spaces in the park).
P. No manufactured home park shall be created on a site less than one acre.
20. Murals and Public Artwork.
A. A mural and public artwork may be located anywhere in the city provided it is first
approved by the City Beautification Committee and then a City Zoning Clearance Permit is
issued by the City Planner in accordance with the procedures and criteria listed in this
section.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 220
B. An application for a mural and/or public artwork shall be filed with the City Planning
Department and shall include:
1. The name of the artist and work samples;
2. Description of the materials to comprise the mural and/or public artwork and manner
of application;
3. A statement regarding the durability of the materials and safety concerns of any
elements considering the location and positioning of the mural and/or public artwork;
and
4. Plans and/or specification for the proposed mural and/or public artwork including a
picture, graphic or other description.
5. Notice of administrative action shall be given to all property owners within 200 feet of
the external boundaries of the location of the mural or public art. Said notice shall
include a summary of the nature and substance of the proposal, a brief description of the
property involved, and a solicitation of oral or written comments to be submitted within
ten (10) days prior to the City Planner’s final action on the proposal.
C. Not less than 15 or more than 45 days after submittal of a complete application, the City
Beautification Committee shall meet and review the application. The Beautification
Committee shall recommend to the City Planner that a mural and/or public artwork be
issued a Zoning Clearance Permit upon a finding that:
1. The mural and/or public artwork will conform within the thematic program established
by City Resolution of the area of its proposed location;
2. The information regarding durability and expected maintenance requirements is
accurate; and
3. The materials to be used and the manner of application will not require excessive
maintenance by its owner, and a plan to assure maintenance and safety is provided.
D. In making its determination, the Beautification Committee will consider evidence that the
proposal will conform within the thematic program established by City Resolution, and may
consider the opinions of the owners and occupants of affected properties. Absent favorable
findings as required hereby, the Beautification Committee shall recommend that a Zoning
Clearance Permit for a mural and/or public artwork not be issued by the City Planner.
E. Upon a favorable recommendation of the Beautification Committee, the City Planner shall
review the application materials and the information received by the committee and shall,
upon a determination that the application materials are complete and accurate and the
findings of the Beautification Committee reasonable, issue a Zoning Clearance Permit for a
mural and/or public artwork. Absent such a determination, the City Planner shall deny the
application. Upon an unfavorable recommendation of the Beautification Committee, the City
Planner shall not issue a Zoning Clearance Permit.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 221
F. Within 15 days of the meeting of the Beautification Committee, the City Planner shall decide
whether or not a Zoning Clearance Permit for a mural and/or public artwork shall be issued.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Planner may appeal such decision within
15 days thereof to the City Council which shall apply the standards set forth in this section in
reviewing the decision of the City Planner. The City Council may affirm, reverse
or reverse with modifications the decision of the City Planner. The decision of the City
Council shall be final.
21. Nursery Schools, Kindergartens, Child Care Centers, and Family Child Care Homes. Nursery
schools, kindergartens, child care centers, and family child care homes serving more than six
(6) children shall provide and thereafter maintain outdoor play areas with a minimum area of 75
square feet per child and provide and maintain an indoor activity area with a minimum of 35
square feet per child. In any R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O, or "C" or "I" District, a site-obscuring fence
of at least four (4) feet but not more than six (6) feet in height shall be provided separating the
play area from abutting lots. A child care center shall meet the requirements listed in OAR
414300-0000 through 414-300-0415. A family child care home shall meet the requirements
listed in OAR 414-350-0000 through 414-350-0405.
22. Recreation Vehicle Parks. A recreation vehicle park shall be for the rental of spaces for the
temporary sitting of "recreational vehicles" or mobile homes containing less than 500 square
feet of space. A recreation vehicle park shall be built to state standards in effect at the time of
construction, with the following provisions and any additional conditions set forth in the
Commission's approval prior to occupancy.
A. The space provided for each recreation vehicle shall be not less than 700 square feet
exclusive of any space used for common areas, such as roadways, general use structures,
walkways, parking spaces for vehicles other than recreation vehicles, and landscaped areas.
B. Roadways shall not be less than 30 feet in width if parking is permitted on the margin of the
roadway, or less than 20 feet in width if parking is not permitted on the edge of the
roadway. Roadway shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, paver, or gravel surface and
designed to permit easy access to each recreation vehicle space.
C. A space provided for a recreation vehicle shall be covered with crushed gravel or paved
with asphalt, concrete or similar material and be designed to provide runoff of surface
water. The part of the space which is not occupied by the recreation vehicle, not intended as
an access way to the recreation vehicle or part of an outdoor patio, need not be paved or
covered with gravel, provided the area is landscaped or otherwise treated to prevent dust
and mud.
D. A recreation vehicle space shall be provided with piped potable water and sewage disposal
service. A recreation vehicle staying in the park shall be connected to the water and sewage
service provided by the park if the vehicle has equipment needing such service. E. A
recreation vehicle space shall be provided with electrical service.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 222
F. Trash receptacles for the disposal of solid waste materials shall be provided in convenient
locations for the use of guests of the park, and located in such number and be of such
capacity that there is no uncovered accumulation of trash at any time.
G. The total number of parking spaces in the park, exclusive of parking provided for the
exclusive use of the manager or employees of the park, shall be equal to one space per
recreation vehicle space. Parking spaces shall be covered with crushed gravel or paved with
asphalt, concrete or similar material.
H. The park shall provide toilets, lavatories and showers for each sex in the following ratios;
for each 15 recreation vehicle spaces or any fraction thereof; one toilet, one urinal, one
lavatory and one shower for men; and two toilets, one lavatory and one shower for women.
The toilets and showers shall afford privacy and the showers shall be provided with private
dressing rooms. Facilities for each sex shall be located in separate buildings, or, if in the
same building, shall be separated by a soundproof wall.
I. The park shall provide 15 square feet of space for clothes drying lines for each ten (10)
recreation vehicle spaces or any fraction thereof.
J. Building spaces required by subsection i and j shall be lighted at all times of night and day,
shall be ventilated, shall be provided with heating facilities, shall have floors of waterproof
material, shall have sanitary ceiling, floor and wall surfaces, and shall be provided with
adequate floor drains to permit easy cleaning.
K. The park shall be maintained in a neat appearance at all times. Except for vehicles, there
shall be no outdoor storage of materials or equipment belonging to the park or to any guest
of the park.
L. Evidence shall be provided that the park will be eligible for a Certificate of Sanitation as
required by state law.
M. A Recreational Vehicle Park is allowed in the following zone districts:
1. R-0 (Multiple Use Residential)
2. N-C (Neighborhood Commercial)
3. H-C (Highway Commercial)
23. Temporary Permits.
A. Authorization. The City Planner may, in writing and in a manner consistent with the
provisions of subsections a to g herein, authorize temporary structures, including mobile
homes, which are incidental to construction on the same property or which are to be used as
temporary offices on the same property during construction. In either case, such
authorization shall not exceed a period of 12 months.
B. Application/Notice. The applicant shall submit an application for a temporary permit on the
appropriate forms provided by the Planning Department. Notice of administrative action
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 223
shall be given to all property owners within 200 feet of the external boundaries of lots or
parcels affected by a temporary permit of pending administrative action on said application.
Said notice shall include a summary of the nature and substance of the proposal, a brief
description of the property involved, and a solicitation of oral or written comments to be
submitted within ten (10) days prior to the City Planner’s final action on the proposal.
C. Standards. Applicants for temporary permits shall submit evidence as may be required to
enable the City Planner to make a finding that one or more of the following conditions
exist:
1) The need of the temporary structure authorization is the direct result of a casualty loss
such as fire, windstorm, flood, or other severe damage by the elements to a pre-existing
structure previously occupied by the applicant on the premises for which the permit is
sought.
2) The applicant has been evicted within sixty days of the date of the application from a
pre-existing occupancy of the lot or parcel for which the permit is sought as a result of:
a) Condemnation Proceedings by a Public Authority;
b) Eviction by abatement of nuisance proceedings, or,
c) By determination of a public body or court having jurisdiction that the continued
occupancy of facilities previously occupied constitutes a nuisance or is unsafe.
3) The temporary occupancy required is limited in duration by the purposes for which the
permit is sought, such as Christmas tree sales, temporary banking or office facilities,
parade stands, circuses, fairs or other exhibitions, and other obviously temporary needs.
4) The purpose for which the temporary structure authorization is sought is incidental to
the basic purpose for which the lot or parcel is being developed, and the duration of such
structure is limited by the period of development, such as construction site offices or
temporary real estate offices.
D. Required Findings. Prior to granting approval of a temporary permit, the City Planner shall
analyze the following criteria and incorporate such analysis in his decision;
1) The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the proposed temporary
structure, if applicable, will be compatible with and will not adversely affect the
livability or appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding
vicinity.
2) The proposed temporary structures will not adversely affect the capacity, circulation, or
generation of traffic on streets or other public ways in the vicinity.
3) The use of the proposed temporary structure is consistent with the spirit and intent of
the zone where the structure is to be located and does not create a substantial property
right not enjoyed by others within the same zone.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 224
E. Temporary Permit Conditions. Reasonable, clear, and objective conditions may be imposed
by the City Planner in connection with the temporary permit as necessary to meet the
purposes of subsections a to g herein. Guarantees and evidence may be required that such
conditions will be or are being complied with. Such clear and objective conditions shall be
quantifiable whenever possible, and may include, but are not limited to, requiring:
1) Special yards and spaces.
2) Fences and walls.
3) Control of points of vehicular ingress and egress.
4) Special provisions for signs.
5) Landscaping and maintenance of such landscaping.
6) Maintenance of the grounds.
7) Control of noise, vibration, and odors.
8) Limitation of operational hours for certain activities.
9) A time period within which the proposed use shall be developed.
10) A time limit on total duration of temporary use.
11) Bond or other security for returning the affected area to equal or better condition as
previously existed upon termination of temporary use.
F. Duration of Temporary Permit. The duration of such temporary permit and attendant
structure shall not exceed the period prior to the completion and occupancy of a permanent
structure of 12 months, whichever comes first.
G. Voiding of a Temporary Permit. When a temporary permit is approved, such approval shall
become void six (6) months from the date of such approval if the City Planner determines
substantial progress, such as substantial excavation or substantial construction, toward the
desired use has not been made. The holder of such permit may apply for an extension of
such approval as may be granted by the City Planner.
24. Urban Farming.
A. The use of property in the OS, N-C, H-C, C-C, L-I, G-I, PUD Districts for Urban Farming
for commercial or non-profit purposes or sustenance is permitted administratively within
the Urban Growth Boundary.
B. Produce that can be grown on these farms include fruits, vegetables, and livestock.
C. Animal keeping of commonly domesticated animals, on these farms, including pastureland
is allowed with the following requirements:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 225
1) Sanitation. Proper sanitation shall be maintained for all animals at all times to prevent
any condition which may be dangerous or detrimental to the health of the public or
animals, or constitute a nuisance.
2) Fencing. Fencing is required and shall be designed and constructed to confine all
animals to the site on which the animal is kept.
3) Enclosures. An enclosure is required and shall be designed and constructed to provide
shelter from the weather for all animals kept outdoors on the development site. The
requirements are listed in subsection 4, Barns, Coops, Corrals, and Hutches, Paddocks,
Pens for Farm Animals, Livestock and Poultry Farms and Eggeries, of this section. D.
Lot Area Minimum ‘5,000 square feet
E. Minimum Setbacks:
1) Front Yard ‘10 feet
2) Side and Rear Yard ‘10 feet
F. Minimum parcel dimensions for Animal Husbandry, livestock, shall be determined by Best
Management Practices available at the OSU Extension Office.
G. An Urban Farm used for commercial or non-profit purposes shall meet the State
requirements listed in ORS 568.900, and provide the City with a copy of the approved
permits from the State Department of Agriculture for water quality and the use of
herbicides, pesticides, and fungicides.
H. Sustainable and/or organic practices are encouraged for all Urban Farms.
25. Utilities. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by public utility or municipal or
other governmental agencies of underground; overhead electrical, gas, steam, or water
transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal system
including poles, towers, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes,
police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith, but not including buildings, shall be permitted in any district in
accordance with their franchise agreement. Utility transmission and distribution lines, poles and
towers may exceed the height limits otherwise provided for in this Development code.
26. Wireless Communication Facilities (WCF)
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish standards that regulate the placement,
appearance and impact of wireless communication facilities, while providing residents and
the business community with the ability to access and adequately utilize the services of
these facilities support. The characteristics of wireless communications facilities are such
that they have the potential to impact not only the area immediately surrounding the facility,
but also the community as a whole. Because of these potential impacts, the standards are
intended to ensure that the visual and aesthetic impacts of wireless communication facilities
are minimized to the greatest extent possible.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 226
B. Application Requirements. The following items shall be provided as part of an application
for the placement and construction of a wireless communication facility. These items are in
addition to other information that may be required for the appropriate use permit. The City
Planner may waive the requirement for submittal of any information described herein when
determined that it is inapplicable based on project specific factors.
1) A site plan drawn to scale indicating the location of the proposed antenna(s), support
structure and equipment facility and relevant dimensions.
2) A photograph of the proposed antenna(s), support structure and equipment facility at a
site similar to the proposal.
3) The materials being proposed, including the colors of the exterior materials.
4) Photographs of the existing site condition taken from key lines of sight and a photo
simulation of the proposed facility at the proposed location from each of the lines of
sight.
5) A map showing all existing wireless communication facility sites operated by the
applicant within and adjacent to Tillamook, including a description of the wireless
communication facility at each location.
6) A co-location feasibility study that indicates that co-location efforts were made and
states the reasons co-location can or cannot occur. All antenna support structures shall
be designed so as not to preclude co-location.
7) A description of alternatives considered for providing wireless communication service
in Tillamook. The alternatives evaluated should include alternative sites, facility
heights, number of facilities, and equipment utilized. Where less preferred locations or
designs are proposed, the reasons why higher priority locations or designs were not
selected.
8) A peer review study, if required by the City Planner.
9) The City of Tillamook will deny the permitting of a wireless communication facility if it
has not been demonstrated that co-location on an existing Wireless Communication
facility is not a viable solution.
C. Location/Design Standards.
1) Wireless communication facilities are allowed outright in the following location(s):
a) Co-location or shared location on an existing wireless communication facility
2) Wireless communication facilities are allowed under a Zoning Clearance Permit and
building permit if of the following design(s) and in the following location(s):
a) Microfacility or Minifacility attached to an existing structure;
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 227
b) Minifacility attached to an existing public facility such as a water tower or public
building;
c) Minifacility attached to an existing utility pole located in a street right-of-way;
3) Wireless communication facilities are allowed under a conditional use permit if of the
following design and in the following location(s):
a) Facility is attached to an existing structure where the height or dimensions of the
antenna exceed those of a minifacility;
b) Facility is in the shape of a new utility pole within the street right-of-way with a
maximum height of 60 feet;
c) Facility is on a monopole not located in a street right-of-way with a maximum
height of 60 feet measured from grade level.
4) Wireless communication facilities are prohibited if in the following design(s) and in the
following location(s):
a) Lattice towers and support structures;
b) Guyed wire towers and support structures;
c) Speculation support structures;
d) Locations in the following Zone districts:
(1) OS (Open Space District)
(2) R-7.5 (Single-Family Residential)
(3) R-5.0 (Single-Family and Duplex Residential)
(4) R-0 (Multiple Use Residential)
(5) N-C (Neighborhood Commercial)
D. Development Standards. All wireless communication facilities shall be located, designed,
constructed, treated and maintained in accordance with the following standards:
1) Preferred locations and designs. Applicants shall consider the following sites as the
preferred order for the location of proposed wireless facilities:
2) General Standards.
a) All facilities shall be installed and maintained in compliance with the requirements
of the Building Codes.
b) All wireless communication facilities shall be designed to minimize their visual
impact to the greatest extent feasible.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 228
c) The smallest and least visible antennas, to accomplish the coverage objectives, shall
be utilized.
d) Antenna(s) attached to an existing structure shall be placed so as to integrate, as
much as possible, with the building's design features and materials. The maximum
height for antennas shall be fifteen (15) feet from the base elevation. Roof mounted
antennas and associated equipment should be located as far back from the edge of the
roof as possible to minimize visibility from street level locations. Where appropriate,
construction from screening to obscure the facility shall be required. Wall mounted
antennas shall be integrated architecturally with the style and character of the
structure, or otherwise made as unobtrusive as possible. If possible, antennas should
be located entirely within an existing or newly created architectural feature so as to
be completely screened from view. To the extent feasible, wall-mounted antennas
should not be located on the front, or most prominent facade of a structure, and
should be located above the pedestrian line-of-sight.
e) Colors and materials for wireless communication facilities shall be chosen to
minimize their visibility. Wireless communication facilities shall be painted or
textured using colors to match or blend with the primary background of the facility,
including the skyline or horizon.
f) Equipment facilities shall be placed in underground vaults wherever feasible. Above
ground equipment facilities shall be reviewed through the design review process of
§153.073 to ensure that they are designed, sited and landscaped to minimize the
visual impact on the surrounding environment.
g) Exterior lighting for a wireless communication facility is permitted only when
required by a Federal or State authority.
h) A wireless communication facility placed pursuant to this section is exempt from the
height requirements of the zoning district in which it is located; however, may not
exceed the heights listed in 16(C) above.
E. Peer Review. If determined appropriate, the City Planner may require a peer review study of
the technical information developed by the applicant to select the proposed facilities. The
purpose of a peer review is to evaluate the feasibility of alternative facility designs and
locations not selected by the applicant but which have a higher design priority as described in
§153.051. The applicant shall pay all costs associated with a peer review.
F. Abandonment and Obsolescence. Any wireless communication facility that is not operated
for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner
of such facility shall remove such facility within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from
the city notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such wireless communication facility is
not removed within said ninety (90) days, the City may remove the wireless communication
facility at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single wireless
communication facility, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease
using the wireless communication facility.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 229
G. Antennas to which this section has no application. The provisions of this chapter do not
apply to radio or television reception antennas, satellite or microwave parabolic antenna not
used by wireless communication service providers, and antennas owned and operated by
federally-licensed amateur radio operators.
H. Wireless Communication Facilities Siting Issues
1) Location
a) Preferences
(1) Co-location/Shared Facilities
(2) On Existing Structures
b) By zone
2) Design Issues
a) Type of pole
b) Height of pole and/or antennae
c) Setbacks and other placement issues
d) Screening/ landscaping
e) Abandonment and obsolescence
f) Lighting/Security
g) Color & Materials
h) Equipment cabinets
3) Review Procedure
a) Key review procedure to the proposed location -provide simply process for preferred
locations, i.e. outright use
b) Site Plan Review -Some or all antenna/pole types and locations
4) Application Requirements
a) Mapping of all proposed locations in city
b) Technical data to support locations, particularly if preferred site types are not used.
c) Visual impact analysis.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 230
§153.053 SIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
1. Title: This Section shall be known as the Tillamook Sign Code and shall be cited herein as
“Sign Standards and Requirements – the City Sign Codes.”
2. Purpose. The purposes of this section are as follows:
A. To provide objective standards governing the placement and size of signs, and the
responsibilities of those persons erecting said signs, within the Tillamook Urban
Growth Boundary (UGB);
B. Allows signs compatible with the character and uses allowed in the zoning district in which they
are located;
C. To improve the neat, clean, orderly, and attractive appearance of the community;
D. To improve the effectiveness and maintenance of signs; and to regulate the construction,
erection, maintenance, electrification, illumination, type, size, number, and locations of
signs;
3. Signs in the Right-of-Way (ROW).
A. Signs located in the Public ROW shall
be handled under a ROW Permit
Application, and shall follow separate
requirements for placement in the
ROW identified in Resolution 1706.
B. Signs attached to walls but extending
over the ROW with proper clearance
shall comply with this section.
4. Signs Allowed in Zone Districts: The City of Tillamook is divided into specific zones, as shown the
official city zoning map, and any sign erected or constructed in these zones shall be controlled by the
rules of each zone. No signs shall be erected and no changes of any nature shall be made to existing
signs within these zones except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Section.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 231
Illustration of A-Frame Sign
Illustration of a Blade Sign
Types of Signs
• A-frame or Sandwich Board Sign: a temporary, double faced sign in the shape of the letter "A"
and is not attached to a structure or the ground, collapsible, movable steeply angled sign, hinged
at the top and open at the bottom for self-support; also known as "tent sign," sign with two sides
that meets at the top.
• Ancillary Sign: any sign allowed by this code, with or without permit, that is not a freestanding,
incidental freestanding, wall, roof or projecting sign. If allowed within the zoning designation,
ancillary signs include, but are not limited to: A-frame signs, flags (excluding attention flags),
and banners.
• Blade Sign also known as "feather," "teardrop," or "Attention flag": a pole-supported sign made
of fabric, vinyl, or other similar non-rigid material, where one side of the sign is more than three
times as long as any other side projecting or suspended from a building.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 232
Illustration of a Banner Sign
Illustration of a Banner on Street Light
Illustration of a Billboard
Illustration of a Bulletin Board/Reader
• Banner: a sign made of fabric, vinyl, or other similar non-rigid material.
• Banner on street light pole: a sign made of fabric, vinyl, or other similar non-rigid material
intended to be displayed in the right-of-way for a limited period of time which complies with
Chapter 15.28 of the Oregon City Municipal Code and the Signs in the Right-of-Way Policy.
• Billboard: a sign with a display area of three hundred square feet or more, including, but not
limited to, outdoor advertising signs as defined in ORS 377.710(21). advertises a business,
commodity, or activity which is sold, offered or conducted on premises other than those where
such a sign is located.
• Bulletin Board, Changeable Copy Sign, or Reader Board: a sign of a permanent nature, but
which accommodates changes in wording, indicating persons, events, products, or services
offered on the premises of the sign location.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 233
Illustration of Awning and Canopy Sign
1
Illustrations of a Freestanding Sign
• Blinking Sign: a sign which shines with intermittent or momentary brief beams or flashes of
light, flashing on and off.
• Building Register Sign: a sign which identifies four or more businesses contained within a single
building structure or complex.
• Awning Sign/Canopy Sign: a sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other
fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover (excluding a marquee) over a door, entrance,
window, or outdoor service area.
• Electronic Readerboard: a sign on which display can be altered electronically by using patterns
of lights. This sign may be changed at intervals of no less than one and one half (1.5) seconds
and may contain only one screen of text or graphic display. The illumination shall be by steady
continuous light.
• Flashing Sign: a sign incorporating intermittent electrical impulses to a source of illumination, or
revolving in a manner which creates the illusion of flashing, or which changes color or intensity of
illumination with sequential light source giving off light suddenly or in transient bursts where the
period of time of illumination is equal to the period of non-illumination, and is used solely to
attract attention in a non-informative way. This includes, but is not limited to, all lights on or
within a building or premises or vehicle on or off the premises for the purpose of attracting
attention for commercial purposes. This definition does not include time, tide, and temperature
signs or electronic reader-board signs.
• Fluttering Sign: a sign which moves, vibrates, in quick, irregular motions, with irregular spasms
or trembling motions.
• Freestanding Sign/ Ground Sign/ Pole Sign: a sign erected on a free-standing frame, mast or
pole, wholly supported from the ground by its own integral structure not attached to any
building.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 234
Illustration of a Lit Sign
Illustration of a Marquee Sign
Illustration of a Political Sign
• Incidental Sign: a sign intended primarily for the convenience and direction of the public on the
premises which does not advertise but is information only. Includes
signs which denote the hours of operation, credit cards, service station gasoline price
sign, entrance and exit, and any signs required by law.
• Incidental Freestanding Sign: a sign wholly supported from the ground by its own integral
structure, excluding A-frame signs. The maximum size allowed is less than that of a freestanding
sign and greater than an ancillary sign.
• Lit Sign: a sign that is a neon and/or bulbed sign.
• Marquee Sign: a sign which is painted on, attached to, or supported by a projecting marquee.
Marquee signs must be located within 1 inch of the top and bottom of the marquee with no more
than 3 businesses indicated per marquee.
• Neighborhood Identification: a sign located on a wall or fence at the entry point of a single-family
subdivision comprising not less than two acres, or a sign identifying a multiple-family development of
ten or more dwelling units.
• Non-Conforming Sign: an existing sign, lawful at the time of enactment of this code , which does not
conform to the requirements of this code.
• Political Sign: any temporary sign which supports the candidacy of any candidate for public office
or urges action on any other matter on the ballot of primary, general, or special elections.
• Portable Sign: a sign used to temporarily identify a new business until permanent identification signs
are installed, or to identify an existing business while permanent identification signs are being
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 235
Illustration of a Roof Sign
Illustration of a Real Estate Sign
Illustration of a Suspended Sign
Illustration of a Projecting Sign
repaired or replaced, or to temporarily identify a sale or business location during the hours of
operation, or Service Station Signs displaying the current prices for fuel sold on the same premises.
• Projecting Sign: a sign projecting more than one foot from the wall of a building. Signs, other than
wall signs, which are attached to and project from a structure or building face, usually
perpendicular to the building face, including blade signs, marquee signs.
• Real Estate Sign: a sign indicating that the premises on which the sign is located, or any portion
thereof, is for sale, lease or rent.
• Roof Sign: a sign constructed or maintained wholly upon or over the roof of any building with
the principal support on the roof structure. Any sign, other than painted signs, erected upon,
against or directly above a roof or top of or above the parapet of a building.
• Rotating sign: a sign which turns/revolves around as on an axis or center point.
• Suspended Sign: a sign that is hanging or suspended from an awning, a canopy or a marquee, not
supported from the ground.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 236
Illustration of Time & Temperature Sign
Illustrations of a Wall Sign
Illustration of Wall Graphics
• Temporary Sign: a sign which is not permanently affixed to the ground or to a permitted
structure. These include all devices such as banners, pennants, flags (not including flags of
nations), searchlights, sandwich boards, sidewalk signs, curb signs, balloons or other symbols
designed to attract attention. Temporary signs include: signs advertising the sale, rental or lease
of commercial or industrial premises, or identifying a property developer, lease agent or builder,
or advertising a legally recorded subdivision.
• Time And Temperature Sign: a message display providing only time, tide, and/or temperature
information to the public. This information can be updated at intervals of no less than one
second.
• Wall Graphics: any mosaic, mural, or painting, or graphic art technique, or combination or
grouping of mosaics, murals, or paintings or graphic art techniques applied, implanted or placed
directly onto a wall or fence and containing no copy, advertising symbols, lettering, trademarks
or other references to any product, service, goods or advertising anything sold on or off the
premises.
• Wall Sign: a sign attached to, or erected against, or painted upon the wall of a building with the
face in a parallel plane of the building wall and extends no more than twelve inches from a wall.
• Wind Sign or device: any sign or device in the nature of a series of one, two or more banners,
flags or other objects, fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subject to pressure by
wind or breeze.
• Window Sign: a sign attached to, suspended behind, displayed behind, placed or painted upon,
the window or glass door of a building, which is intended for viewing from the exterior of the
building. Windows signs include: posters and other signs which advertise or inform the public of
current prices or events may be displayed on the inside of a window or door of a business located
in a commercial or industrial district.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 237
Illustration of a Window Sign
Zone Districts
A. Highway Commercial (H-C), Central Commercial (C-C), Light Industrial (L-I) and General
Industrial (G-I).
1) Free-standing and Ground-mounted Signs shall be allowed subject to the following
conditions:
a) Shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in size.
b) Shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet.
c) Only one (1) such sign shall be allowed per street frontage.
d) Sign Clearance and Setback: see Subsection 7 of this Section below.
2) On-building Wall Signs, Roof Signs, Projecting Signs, Canopy Signs shall be allowed subject
to the following conditions:
a) Shall not exceed 120 square feet in sign per building side.
b) A maximum of three (3) such signs shall be allowed per building side.
c) Design: On-building signs shall be incorporated into the design of the building, and
shall not be placed in locations which interrupt, detract from, or change the
architectural character of the building.
3) Illumination: Such signs may be illuminated. B. Town Center Commercial (T-C).
1) Signs in the Town Center shall meet requirements described in §153.032. C.
Neighborhood Commercial (N-C).
1) Free-standing and Ground-mounted Signs shall be allowed subject to the following
conditions:
a) Shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in size.
b) Shall not exceed a height of ten (10) feet.
c) Only one (1) such sign shall be allowed per street frontage.
d) Sign Clearance and Setback: see Subsection 7 of this Section below.
2) On-building Wall Signs, Roof Signs, Projecting Signs, Canopy Signs identifying the use of
the premises shall be allowed subject to the following conditions:
a) Shall not exceed 40 square feet in size per sign.
b) Three (3) such signs shall be allowed per street frontage.
c) Design: On-building signs shall be incorporated into the design of the building, and shall
not be placed in locations which interrupt, detract from, or change the architectural
character of the building.
2) Illumination: Such signs may be illuminated.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 238
D. Multiple Use Residential (R-0).
1. Signs identifying multiple use development, multi-family development or subdivisions:
a) Free-standing and Ground-mounted Signs.
1) Shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet, as viewed from a single direction.
2) Shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet above the natural ground elevation.
3) No more than one (1) free-standing or ground-mounted identification sign shall be
allowed for a development or complex, even when more than one tax lot or ownership
is included in the development. However, in mixed-use developments a separate
freestanding sign may be allowed to identify the multiple uses and multi-family portion
of the development.
b) On-building Signs.
1) Shall be reviewed as part of the architecture of the building.
2) Shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in size.
c) Directional Signs within the development shall not exceed three (3) square feet except as
provided in the district.
d) Illumination. Signs may only be externally illuminated.
2. Signs identifying commercial businesses and public facilities.
a) Free-standing and Ground-mounted Signs.
1) Shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet, as viewed from a single direction, 2)
Shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet above the natural ground elevation.
3) No more than one (1) free-standing or ground-mounted identification sign shall be
allowed per development or complex, even when more than one tax lot or ownership is
included in the development. However, in mixed-use developments a separate
freestanding sign may be allowed to identify the multiple uses and multi-family portion
of the development.
4) Sign Clearance and Setback: see Subsection 7 of this Section below.
b) On-building Wall Signs, Projecting Signs, Canopy Signs
1) Shall not exceed twenty-four square feet in size.
2) No more than one (1) on-building identification sign shall be allowed per use of the
development.
c) Directional, Onsite Traffic Control, and Identification Signs.
1) Shall not exceed three (3) square feet in size. 2) Shall not exceed a height of five (5)
feet.
d) Illumination.
1) Signs located adjacent to an arterial roadway may be internally illuminated outright; 2)
Signs located adjacent to a local or collector roadway may be internally illuminated
subject to a Conditional Use Permit as per the provisions of §153.070; 3) Signs may be
externally illuminated if at any other location. E. Residential (R-7.5, R-5.0).
1. Signs permitted outright
a) Residential Name Plates:
1) Shall not exceed two (2) square feet.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 239
2) Shall only be limited to the title, name, and address of the occupant of the premises
upon which the sign is located.
3) Only one (1) such sign shall be permitted upon the premises.
4) May only be externally illuminated.
Signs permitted with a Sign Permit
a) Signs pertaining to home occupations, as provided under Section 28 (12) of this
development code:
1) If located inside or flush against the dwelling, the sign shall not exceed three
(3) square feet in size. If not affixed to or inside the dwelling, the sign shall
not exceed two (2) square feet in size.
2) Only one (1) such sign shall be permitted upon the premises.
3) May be located within the required setback area of the district provided it is
situated in a manner so as not to adversely affect safety, corner vision or other
similar conditions. 4) May only be externally illuminated.
Public and Semi-Public (P&S-P) and Open Space (O).
1) Free-standing and Ground-mounted Signs for Public and Semi-public facilities, schools,
churches, hospitals, and similar uses shall be allowed subject to the following conditions:
a) Shall not exceed eighteen (18) square feet in size.
b) Shall only pertain to the use on the premises.
c) Only two (2) such sign shall be permitted upon the premises.
d) Sign Clearance and Setback: see Subsection 7 of this Section below.
2) On-building Wall, Roof Signs, Projecting, Canopy Signs shall be allowed subject to the
following conditions:
a) Shall not exceed eighteen (18) square feet in size.
b) Shall only pertain to the use of the building.
c) Only two (2) such sign per street frontage shall be permitted upon each building.
d) Design: On-building signs shall be incorporated into the design of the building, and shall
not be placed in locations which interrupt, detract from, or change the architectural
character of the building.
2) Illumination: Such signs may be illuminated.
Sign Permit Requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, or relocate any sign or other advertising
structure as defined in this Code within the City, without first obtaining a permit from the City
Planning Department. The Planning Department may require the filing of sufficient data to
determine compliance with these requirements and zoning requirements.
B. It shall be the duty of the Planning Department, to examine such plans and specifications and
other data needed to erect the sign or other advertising structure and if it appears that the
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 240
proposal is in compliance with all the requirements of this section and all other laws and
ordinances of the City, the City Planner shall issue the sign permit.
C. No person shall place on, or apply to, the surface of any building, any painted sign, or erect,
construct, place or install any other sign, unless a sign permit has been issued by the city for such
sign.
D. Application for a sign permit shall be signed by the property owner and the permittee in
accordance with these provisions.
E. No person having a permit to erect a sign shall construct or erect in any manner, except in the
manner set forth in his approved application permit.
F. The application for a sign permit (both existing signs and proposed) shall be accompanied by a
filing fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council.
6. Sign Permit Application. A sign permit application is required for the erection of any new sign or
the structural alteration of an existing sign, except those signs that are exempt. A sign permit
application is required for modification or alteration of the sign face, or any portion of the sign or
supporting structure. The applicant shall submit three (3) copies of the following with a Sign Permit
Application:
A. An accurate in-scale rendering of the sign fully indicating its colors, lettering, symbols, logos,
materials, size, area, etc.
B. An elevation and plot plan drawn to scale indicating where the proposed sign will be located on a
structure or lot, method of illumination, if any, and similar information. C. One (1) completed
copy of the city sign permit application.
D. No notification is required upon application for a sign.
7. General Requirements, Provisions and Standards Applicable To Signs.
A. Sign Illumination/glare. The artificial illumination of signs, either from an internal or external
source, shall be designed to eliminate negative impacts to prevent the casting of glare or direct
light from artificial illumination on surrounding right-of-way and surrounding properties, and
shall be placed, directed and shielded to limit direct illumination so as not to shine into
residential dwelling units or structures, or impair the vision of the driver of any vehicle. Lights
and illuminated signs requiring an outside power source shall use a state approved power outlet.
Illuminated Signs shall conform to current electrical codes and shall be designed by a state
licensed signs contractor and erected by a state licensed electrician.
B. Conflicting Standards: Signs shall be allowed subject to the provisions of this Section, except
when the provisions conflict with the specific standards for signs in the subject zoning or overlay
district.
C. Signs Subject to State Approval: All signs visible to the traveling public from state highways, are
additionally subject to the regulations and permit requirements of the State of Oregon
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 241
Department of Transportation. Where the regulations of the State and City differ, the more
restrictive regulations shall govern.
D. Uniform Sign Code: All signs shall comply with and meet the material and construction methods
requirements of the provisions of the current Uniform Sign Code of the Uniform Building Codes,
except as otherwise provided in this section.
E. Pre-Existing Signs: Signs and sign structures existing prior to the adoption of this code , which
complied with the applicable regulations existing when the sign was established, but which do
not comply with one or more of the requirements of this subsection, shall be subject to the
provisions for Non-conforming Uses, in this development code except:
1. Alterations to a non-conforming sign which reduces, or does not increase its non-compliance
with the provisions of this code , including changes in display surface, sign area, height and
setback, may be allowed.
2. Sign copy which identifies or advertises a business, product or service no longer located on
the same site or premises on which the sign is posted shall be replaced, or removed, within
twelve (12) months of the change of occupancy of the premises or vacancy of the premises.
Failure to use the copy area of a non-conforming sign for purposes permitted under this
section for a period of more than twelve (12) consecutive months shall constitute a
discontinuation of use as provided under 153.074 and such sign shall be removed or modified
to satisfy all applicable requirements of this Section and the underlying district.
F. Abandoned, Obsolete And Damaged Signs To Be Removed Or Repaired: Any sign now or
hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bonafide business conducted or a product sold, a
current event, or is otherwise abandoned or obsolete, shall be taken down and removed by the
owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon which-such
sign may be found within 30 days after closure of said business.
G. Sign Clearance and Setbacks for Free-Standing or Ground-mounted Signs.
1. No Signs shall be erected or maintained if any part of such sign extends less than fifteen (15)
feet above driveways.
2. Signs less than twenty-eight (28) square feet in size must observe at least one-half of the yard
setback requirements of the zone district in which it is located.
3. Signs greater than twenty-eight (28) square feet in size must observe the setback requirements
of the zone district in which it is located.
4. All signs shall be situated in a manner so as not to adversely affect safety, corner vision or
other similar conditions.
H. The following diagrams shall be used to determine sign measurements.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 242
I. The following diagrams shall be used to determine sign height measurements.
8. Wind Pressure, Seismic and Dead Load Requirements. All signs shall be designed and constructed to
withstand pressure loads, seismic loads and dead loads as required by the current Oregon State
Uniform Building Code.
9. Freestanding Sign Requirements.
A. Materials and attachments of Letters: All letters, figures, characters or representations in uncut or
irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to, or superimposed upon any sign shall
be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure and shall comply with all
requirements in this section.
B. No Freestanding Sign shall project or extend into any vision clearance area prescribed by any
provision of this Code. One or two sign poles supporting a freestanding sign may be located
within the vision clearance area if they do not exceed a combined total width of 12 inches and if
no other portion of the sign proper is located within the vision clearance area between 3 and 7
feet above grade.
C. All posts, anchors, and bracing or wood shall be treated to protect them from moisture by
creosoting or together approved methods when they rest upon or enter the ground.
10. On-Building Wall Sign, Roof Sign, Projecting Sign, Canopy Sign Requirements
A. Shall not cover, wholly partially, any wall opening nor project beyond the ends or top of the wall
to which it is attached.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 243
B. Shall not be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress or egress from any
door, window, or fire escape.
11. Construction Standards For Temporary Signs.
A. All temporary signs shall be constructed to the following standards: all exposed parts of the sign
shall be constructed of such materials, or treated in such a manner, that normal rainfall or other
moisture shall not harm, deface, or otherwise affect the sign.
B. Anchoring: All signs approved under this provision shall be physically established in a manner,
which both prevents the sign from being moved or blown from its approved location, and allows
for removal of the sign.
12. Maintenance: All signs together with all of their supports, braces, guys, and anchors, shall be kept in
good repair and be maintained in a safe condition. All signs and the site upon which they are located
shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and attractive condition. Signs shall be kept free from rust,
corrosion, peeling paint, or other surface deterioration. The display surfaces of all signs shall be
kept neatly painted or posted. All freestanding signs and the premises surrounding the same shall be
maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary, and inoffensive condition, and free and clear of
all obnoxious substances, rubbish, and weeds.
13. Voiding Permits. If the work authorized under a Sign permit has not been completed within six
months after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void.
14. Exempt Signs and Temporary Signs. The following signs and devices shall be exempt from the
approval of a sign permit:
A. Bunting or Flags of national, state or local government, provided they are displayed or draped so
as to not obstruct or hinder traffic or pedestrian access, or cause a safety hazard.
B. Signs placed by local, state or federal governments for the purpose of construction, maintenance
or identification of roads or other public agencies for the direction of traffic, and designed to
fulfill the requirements of state and federal funding agencies.
C. Signs within a building or within a window.
D. Portable Identification Signs. A portable sign may be used to temporarily identify a new business
until permanent identification signs are installed, or to identify an existing business while
permanent identification signs are being repaired or replaced, or to temporarily identify a sale or
business location during the hours of operation under the following conditions and limitations:
1. Need: No portable sign shall be allowed under this provision when any other permanent or
portable sign visible from adjacent roads accurately identifies the premises.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 244
2. Number: Only one (1) portable identification sign shall be displayed for a development or
complex.
3. Time period: The use of a portable identification sign shall be valid for ninety (90)
consecutive days, or until a permanent identification sign is installed, whichever occurs first.
4. Design Review: The application for permanent identification signing for the business shall be
submitted for review and shall be subject to the approval of a sign permit, prior to, or
concurrent with, the establishment of a temporary display or portable sign under this Section.
5. Size Limits: Portable signs shall not exceed a sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet, or a
height of six (6) feet above the natural ground elevation.
6. Portable Service Station Signs: A service station may maintain one (1) portable sign
displaying the current prices for fuel sold on the same premises provided such sign does not
exceed an area of twelve (12) square feet, or a height of five (5) feet. Such signs shall be
subject to clear-vision area requirements and one-half (1/2) the setback requirements of the
district.
E. Temporary signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of commercial or industrial premises, or
identifying a property developer, lease agent or builder, or advertising a legally recorded
subdivision in its entirety, or residential property in excess of one acre, may be allowed, subject
to the following limitations:
1. Shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in area.
2. Shall pertain only to property upon which they are located, unless they are temporary
off premise directional signs indicating a sale on another piece of property.
3. Shall observe the setback provisions under Subsection 6A (4).
4. Only one (1) such sign shall be permitted on the premises.
5. Shall not be artificially illuminated.
6. Such signs shall be removed from the premises after the premises are sold, rented or leased.
Signs pertaining to recorded subdivisions shall not remain upon the premises in excess of
eighteen (18) months from the date of filing of the subdivision.
7. These signs are not included in the required sign face area. G. Real estate signs advertising
individual lots:
1. Shall not exceed six (6) square feet.
2. Shall pertain only to the property upon which they are located, unless they are temporary
off premise directional signs indicating a sale on another piece of property.
3. Shall be located at least five (5) feet behind the front lot line.
4. Shall not exceed five (5) feet in height.
5. Shall be temporary in nature and shall be removed within two (2) weeks after the date of
sale.
6. Shall not be artificially illuminated.
H. Political Signs: Signs which support or oppose ballot measures, persons running for political
office, and other issues subject to a vote by the public may be allowed subject to the following:
1. Approval by the owner of the property on which the sign is to be posted.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 245
2. Setbacks: Such signs may be located within the required setback area of the district, provided
they are situated in a manner so as not to adversely affect safety, corner vision, or other similar
conditions.
3. Size: Signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in size, as viewed from one direction.
4. Time Limit: All such signs shall be removed within one (1) week after the election for which
the sign is posted.
I. Temporary paper signs that serve as notice of a public meeting when removed promptly after
such meeting is held.
J. A combination of banners (both vertical and horizontal), streamers, strings of lights, flags,
beacon lights, sandwich board signs and/or other similar apparatus; may be displayed for the purpose
of advertising a grand opening, sale or similar event, on the same property, under the following
conditions and limitations:
1. Time period and duration: the temporary display shall not exceed a total time period of four
weeks in any calendar year and must coincide with an actual event. Such signs must be
removed within ten (10) days after the event concludes.
2. Hazards: No sign, light, electrical cord, streamer, banner or other apparatus shall be situated
or used in a manner which creates a hazard.
3. Size Limits: Temporary signs shall not exceed a sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet,
which shall include sign face and any lighting strips, and if freestanding, a height of six (6)
feet above the natural ground elevation.
K. Address Display: The signing program for a multi-family, commercial or industrial development
shall include the display of the street number(s) for the development on the sign, support structure or
building where it can be seen from adjacent roads.
L. Electronic reader boards, banners (both vertical and horizontal), streamers, strings of lights,
flags, beacon lights, sandwich board signs, and/or other similar apparatuses may be displayed for the
purpose of promoting an event open to the general public, held at an offsite property, under the
following conditions and limitation.
1. Time period and duration: the temporary display shall not exceed a total time period of
six weeks in any calendar year and must coincide with an actual event. Such signs, including
displays, must be removed within ten days after the event concludes.
2. Hazards: No sign, light, electrical cord, streamer, banner, or other appartaud shall be
situated or used in a manner which creates a hazard.
3. Size limits: temporary signs shall not exceed a sign area of forty-eight (48) square feet
per sign, which shall include sign face and any lighting strips, and if freestanding, a height of six
(6) feet above the natural ground elevation.
16. Temporary Off-Premise Directional Signs Temporarily Directing Traffic To An Event shall be
subject to the following Requirements:
A. Shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet.
B. Shall be located at least five (5) feet behind the front lot line.
C. Shall not exceed five (5) feet in height.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 246
D. Shall be temporary in nature and shall be removed immediately at the end of the day on which
the event is conducted.
E. Shall not be artificially illuminated.
F. Along State Highways: All Temporary off-premise signs which are visible from a State highway
are subject to approval by the Oregon State Highway Division pursuant to the Motorist
Information Act.
G. Temporary off-premise directional signs are subject to the approval of a sign permit.
17. Directional, On-Site Traffic Control and Identification Signs
A. Directional On-site Traffic Control signs: shall be those permanent signs which are oriented
toward internal circulation roads, driveways and walkways, or which direct the flow of traffic to
and from the site from adjacent roads or walkways, and within the site area, and shall observe
the clear-vision requirements of the district and shall:
1. Not exceed a maximum of three (3) square feet in area.
2. Observe the clear-vision requirements of the district and not exceed a maximum of three (3)
feet in height.
3. Placement and design of any such sign shall be the responsibility of the City. Costs for the
sign and placement shall be assessed to the applicant. No more than five (5) signs shall be
allowed at any one location. Each property owner shall be responsible for maintaining any
sign approved under its application. Costs for replacement of any sign for any cause shall be
assessed to the applicant.
B. Identification signs: An on-site permanent ground-mounted tenant identification sign for an
individual building and/or informational sign providing onsite information to the users of the
subject property within a development may be allowed as an alternative to an on-building
identification sign provided such sign shall:
1. Be located on the most visible side of the building being identified.
2. Not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
3. Not exceed six (6) feet in height.
4. Use materials and colors, which are the same, or substantially the same, as those used on the
building identified by the sign.
5. Public facility identification signs shall be placed internally to avoid conflicting with other
signs on the premises.
6. Placement and design of any such sign shall be the responsibility of the City. No more than
five (5) signs shall be allowed at any one location. Each public facility shall be responsible
for maintaining any sign approved under its application. Costs for replacement of any sign
for any cause shall be assessed to the applicant. C. Illumination. Such signs may be
illuminated.
D. All On-site Traffic Control and Identification signs shall be subject to the approval of a sign
permit.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 247
18. Permanent Off-Premise Signs. Any sign not located on the site of the use or activity for which it is
advertising shall be considered off-premise and if not determined to be a billboard by ODOT after
examination of the location and upon due proof that such sign, signboard, or other advertising will
not be unduly detrimental to the adjacent and surrounding property, but the same front and side yard
provisions as required for buildings may be required AND shall be subject to the approval of a sign
permit.
A. Along State Highways: All off-premise signs which are visible from a State highway are subject
to approval by the Oregon State Highway Division pursuant to the Motorist Information Act.
B. All Permanent Off premise signs shall be subject to the approval of a sign permit and the
following:
1. Shall not exceed a size of 40 square feet.
2. Shall not exceed a height of 10 feet.
3. Shall not be internally illuminated.
4. Shall only be allowed to be placed in the Multiple Use Residential (R-0), Neighborhood
Commercial (C-N), Central Commercial (C-C), Highway Commercial (C-H),Light Industrial
(I-L), General Industrial (I-G), or Public and Semi-Public (P&S-P) Zone Districts.
5. Only one (1) sign shall be allowed per property in addition to on-premise signage.
6. Signs placed by a government (City, County, State) signage program shall be exempt.
18. All Other Signs, Signboards, And Other Forms of Outdoor Advertising May Be Allowed Including
the Following Alternatives:
A. Changeable Copy Signs may be incorporated into a permanent identification sign for a business
or development. The following conditions shall apply:
1. Only one (1) such sign shall be used in development.
2. The changeable copy sign shall be included in the maximum sign area allowed under this
Section.
3. A changeable copy sign shall not be used on a sign, which includes a time and/or temperature
display.
B. Directory Sign: An on-site sign oriented primarily toward vehicle circulation which identifies
and directs traffic to a number tenants, uses or buildings within the development, shall be limited
in area to a maximum of two (2) square feet per tenant, use or building specifically identified, up
to a maximum of forty (40) square feet. Directories oriented toward pedestrian circulation areas,
including those attached to buildings, shall be a maximum of twenty-four (24) square feet in
area, and eight (8) feet in height.
19. Prohibited Signs.
A. Illumination of any sign or portion thereof, in the shape of an arrow, or any other shape which
may be construed as a traffic control device is prohibited.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 248
B. Blanketing: No sign shall be situated in a matter, which results in the
blanketing/covering/blocking from view of an existing sign.
C. No sign or other illuminating devices shall have blinking, flashing or fluttering lights/displays,
with the exception of a time and temperature sign. This includes, but is not limited to, all lights
on or within a building or premises or vehicles on or off the premises for the purpose of
attracting attention for commercial purpose. This subsection shall not apply to Holiday lights
(e.g. Christmas Lights). No sign or window display shall be so placed or illuminated as to be
hazardous to pedestrians or traffic or in any or any manner tending to create a nuisance to the
occupants of any other building or premises.
D. No colored lights shall be used at any location or in any manner, which may be confused with or
construed to be traffic signals or lights on emergency vehicles.
E. Moving Signs: No sign structure, or portion thereof, shall be designed to rotate, flutter or appear
to move, with the exception of barber shop poles.
F. Paper or plastic signs or banners are not allowed on the exterior of any building, except as
provided in Section 14 of these standards and requirements.
G. No sign shall be attached to a utility pole nor placed within any public right-of-way, unless
approved by the City Council through franchise agreement.
H. No sign, light, electrical cord, streamer, banner, or other apparatus shall be situated or used in a
manner which creates a hazard.
I. Billboards: New billboards, as defined by the State (ORS 377.700 to 377.840) as an outdoor
advertising sign, not at the location of a business or an activity open to the public the owner of
which leases out the space to others in the exchange of compensation for posting their message,
visible from the Right-of-way, shall not be allowed in any zoning district within the City of
Tillamook and its UGB. Billboards or off-premises advertising signs are prohibited, except as
allowed in Section 14, 15 and 17.
J. Any unofficial sign which purports to be, is in imitation of or resembles an official traffic
light/sign or a portion thereof, or which hides from view any official traffic sign or signal, is
prohibited.
K. Signs shall not be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress or egress from
any door, window, or fire escape.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 249
§153.054 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to assure that no building or other permit shall be issued
until plans and evidence are presented to show how the off-street parking and loading
requirements are to be fulfilled and that property is and will be available for exclusive use as offstreet
parking and loading space. The subsequent use of the property for which the permit is
issued shall be conditional upon the unqualified continuance and availability of the amount of
parking and loading space required by this Code.
2. Scope. Development of off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided and maintained
for any type of development as set forth in this section. Off-street parking and loading standards
apply to the following types of development:
A. A new building or structure erected after the effective date of this Code;
B. The construction or provision of additional floor area, seating capacity or other expansion
of an existing building or structure; and/or
C. A change in the use of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this Code
which would require additional off-street parking spaces or off-street loading areas under
the provisions of this section.
If the expansion of an existing building or structure does not exceed 50% of the market value or
the capacity of the existing building or structure is increased by less than 50% in size, additional
parking spaces only need to be provided in proportion to the expansion.
If the expansion of an existing building or structure exceeds 50% of the market value or the
capacity of the existing building or structure is increased by more than 50% in size, parking
spaces and loading spaces must be provided for the entire use according to 7 and 8 of this section.
If the building or structure in which the change of use occurred does not require additional
off street parking or off-street loading spaces, no additional parking or loading spaces shall be
required. Any use requiring one half (1/2) or more of a parking space or loading space shall be
deemed to require the full space. Parking spaces and loading spaces provided to meet the
requirements of this Code shall not be reduced in size or number to an amount less than required
by this Code for the use occupying the building. The provision and maintenance of off-street
parking and loading space is a continuing obligation of the property owner.
Meeting Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. A plan drawn to scale and
dimensioned, indicating how the off-street parking and loading requirements are to be met,
shall accompany an application for a Zoning Clearance Permit.
3. Location of Parking Facilities. Off-street parking spaces for one or two family dwellings shall
be located on the same lot with the dwelling. Parking spaces for all other dwelling units require
Site Plan Approval (see §153.073) by the Planning Commission and in addition to §153.051 and
§153.055, must comply with the following requirements. Vehicle parking is allowed only
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 250
on approved on-street parking shoulders, within garages, carports, and other structures, or on
driveways or parking lots that have been developed in conformance with this code.
A. Except for single-family dwellings and duplexes, the vehicle parking spaces required
by this Section may be located on another parcel of land provided the parcel is within 500
feet from the building or use they are intended to serve. The distance from the parking area
to the use shall be measured in straight lines from the nearest parking space to the building
entrance following a pedestrian route (sidewalk). The burden of proving the existence of
such off-premise parking arrangements rests upon the person who has the responsibility of
providing parking. The right to use the off-site parking must be evidenced by a recorded
deed, easement, or similar written instrument.
B. Use of Parking Facilities/ Availability of facilities. Required parking space shall be
available for the parking of operable passenger automobiles of residents, customers, patrons
and employees only, and shall not be used for the storage of vehicles or materials. Areas
needed to meet the parking requirements of a particular building or use shall not be
transformed or changed to another type of use, or transferred to meet the parking
requirements of another building or use until the parking required for the original user of said
parking area is provided at another approved location. Owners of off-street parking facilities
may post a sign indicating that all parking on the site is available only for residents,
customers, patrons, and/or employees, as applicable. Signs shall conform to the standards
of §153.053 of this Code.
C. Parking, Front Yard. Unless otherwise provided, required parking and loading spaces
shall not be located in a required front yard, except in the case of a single or two-family
dwelling, and except in the case of a use in a C-N District where parking spaces may be
located in the rear ten (10) feet of the required 20 foot front yard, and except for uses in a CH
District where parking and loading may occur in all but the first ten (10) feet of yard area
from any public right-of-way. Parking spaces may be located within a required side or rear
yard.
4. Joint Use of Facilities. The off-street parking requirements of two or more uses, structures or
parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking or loading space used jointly to the extent
that it can be shown by the owners or operators of the uses, structures or parcels that their
operations and parking needs do not overlap in point of time. If the uses, structures or parcels
are under separate ownership, the right to joint use of the parking space must be evidenced by a
deed, lease, contract or other appropriate written document to establish the joint use that must
extend over the time period of the use of the property.
5. More than One Use on One or More Parcels: In the event several uses occupy a single structure
or parcel of land, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements
of the several uses computed separately, provided, however, where the operation of these
different uses is such that the hours of operation or uses complement each other insofar as the
parking demand is concerned, the planning commission may authorize a reduction in these
requirements. If the planning commission finds that a portion of the floor area, not less than one
hundred contiguous square feet, in a retail store will be used exclusively for storage of
merchandise which is not being displayed for sale, it may deduct such space in computing parking
requirements, but the owner shall not thereafter use the space for any other purpose without
furnishing additional off-street parking as required by this chapter.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 251
6. On-Street Parking Credit. For property within the Multiple Use Residential (R-0) Zone, the
Central Commercial (C-C) Zone and Town Center (T-C) Zone Districts, and outside of the C-
4 Parking District, the amount of off-street parking required may be reduced by one offstreet
parking space for every on-street parking space adjacent to the development. An
on-street parking credit reduces the number of off-street parking spaces required. An onstreet
parking credit does not reserve parking spaces for the specific commercial business
utilizing the credit. The Planning Commission shall review and approve all on-street parking
credits. On-street parking shall follow the established configuration of existing on-street
parking as established by the City of Tillamook. The following constitutes an on-street parking
space:
A. Parallel parking, each 24 feet of uninterrupted curb;
B. Curb space must be connected to the lot which contains the use;
C. Parking spaces that would not obstruct a required clear vision area, nor any other parking
that violates any law or street standard; and
D. On-street parking spaces that may be credited for a specific use may not be used exclusively
by that use, but shall be available for general public use at all times. No signs or actions
limiting general public use of on-street spaces is permitted.
E. On-street parking is on a street that is designed and physically improved to
accommodate parking within the right-of-way.
F. On-street parking credit shall not be considered on or adjacent to areas of town zoned
Low Density or Medium-Density Residential (R-7.5, Single-Family Residential or R-
5.0, Single Family Duplex Residential).
7. Off-Street Loading. Every use for which a building is erected or structurally altered to the extent
of increasing the floor area to equal a minimum floor area required to provide loading space, and
which will require the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by truck or similar
vehicle, shall provide off-street loading space on the basis of minimum requirements as follows
[Note: Commercial Buildings within the Town Center Overlay Zone District shall refer to
§153.032 for loading requirements]:
A. Commercial, industrial and public utility uses, which have a gross floor area of 5,000 square
feet or more, shall provide truck loading or unloading berths in accordance with the following
table:
Square Feet of Floor Area Number of Berths Required
Less than 10,000 0
l0,000 - 30,000 1
30,000 – 100,000 2
100,000 and over 3
B. Restaurants, office buildings, hotels, motels, hospitals and institutions, schools and colleges,
public buildings, recreation or entertainment facilities and any similar use which has a gross
floor area of 30,000 square feet or more shall provide off-street truck loading or unloading
berths in accordance with the following table:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 252
Square Feet of Floor Area Number of Berths Required
Less than 30,000 0
30,000 – 100,000 1
100,000 and over 2
C. A loading berth(s) shall contain space large enough to accommodate the largest anticipated
delivery vehicle, and be not less than ten feet wide, twenty-five feet in length and fourteen
feet in height. If the vehicles generally used for loading and unloading exceed these
dimensions, the required length of these berths shall be increased.
D. If loading space has been provided in connection with an existing use or is added to an
existing use, the loading space shall not be eliminated if elimination would result in less space
than required to adequately handle the needs of the particular use.
E. Off-street parking areas used to fulfill the requirements of this Code shall not be used for
loading and unloading operations except at off-peak hours during periods of the day when
not required to take care of parking needs.
F. Passenger Loading/Unloading: A driveway designed for continuous forward flow
of passenger vehicles for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers, shall be
located on the site of any school or other public meeting place which is designed to
accommodate more than 25 persons at one-time.
7. Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained as set forth
in this section for all uses in all zoning districts except the Downtown (C-4) Commercial
District as described in Section 17. The minimum number of required off-street vehicle
parking spaces (i.e. parking that is located in parking lots and garages and not in the street
right-of-way) shall be determined based on the standards listed in subsections 4 - 7 of this
section. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided as follows [Note: Commercial
Buildings within the Town Center Zone shall refer to §153.032.1(9) for parking and
circulation standards]:
Use Requirement
A. Residential
One, Two and Three-family dwellings: Two spaces per dwelling
Multi-family dwelling containing four or
more dwelling units: One & one-half per dwelling
Bed & Breakfast
Two spaces per dwelling plus one space per
guest room
Rooming or boarding accessory units
houses; rental units
One space for each accommodation and one
per guest room
B. Commercial Services:
Bank, personal services, office, (except
medical and dental):
One (1) space per five hundred (500) square
feet of floor area plus one (1) space per two
(2) employees
Barber shop or beauty shop: One (1) space per service Chair or stool
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 253
Bed and Breakfast Establishments:
Two (2) spaces per dwelling plus one (1) per
guest room for the establishments of three (3)
guest rooms or more
Clubs; Lodge:
The same number of spaces to meet the
combined requirements of the uses being
conducted such as hotel, restaurant,
auditorium, etc.
Eating and Drinking:
One (1) space per four (4) seats Establishments
or one (1) space per 100 square feet of dining or
dinking area
Hotel/Motel:
One space per 200 square feet of floor area
plus one space per 2 employees
Mortuaries, chapels:
One (1) space per four (4) seats or eight (8)
feet of bench length in main chapel
Self-service Laundry or Dry Cleaning:
One (1) space per four
(4) washing or cleaning machines
Service or repair shop feet of floor area. One space per 600 square feet of floor area
C. Commercial Retail Stores:
4000 square feet or less:
One (1) space per two hundred (200) square
feet of floor area
4001 square feet or more:
One (1) space per two hundred
seventy-five (275) square feet of floor area
Retail store exclusively handling bulky
merchandise such mobiles, as auto
furniture and large appliances
One space per 600 square feet of retail floor
area.
Open air market;
One space for 1,500 square used car sales lot
feet of land area
Supermarkets, Grocery Stores:
4000 square feet or less:
One (1) space per two (2) employee, plus One
(1) space per two hundred (200) square feet
of floor area.
4001 square feet and over:
One (1) space per one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of floor area
D. Commercial Amusements
Bowling alley:
Three (3) spaces per lane plus one (1) space
per two (2) employees
Dance Hall, Skating Rink:
One (1) space per one hundred (100) square
feet of floor area plus one (1) space per two
(2) employees
Miniature Golf Course: Four (4) spaces per hole
Stadium, arena, theater: One (1) space per four (4) seats
E. Industrial
Manufacturing establishment:
One (1) space per employee on the maximum
shift
Storage warehouse, rail or trucking freight
terminal:
One (1) space per employee on the maximum
shift
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 254
Wholesale establishment:
One (1) space per employee plus one (1)
space per seven hundred (700) square feet of
patron serving area
Public Utilities
(gas, water, telephone, etc), not including
business offices:
One (1) space per two (2) employees on the
largest shift, plus one (1) space per company
vehicle; a minimum of two (2) spaces is
required.
F. Institutions/ Places of Public Assembly
Child Care Centers,having thirteen (13) or
more children
One (1) space per two (2) employees; a
minimum of two (2) spaces is required
Churches and similar places of worship
One (1) space per four (4) seats or eight (8)
feet of bench length in the main auditorium
Convalescent hospital, nursing home,
sanitarium, rest home, home for seniors
One (1) space per two (2) beds for patients or
resident
Golf Course, (except miniature)
Eight (8) spaces per hole, plus additional
spaces for any auxiliary uses set forth in this
section
Hospitals: Two (2) spaces per patient bed
Library, reading room, museum, art gallery
One (1) space per four hundred (400) square
feet of floor area plus one (1) space per two
(2) employees
Limited school service facility (i.e. nonclassroom):
One (1) space per four hundred (400) square
feet of floor area
Other auditorium, meeting rooms
One (1) space per (4) seats or (8) eight feet
of bench length. If no permanent seats are
provided, one space per 100 sq. feet of floor
or assembly area.
Schools:
Pre-school nursery kindergarten: Two (2) spaces per teacher
Elementary and Junior High:
One (1) space per employee or one and onehalf
(1 1/2) space per classroom or one (1)
space per four (4) seats or eight (8) feet of
bench length in the auditorium or assembly
room, whichever is greater
High School:
One (1) space per employee plus one (1)
space for each six (6) students or one (1)
space per four (4) seats or eight (8) feet of
bench length in the main auditorium,
whichever is greater
Colleges, Universities,
and commercial trade schools for adults:
One and one-half (1 1/2) spaces per
classroom, plus one (1) space per five (5)
students the school is designed to
accommodate or one (1) space per three (3)
seats in classrooms whichever is greater
Correctional institutions:
One space per five beds for patients or
inmates
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 255
G. Other uses not specifically listed above shall furnish parking as required by the Planning
Commission. The Planning Commission shall use the above list as a guide for determining
requirements for said other uses, and shall determine the minimum number of parking spaces
required to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys.
9. Disabled Parking (as required in conformance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act). The number of disabled parking spaces shall comply with the following
standards. Striping and signing of the handicap space(s) shall conform to ADA Standards and
are shown in the figure below, and referenced on following pages.
10. Development and Maintenance Standards for Off-Street Parking and Loading
Areas. Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area, including
commercial parking lots, public parking lots, and non-subsidiary uses such as automobile sales
lots, shall be developed as follows:
A. An off-street parking area for more than five (5) vehicles shall be effectively screened by
a sight-obscuring fence, hedge or planting, on each side which adjoins property situated in
an R-7.5, R-5.0, or R-O District or the premises of any school or like institution.
B. Any lighting used to illuminate the off-street parking areas shall be pedestrian-scale and
so arranged that it will not project light rays directly or create or reflect substantial glare
upon any adjoining property in an R-7.5, R-5.0 or R-O District or on any adjacent dwelling.
C. Except for single-family and duplex dwellings, groups of more than two (2) parking spaces
shall be so located and served by a driveway that their use will require no backing movements
or other maneuvering within a street or right-of-way other than an alley.
D. Types of surfacing required for off-street parking and loading areas
1. Except in Floodway or Floodplain zones, areas used for standing vehicles and required
for maneuvering of vehicles in all residential, commercial, or industrial zones shall
have surfaces of asphalt, concrete, brick or other permanent, durable, dustless surfaces
Total Number of
Parking Spaces
provided (per lot)
Accessible Parking
Spaces
Van Accessible
Parking Spaces with
min 96" wide access
aisle Required
Parking Spaces
with min 60"
wide access aisle
1 to 25 1 1 0
26 to 50 2 1 1
51 to 75 3 1 2
76 to 100 4 1 3
101 to 150 5 1 4
151 to 200 6 1 5
201 to 300 7 1 6
301 to 400 8 1 7
401 to 500 9 2 7
501 to 1000 2% of total parking
provided in each lot
1/8 of column to the
left
7/8 of 1st column to
the left
1001 and over 20 plus 1 for each 100 over
100 parking provided in
each lot
1/8 of column to the
left
7/8 of 1st column to
the left for each one
hundred Accessible
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 256
maintained adequately for all weather use (excluding oil-matte surfaces). In flood
zones, permeable surfaces are encouraged. All such areas shall be so drained as to avoid
standing water and flow of water across sidewalks, walkways and adjacent properties.
2. According to Section 3.02.03, Driveways, of the City of Tillamook Street and Storm
Drainage Design Standards, all driveway aprons shall be paved a minimum of twenty
(20) feet from the back of the sidewalk into the driveway.
3. Unless the driveway is shared between adjacent property owners, a minimum of five (5)
feet between the improved driveway surface and the property line is required as is
further determined by the street designation in §153.051, Site Development Standards of
this development code.
4. Areas used for standing and maneuvering of vehicles in all property within the
designated Floodway shall have surfaces of durable, dustless, permeable materials. All
such areas shall be designed to avoid flow of water across adjacent properties.
E. Except for parking to serve one or two family residential uses, parking and loading areas
adjacent to or within residential zones or adjacent to residential uses shall be designed to
minimize disturbance of residents by the erection of a sight-obscuring fence of not less than
five nor more than six feet in height between the uses, except where vision clearance is
required.
F. Access aisles shall be of sufficient width for all vehicular turning and maneuvering.
G. Service drives to off-street parking areas shall be designed and constructed to facilitate the
flow of traffic, provide maximum safety of traffic access and egress and maximum safety of
pedestrians and vehicular traffic on the site. The number of service drives shall be limited to
the minimum that will allow the property to accommodate and service the traffic to be
anticipated. Service drives shall be clearly and permanently marked and defined through the
use of rails, fences, walls, or other barriers or markers on frontage not occupied by service
drives. Service drives to drive-in establishments shall be designed to avoid backing
movements or other maneuvering within a street, other than an alley.
H. Service drives shall have a minimum vision clearance area formed by the intersection of the
driveway center line, the street right-of-way line and a straight line joining said lines through
points 20 feet from their intersection. Such area shall be maintained free of all visual
obstructions. (See §153.003 for Definition.)
I. Curbing and Wheel Stops. Parking spaces along the outer boundaries of a parking area shall
be contained by a curb or bumper rail so placed to prevent a motor vehicle from extending
over an adjacent property line or a street. Wheel stops shall be a minimum of four inches in
height and width, and six feet in length; shall be firmly attached to the ground, and so
constructed as to withstand normal wear. Wheel stops shall be provided where appropriate
for all spaces abutting property lines, buildings, landscaping and no vehicle shall overhang a
public right-of-way.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 257
J. Marking/Striping. Except for parking to serve one or two family residential uses, all
spaces shall be permanently and clearly marked/striped according to the City stall
standards.
11.Maximum Number of Parking Spaces Allowed. The number of parking spaces provided
commercial use in ground surface parking lots shall not exceed the required minimum number
of spaces provided by this Section by more than 10%. Spaces provided on-street, or within
the building footprint of structures, such as in rooftop parking, or understructure parking, or in
multi-level parking above or below surface lots, may not apply towards the maximum of
allowable spaces. Parking spaces provided through "shared parking" also do not apply
towards the maximum number.
12. Parking Stall Standard Dimensions, Disabled Person Parking Stall Requirements and Standard
Dimensions. All off-street parking stalls shall be improved to conform to City standards for
surfacing, storm water management and striping. Standard parking spaces shall conform to
the dimensions in the following figure.
A. Standard Dimensions
Curbing Length (C)
Minimum Standard Parking Spaces and Aisle Dimensions
Angle (A) Width (B) Curb Length (C) 1 Way Aisle Width (D) 2 Way Aisle Width (D) Stall Depth (E)
0˚(Parallel) 8 ft. 22 ft. – 6 in. 12 ft. 24 ft. 20 ft.
30˚ 9 ft. 18 ft. 12 ft. 24 ft. 17 ft.
45˚ 9 ft. 12 ft. – 6 in. 12 ft. 24 ft. 19 ft.
60˚ 9 ft. 10 ft.– 6 in. 18 ft. 24 ft. 20 ft.
90˚ 9 ft. 9 ft. 24 ft. 24 ft. 19 ft.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 258
B. Disabled person parking spaces shall conform to the following standards and dimensions:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 259
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 260
13. Bicycle Parking Requirements. The following new developments shall be required to provide
bicycle parking in compliance with this subsection. Additionally, the required bicycle parking
facilities shall be constructed when an existing building is altered or enlarged, or when a use is
intensified by the addition of floor space, seating capacity, or change in use.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 261
A. Exemptions. This Section does not apply to single family, two-family, and three-family
housing (attached, detached or manufactured housing), home occupations, agriculture and
livestock uses, or other developments with fewer than 10 vehicle parking spaces.
B. New multifamily residential with four or more units shall provide at least one sheltered
bicycle parking space for each dwelling unit. Sheltered bicycle parking spaces may be
located within a garage, storage shed, basement, utility room or similar area. In those
instances in which the residential complex has no garage or other easily accessible storage
unit, the bicycle parking spaces shall be sheltered from sun and precipitation under an eave,
overhang, an independent structure, or similar cover.
C. New retail, office, institutional development and other commercial uses shall provide at
least one bicycle parking space for each retail, office and institutional development, and
provide a minimum of one bicycle parking space for every 10 motor vehicle parking spaces
regarding the off-street parking lot and parking structures.
D. Transit transfer and park and ride lots shall provide a minimum of one bicycle parking space
for every 10 motor vehicle parking spaces.
E. Parking Lots. All public and commercial parking lots and parking structures provide a
minimum of one bicycle parking space for every 10 motor vehicle parking spaces.
F. Schools. Elementary and middle schools, both private and public, provide one bicycle
parking space for every 10 students and employees. High schools provide one bicycle
parking space for every 5 students and employees. All spaces shall be sheltered under an
eave, overhang, independent structure, or similar cover.
G. Colleges and trade schools provide one bicycle parking space for every 10 motor vehicle
spaces plus one space for every dormitory unit. Fifty percent of the bicycle parking spaces
shall be sheltered under an eave, overhang, independent structure, or similar cover.
H. Multiple Uses. For buildings with multiple uses (such as a commercial or mixed use
center), bicycle parking standards shall be calculated by using the total number of motor
vehicle parking spaces required for the entire development. A minimum of one bicycle
parking space for every 10 motor vehicle parking spaces is required.
I. Location and Design. Bicycle parking shall be conveniently located with respect to both the
street right-of-way and at least one building entrance (e.g., no farther away than the closest
parking space) either on the sidewalks or in specially constructed areas such as pedestrian
curb extensions. All bicycle parking spaces shall be located in close proximity to the use
they are intended to serve, shall be located no more than 50 feet from a well-used entrance,
and shall have direct access to both the public right-of-way and the main entrance of the
principal use. Inverted "U" style racks or ribbon racks are recommended. Bicycle parking
shall not interfere with pedestrian passage, leaving a clear area of at least 36 inches between
bicycles and other existing and potential obstructions. Bicycle parking should be
incorporated whenever possible into building design and coordinated with the design of
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 262
street furniture when it is provided. Street furniture includes benches, street lights, planters
and other pedestrian amenities.
J. Visibility and Security. Bicycle parking shall be visible to cyclists from street sidewalks or
building entrances, so that it provides sufficient security from theft and damage.
K. Options for Storage. Bicycle parking requirements for long-term and employee parking can
be met by providing a bicycle storage room, bicycle lockers, racks, or other secure storage
space inside or outside of the building.
L. Lighting. Bicycle parking shall be least as well lit as vehicle parking for security.
M. Reserved Areas. Areas set aside for bicycle parking shall be clearly marked and reserved
for bicycle parking only and shall not impede or create a hazard to pedestrians.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 263
153.055 Design and Landscape Standards
1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage originality, flexibility and innovation in
site planning and development, including the architecture, landscaping and design of private
properties, to discourage monotonous, drab, unsightly, dreary and inharmonious design, to
conserve the City's natural beauty and visual character and charm by insuring structures, signs,
and other improvements are properly related to their sites, and to surrounding sites and
structures, with due regard to the aesthetic qualities of the natural terrain and landscaping, and
that proper attention is given to exterior appearances of structures, signs and other
improvements, to prevent physical harm to the citizens of Tillamook City, and to promote
harmony between adjacent property owners and to protect each property's right of access to
sunlight, air and open spaces.
2. Fence and Wall Standards
A. Front yard: A front yard fence or wall must not be more than:
1. Three (3) feet in height if the fence is within ten (10) feet of the front lot line; or
2. Six (6) feet in height if the fence is set back more than ten (10) feet from the front lot
line.
3. Vision clearance area as per Section 21 shall be required for corner lots.
B. Rear yard: A rear yard fence or wall must not be more than six (6) feet in height.
C. Interior side yard: A side yard fence or wall, on a side not abutting a street, must not be
more than six (6) feet tall.
D. Street side yard: A side yard fence or wall, on a side abutting a street, must not be more
than:
1. Three (3) feet in height if the fence is within ten (10) feet of the lot line; or
2. Six (6) feet in height if the fence is set back more than ten (10) feet from the lot line.
3. Vision clearance area as per Section 21 shall be required for corner lots.
E. Height measurement: Fence or wall height is measured from the ground to the top of the
fence. If the ground on which the fence is located has been bermed or raised above the level
of the surrounding land, the fence is measured from the level of the unraised ground.
F. Materials: Wood, brick, rockwork, split-face block, vinyl, or low post and wire and
hedgerows are encouraged. Concrete block walls are prohibited. Cyclone or chain link
fencing is prohibited within any front yard or street side yard setback area unless coated
with a non-metallic material, but is allowed in side and rear yards.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 264
G. Retaining wall: The above standards do not apply to a device used to buttress earth, such as
a retaining wall or riprap.
H. For purposes of this section only, if a lot abuts more than one street, only the frontage on
one of the streets shall be deemed a front lot line, and the height restrictions shall apply only
to one front yard. The person in possession and control of the premises may elect which is
the front yard and restrict the height of the fence or wall accordingly. Such person may
change his election to any of the other streets abutting his premises by first abating any
nonconforming fence or wall in the front yard to be thus defined. In a zone district other
than residential, notwithstanding the yard requirements, a fence, wall, hedge or other like
screening device may be required by the Planning Commission as a condition to the
approval of a proposed commercial or industrial improvement on a lot abutting, or across
the street or alley from, an adjacent property in a residential district, if the Planning
Commission finds that such screening is necessary to prevent an unreasonable interference
with the use and enjoyment of the residential lot.
I. Interference and Hazard to the Public
1. No owner or person in charge of property shall construct or maintain a barbed-wire
fence thereon, or permit barbed wire to remain as part of a fence along a sidewalk or
public way or along the adjoining property line of another person unless placed at least
three (3) feet behind an initial fence;
1. No owner or person in charge of property shall construct, maintain or operate an electric
fence along a sidewalk or public way or along the adjoining property line of another
person unless placed at least three (3) feet behind an initial fence.
J. Relation to Adjoining Property.
1. Fences shall not be installed on or across a property line unless jointly owned by
adjoining property owners, in which case they may be on the property line.
a. Determination of where property line is located shall not be the responsibility of
Tillamook City or its officials.
K. Building Permit and Setback Requirements for Fences. Any fence greater than six (6) feet
in height shall require a building permit, and hence, shall be required to abide by the front
yard setback and height requirements of the applicable zoning district.
L. Fences in Industrial Zones. A fence six (6) feet in height shall be required to separate any
new or substantially improved industrial operation from abutting property which is located
in any residential or commercial zoning district. Such fence shall be subject to the
requirements of Section 5(b) of this development code.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 265
3. Exterior Lighting (including LED) Requirements. All exterior outdoor lighting installed in any
and all zones in the City shall conform to the following requirements unless otherwise
exempted.
A. Area Lights – All area lights, including street lights and parking area lighting shall be full
cutoff fixtures and are encouraged to be eighty-five (85) degree full cut-off type fixtures.
Street lights shall be high pressure sodium, low-pressure sodium, or metal halide, unless
otherwise determined by the City that another type is more efficient street lights along
residential streets shall be limited to 70-watt high-pressure sodium (hps) light. If the City
permits a light type other than high-pressure sodium the equivalent output shall be the limit
for the other light type. Outdoor mercury vapor and quartz lights are prohibited; preference
should be given to low impact lighting.
B. Canopy Lights – All lighting shall be recessed sufficiently so as to ensure that no light
source is visible from or causes glare on public rights-of-way or adjacent property.
C. Illumination Levels – Illumination levels and uniformity shall consider current
recommended practices of the illuminating Engineering Society. Recommended standards
for the illuminating engineering society shall not be exceeded. Lighting shall be compatible
with the character of the neighborhood within which it is located, and light trespass impacts
on surrounding properties shall be minimized. Fixture mounting height and light intensity
shall be considered in determining the extent of light trespass impacts. Up lighting shields
shall be required except in the Town Center.
D. Temporary Lighting – Temporary lighting that conforms to the requirements of this
development code shall be allowed. Nonconforming temporary exterior lighting may be
permitted by the Public Works Director only after considering:
1. The public and private benefits which will result from the temporary lighting.
2. Any annoyance or safety problems that may result from the use of the temporary
lighting.
3. The duration of the temporary nonconforming lighting. The applicant shall submit a
detailed description of the proposed temporary nonconforming lighting to the Public
Works Director.
E. Towers – All radio, communication and navigation towers that require lights shall have dual
lighting capabilities. Lights may only be used in accordance with FAA requirements.
F. For the purpose of this section wattage ratings for lamp types will be for either a single
lamp source or multiple lamp sources when installed in a cluster.
G. The streetlight illustrations in the City’s most current design standards shall be used by
property owners in a subdivision or other development. Lamp types not listed in the table
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 266
may be approved for use by the Planner providing installation of these lamps conforms to
the lumen limits established in this section.
H. Glass tubes filled with argon, neon or krypton do not require shielding.
I. Exterior Lighting Exemptions and Exceptions.
1. Residential fixtures consisting of lamp types with 2,050 lumens or less. Examples
include:
a. 100 Watt Standard Incandescent and less.
b. 100 Watt Mid break Tungsten-Halogen (quartz) and less.
c. 25 Watt T-12 Cool White Fluorescent and less.
d. 18-Watt Low Pressure Sodium and less.
2. Federally funded and state funded roadway construction projects to the extent necessary
to comply with federal and state requirements.
3. Fossil Fuel Light – Fossil fuel light produced directly or indirectly by the combustion of
natural gas or other utility-type fossil fuels.
4. Full cutoff street lighting, which is part of a federal, state, or municipal installation.
5. Holiday Lighting.
6. Lighting of sports facilities or stadiums.
7. Specialized lighting necessary for the safety, such as navigation or runway lighting of
airports, or temporary lighting associated with emergency operations, road hazard
warnings, etc.
8. Traffic control signals and devices.
J. Prohibited Lighting
1. Newly installed fixtures, which are not full cutoff fixtures.
2. Lighting which presents a clear hazard to motorists, cyclists, or pedestrians.
3. Laser Source Light – The use of laser source light or any similar high intensity light for
outdoor advertising or entertainment is prohibited.
4. Sidewalk and Pathway Standards.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 267
A. The placement of a sidewalk or pathway along the frontage(s) of a subject property is
required and shall be constructed in accordance with the City’s most current design
standards. Reconstruction or maintenance of an existing sidewalk or pathway may
replicate its original design. No matter which surface is utilized, grading and compaction
shall be sufficient to allow the unimpeded passage of wheeled vehicles such as bicycles,
wheelchairs, and perambulators.
5. Driveway and Garage Standards.
A. Detached garages shall be encouraged to be located to the rear of the residence. If an alley
is available, paved and improved to a minimum width of 10 feet, it shall service the
garage. Attached garages are required to be located at least 10 feet behind the front wall of
the house.
B. Driveways shall be placed alongside of a residence leading to a detached garage, unless
an alley paved and improved to minimum width of 10 feet is available; then the alley
shall be utilized. Exceptions to the location of the driveway include conditions such as lot
size, shape, topography or other circumstances over which the applicant has no control
apply to the property which force the driveway to be located elsewhere. Shared
driveways are encouraged to reduce the impact of the automobile on the appearance of
small lot residential neighborhoods. Separated driveway wheel tracks of concrete, gravel,
or pavers are encouraged, except in circumstances where an extended driveway is a
critical component of fire protection access. Impermeable surfacing shall be minimized.
6. Other Outbuilding and Accessory Standards.
A. Front yard: No barn, deck, shed, outbuilding (except garages), or hot tub is allowed in
a front yard. Porches, patios and gazebos are permitted in front yards, but not within
the required setback area.
B. Rear yard: Barns, decks, gazebos, sheds, outbuildings, and hot tubs are allowed in a
rear yard, but must meet setback requirements. They shall not overhang or drain onto
an adjoining property, obstruct fire access, or be placed on a right-of-way or recorded
easement.
C. Materials: Wood or brickwork is encouraged. Wrought metalwork and sheet metal are
discouraged. All exterior lighting (including LED) must minimize light trespass
impacts.
7. Swimming Pool Standards.
A. Front yard: No swimming pool is allowed in a front yard.
B. Rear yard additional setbacks: A swimming pool is allowed in a rear yard. The
minimum setback for a swimming pool is:
1. fifteen (15) feet from rear lot line,
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 268
2. fifteen (15) feet from a side lot line, on a side not abutting a street,
3. twenty (20) feet from a side lot line, on a side abutting a street; and4. ten (10) feet
from any dwelling on the lot.
C. Fencing: If appropriate, a solid noise dampening fence or wall, six (6) feet tall, should
enclose the rear yard including the swimming pool to protect neighboring lots from
excessive noise. A vinyl coated chain link fence not less than four feet tall, nor more than
five (5) feet tall, may also be installed in close proximity to the pool as a safety
precaution.
D. Materials: Materials exposed to neighbors or Public Way shall be those allowed by
'Fence and Wall standards'.
E. Child proofing: Any gate leading to the pool must be self-closing and self-latching. The
latch must be openable only by key or combination lock. The pool enclosing fence must
have no openings larger than four (4) inches in any dimension.
F. Overhead utility lines: Overhead electric, telephone, cable TV or other utility lines must
not cross over a swimming pool. For safety reasons, a minimum ten (10) foot horizontal
clearance must be maintained between the pool and any overhead lines. (A pool cleaning
tool, attached to a metal pole, can cause electrocution if it contacts a live wire.)
G. Measurements: Setbacks are measured from the edge of the water at the design water line.
8. Satellite Dish and Telecommunication Equipment Standards.
A. Ground Dishes or piece of equipment under 24”.
1) Shall be located based on technical need with the rear yard given first priority, side yard
second priority, and front yard third priority. Written verification of technical need may
be requested from a qualified dealer prior to siting in a front yard.
2) A ground dish shall abide by the setback requirements of the zone district in which it is
located. Zone Districts without an established setback area shall at a minimum provide
a five (5) foot side an s rear yard setback and a minimum of ten feet shall be required
for a front yard setback.
3) Any portion of a ground dish which is above a height of ten (10) feet, must be inset
and additional one-half foot for each foot of height exceeding 10 feet.
4) All ground dishes located in a front of side yard shall be screened by sight-obscuring
fences and/or dense landscape buffers. Such buffers shall at a minimum screen 50%
of a ground dish based on the total vertical height with a maximum buffer height of six
(6) feet. Dishes may be painted to blend with the existing surroundings.
B. Roof Dishes or piece of equipment under 24”.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 269
1) May be mounted on roofs, porches, or project from a wall of the dwelling.
C. Any satellite dish or piece of equipment larger than 24” shall be confined to rear or side
yards, shall be screened from any viewpoint four feet above and along the centerline of
a City street.
9. Drop Box and Newsrack Standards.
A. Drop boxes and newsracks are not permitted in any R-7.5 or R-5.0 residential zones.
In zones where permitted, they shall be screened or placed in such a way as to not
obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
10. Dumpster Standards.
A. All proposed dumpsters shall be screened and located in the rear or side access, but not in
the front of the subject property. Design of the dumpster screen shall be constructed in
accordance with the guidelines provided to the City by the affected waste disposal
provider.
11. Temporary Structure Standards.
A. Tents, tarps, and other temporary structures lacking foundations which are left in place
longer than seven consecutive days shall not be visible from any viewpoint four feet
above and along the centerline of a City street.
B. In all residential zones, all off street parking of automobiles, trucks, trailers and
recreational vehicles in the front yard shall be limited to a contiguous area which is no
more than 25% of the area of the front yard.
C. Such structures, vehicles, or devices shall not be used as a dwelling, either permanently
or for more than seven days temporarily.
12. Development Standards for multi-family, multiple use, commercial and industrial projects
and projects which will create or alter a street or roadway, and development for multi-family,
multiple use, commercial and industrial projects.
A. Landscape Planning Requirements.
1. Prior to site alterations, a thorough inventory and mapping of the location, type, and
quality of trees on the property will be prepared. The map must be to the same scale as
the site plan for the development proposal. In the instances where the property contains
large volumes of woodlands, the inventory can take the form of a description of type,
location and general volumes of tree groupings.
2. During site alterations, the retention of resource trees is strongly encouraged.
Construction of natural buffers using native vegetation between sensitive natural
environments and transportation systems is encouraged. Methods and details for
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 270
protecting existing vegetation during construction must be submitted for City Planner
approval.
3. A project wide landscape plan (with installation timelines and maintenance
requirements) prepared by a qualified landscape professional must be submitted for City
Planner approval prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Building
Official, unless otherwise specified by the City Planner or conditioned in a Final Order
for Approval. All street and common areas must be landscaped within a reasonable
amount of time after the completion of the improvements in those areas; however, a
secured agreement to provide individualized landscape plans and timelines for the front
yard (at a minimum) of each lot of a subdivision within one year and a half from final
platting of the affected phase may be permitted.
4. The predominant use of ground covers such as bark mulch and rock as a permanent
landscape feature is discouraged. The location and description of landscape
improvements, such as earth berms, walls, fences, screens, sculptures, fountains, street
furniture, lights, and courts or paved areas must be graphically indicated on the
landscape plan.
B. Landscape Standards for multi-family, multiple use, commercial and industrial projects.
1. Preservation of Landscape. The existing landscape shall be preserved in natural state, in
so far as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal, and any other grade changes
shall be in keeping with the appearance of developed areas. Preservation includes the
preservation of any woody plant having a trunk six (6) caliper inches or larger in diameter
at breast height (DBH), a bush at least 4 feet in height, an area onsite designated as
wetlands, a drainage ditch located onsite. For all landscaping, live material shall be
predominantly used
2. Landscaping Requirement
a) New Construction
1) Commercial and industrial development shall provide an amount of landscaping
which equals 10% of buildable area in landscaping. Public and semi-public
developments shall provide an amount of landscaping, which equals 15% of
buildable area. Development within the CC zone and TC & HW overlays have the
option of employing a two (2) square foot per one (1) linear foot of street frontage
provided the landscaping is adjacent to the frontage. Placement of required
landscaping shall not be restricted to within the buildable area, but may be located
within the required setback areas.
2) Multi-family and mobile park development shall provide an amount of
landscaping which equals 10% of buildable area in landscaping in addition to
open space requirements. Placement of required landscaping shall not be
restricted to within the buildable area, but may be located within the required
setback area.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 271
b) Existing Buildings and Structures
1) Existing buildings which expand into an undeveloped area, including the building
upwards of a structure shall devote the same percentage of landscaping as is
listed for new construction in Section 22, 6b. Exceptions may be made in the
case where a structure covers the entire lot area, or when expansion of a
structure does not exceed 10% of the square footage of the existing building's
ground floor area.
b) Height and Size
1) Height and screening may be emphasized through the planting of deciduous trees. If
deciduous trees are used, they should have straight trunks, be fully branched, have a
minimum caliper of 1 1/4 inches, and a minimum height of eight (8) feet at the time
of planting. Deciduous trees can be supplied bare root provided the roots are
protected against damage.
2) Evergreen trees and shrubs must be balled and burlapped or in suitable
containers in which the tree or shrub has grown for one (1) year. If balled and
burlapped, the ball of each tree or shrub shall be firm and burlap sound; no loose
ball or made ball will be acceptable. Each tree shall be a minimum of six (6)
feet in height, fully branched, and adequately staked at the time of planting.
3) Ground cover shall be supplied in a minimum 4" size container. Ground cover
plantings shall be planted on a maximum of 30" on center and 30" between rows.
Rows of plants are to be staggered for a more effective covering. If a 2 1/4" container
is used, planting 18" on center may apply within the above guidelines.
4) Shrubs shall be supplied in one-gallon containers or 9"-10" burlap balls with a
minimum spread of 12" to 15"
f) Off-Street Parking Areas. Landscaping shall be used to define, soften and screen,
reducing the visual intrusions of vehicles using less offensive or more harmonious
elements, such as plants, berms, fences, walls, or any appropriate combination thereof,
the appearance of off-street parking areas from public rights-of-ways. Landscaping
requirements are identified in subsection 13 of this section.
1) Evergreen and/or deciduous plant material shall have a minimum height at the
time of planting of 18" - 24".
2) Parking lot plants and/or berms shall be designed to allow surveillance of the lot
from the street at several points.
3) Landscaping. In all zones, except single-family residential zones, all parking
facilities shall include landscaping to cover not less than twelve percent (12%)
of the area devoted to outdoor parking facilities, including any landscaping
required in subsection of this section. Said landscaping shall be uniformly
distributed throughout the parking area, be provided with irrigation facilities,
and protective curbs or raised wood headers. It may consist of trees, plus shrubs,
groundcover or related plant material.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 272
g) Special Features
1) Exposed storage areas, trash receptacles, service areas, truck loading areas,
utility buildings and similar accessory areas and structures shall be subject to a
minimum 10 foot setback from the public ROW and pedestrian pathways, to
reduce the impact of unsightly visual intrusions. Screen plantings and other
screening methods such as fences, walls, or any appropriate combination thereof
shall be used to be congruent with existing surrounding properties.
h) Live Material, Compatibility and Maintenance
1) All live material used for landscaping must be compatible with climate and soil
conditions prevalent to the coastal areas; thus reducing the risk of costly
replacement. All landscaping required and approved through site review shall
be continually maintained, including necessary watering, weeding, pruning and
replacement.
i) Alternatives
1) Occasionally strict adherence to the above landscaping specifications may be
unduly harsh or found to be in conflict with a particular development plan. A
developer may therefore propose alternatives for Commission consideration.
Deviations from specified requirements must be shown to the Commission's
satisfaction that they are not in conflict with the overall intent of this section,
which is to promote adequate and pleasing landscaping for development.
j) Landscaping Credit for Street Tree Planting
1) The retention of trees shall be considered in the design of partitions, site plans,
subdivisions, or planned developments; the placement of roads and utilities shall
preserve trees wherever possible. The need to remove trees shall be considered
in the review process for partitions, site plans, subdivisions, or planned
developments.
2) The preservation of trees, as mentioned in 6A of this section, shall provide a
basis for consideration of a landscaping credit, which can reduce the landscaping
requirements on the subject property by 10% (10% of 10% landscaping = 1%).
3) The planting and maintenance of Street Trees in the public Right-of-way shall
provide a basis for consideration of a landscaping credit, which can reduce the
landscaping requirements on the subject property by 10% per street tree (10% of
10% landscaping = 1%).
k) The list of street tree species to be planted and minimum tree planting dimensions
are listed in detail in the City Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93.
C. Special tree protection standards:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 273
1. Preservation: A tree that has been singled out for preservation in the conditions of
approval must not be removed or damaged during construction.
2. Root protection: When construction encroaches into the drip line area of a protected
tree, special construction techniques must be used to protect the roots. The existing
ground surface within four feet of the base of a protected tree must not be cut, filled,
compacted, or paved. No more than 12 inches of fill or cut can occur within the
remainder of the drip line of a protected tree. A tree well may be used if approved by the
City Planner.
3. Excavation: prohibited excavation adjacent to a protected tree is not allowed if it will
damage the root system. In questionable situations, the applicant must provide
substantiating documentation prepared by a certified arborist showing that the trees will
be protected.
D. Street tree standards:
1. Shade trees are required along all streets, except in the downtown Town Center. The
City approved Street Tree List governs street tree selection and replacement on each
street. Species designated in the list should be consistent with the character, height,
canopy and spacing of a neighborhood's original plantings, and the scale and function of
the street within the City. The approved street tree list shall be used in order to
determine whether a small, medium, or large tree is selected. A limited number of the
same species should be planted along any single street.
2. Street trees shall be sized, spaced, and planted in accordance with the standards
provided below and shall be located in the center of 5 foot wide planter strips between
streets and pathways (minimum ten foot in length) or between two and a half to 4 feet
from street edge pathways or impervious surfaces. Plant the largest tree that space
allows for each planting location.
3. If utilities exist in the planting strip, large trees shall be planted on the side of the road
without utilities and medium and small trees on the utility side of the road. It is
recommended that in these situations, rather than having equal sized planting areas, that
the planting areas on the side opposite the utilities be larger than the utility side planting
areas.
In general, the side of the street without overhead electric lines should be planted with
trees with potential to attain a large size, if there are no obvious constraints to trees
attaining mature size, such as small planting areas. On the sides of streets with overhead
electrical lines directly above the planting areas, only trees from the recommended street
tree list designated "small" may be planted, unless there is a minimum of 10 feet of
horizontal clearance between the bases of the street trees and electrical facilities.
Columnar shaped trees should only be used where there are obstructions like buildings,
signs, and overhead electrical lines that preclude broader canopied trees. Medium sized
trees may be planted if the horizontal clearance is 10 feet or greater, and large trees may
be planted if the horizontal clearance is 20 feet or greater.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 274
4. At street corners, no tree shall be planted which branches below eight feet to ensure
vision clearance.
5. Appropriate pruning, watering, nutrient feeding, and tree protection devices are required
after planting, staking only when necessary. No metal stakes may be used for tree
stakes. Tree protection devices shall remain in place until the trees reach four inch DBH
or until the trees have been in place for two years, whichever is longer.
6. A secured agreement shall be provided that ensures that if planted trees are not alive and
viable two years after planting, replacements will be required.
E. Standards for plant measurements, installation, and maintenance
1. Developers shall install and/or dig, ball, burlap, and transplant all plant materials
listed on landscape plan. Bareroot is typically not permitted for any tree.
2. Plant materials shall conform to the requirements described in the latest edition of
American Standard for Nursery Stock, which is published by the American
Association of Nurserymen. Plants shall be nursery grown. Neither heeled-in plants
nor plants from cold storage shall be acceptable.
3. Plants shall conform to the measurements specified in the Landscape Plan.
a) Diameter at breast height (DBH) shall be measured by taking the circumference
of the tree's trunk(s) at four feet above grade/ground level, and dividing by 3.14.
b) Minimum branching height for all shade trees shall be six feet.
c) Minimum size for shade trees shall be two inches at DBH; seven to nine (9) feet
in height.
d) Minimum size for evergreen trees shall be six (6) to eight (8) feet in height.
e) The minimum planting area by tree size shall be:
1) Small trees (under 25 feet in height at maturity): 40 square feet
2) Medium trees (between 25 to 50 feet in height at maturity) 60 square feet
3) Large trees (over 50 feet in height at maturity) 96 square feet.
f) The maximum spacing between trees shall be:
1) Small trees: 20 feet
2) Medium and large trees: 30 feet
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 275
3) A professional horticulturist/nurseryman shall be consulted to determine
the proper time to move and install plant material so that stress to the plant
is minimized.
4. Planting areas for trees must be in an uncompacted state to a depth of at least two feet.
Area to be ripped or excavated to that depth unless within the drip line of a resource
tree
or if roots from other trees larger than one inch diameter are encountered. If these
occur, obtain and follow the recommendation of a certified arborist.
Use existing soil for tree planting. Avoid adding topsoil. Soil amendments like aged
sawdust (minimum of ten years of aging) may be used. Avoid working the soil when
it is saturated with water, frozen or dry. Use two to three inches of bark mulch around
all newly planted trees.
13. Landscaping Standards. All landscaping in any zone district in the City shall conform to
the following requirements unless otherwise exempted.
A. General Height Limitation for Hedges and Other Landscaping Used for Screening.
Hedges and other landscaping used for screening and privacy shall not be permitted to
grow higher than eight (8) feet.
B. Relation to Adjoining Property.
1. Hedges, shrubs and other landscaping used for screening and privacy shall not be
installed or planted on or across a property line unless jointly owned by adjoining
property owners, in which case they may be on the property line. Hedges and
shrubs shall not extend beyond the property line unless jointly agreed to by
adjoining landowners.
a. All landscaping or portions thereof shall be located in such a way as to not be
detrimental to abutting property. No landscaping shall obstruct or threaten to
obstruct the access of neighboring property to adequate and sufficient
sunlight.
C. Interference and Hazard to the Public.
1. No owner or person in charge of property that abuts upon a street or public sidewalk
shall permit trees, bushes, hedges or shrubs on the property to interfere with street or
sidewalk traffic. It shall be the duty of an owner or person in charge of the property
that abuts upon a street or public sidewalk to keep all trees on the premises, including
the adjoining parking strip, trimmed at a height of not less than ten (10) feet above the
sidewalk and not less than fourteen (14) feet above the roadway.
2. No owner or person in charge of property shall allow a dead or decaying tree to
stand that is a hazard to the public or to persons or property on or near the property.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 276
D. Enforcement.
1. Tillamook City shall be empowered to perform any necessary work in order to bring
such hedges into conformance and, after so doing, may assess to the property the cost
of any such work, plus an additional fee for administration.
Planting in the City Rights-of-way.
A. Abutting property owners may be granted permission to plant in the City Right-of-way by
the City according to the current City Street Tree Code if the following information
is provided:
1. A request in writing is provided in the form of a letter to the Street Tree Committee
and a City Public Works Permit application for street trees proposed in a new
subdivision or newly created road right-of-ways, or a City Public Works Permit
application for administrative permission for street tree(s) proposed on an existing tree
lawn and an established road right-of-way with curb.
2. A plot plan of area referencing water and sewer lines, power lines, driveways
and intersecting streets is provided.
3. Approval, if granted by the City, shall be required in the form of an approved City
Public Works Permit prior to planting of the tree or trees. Fees for such permit shall
be paid prior to approval by the abutting property owner.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 277
§153.070 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
1. Purpose. There are certain uses, which, due to the nature of impacts on surrounding land
uses and public facilities, require a case-by-case review and analysis. These are identified
“Conditional Uses.” Conditional uses may be permitted in certain districts, subject to the
granting of a Conditional Use Permit. It is the purpose of this section to establish the terms,
criteria, and procedures by which Conditional Uses may be permitted, enlarged, or altered. It
is a further purpose of this section to supplement the other sections of Code and the
Comprehensive Plan. A use is considered conditional if it may require special consideration
because of unusual characteristics of the area in which it is to be located. It is important that
conditional uses be properly located with respect to the objectives of this Code and the effect
to the surrounding properties. A use designated as conditional use may be permitted,
enlarged or otherwise altered upon administrative authorization or authorization by the
Planning Commission in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in this
section. Nothing in this section guarantees that a Conditional Use permit will be issued.
2. General Provisions.
A. Application for approval of a Conditional Use may be processed and authorized under
an administrative or a Planning Commission decision making procedure as provided by
§153.004, Application Procedures, as well as the provisions of this section.
B. A Conditional Use permit shall be issued only for the specific use or uses outlined in the
application, together with the limitations or conditions as determined by the approval
authority.
C. The findings and conclusions made by the approval authority and the conditions,
modifications, or restrictions of approval, if any, shall specifically address the
relationship between the proposal and the approval criteria listed in this section, in the
underlying zoning district, and any applicable overlay zones.
D. An application shall be approved if it satisfies the applicable criteria or can be made to
meet the criteria through imposition of reasonable conditions of approval. If findings or
data or reasonable conditions cannot bring an application into compliance with the
criteria, then the application shall be denied.
3. Approval Authority
A. Administrative Authority. An administrative review is required for those uses listed in
§153.004. Changes in use, expansion or contraction of site area, or alteration of
structures or uses classified as conditional are considered modifications, and can be
handled administratively.
If an exterior structural addition, extension or relocation of, or to, an existing structure
conditionally approved, or the proposed accessory uses and buildings customarily
appurtenant to a permitted or approved conditional use, does not equal or exceed 50% of
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 278
the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started, Conditional
Use approval is not required
B. Planning Commission Authority. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to
approve, approve with conditions, disapprove, or revoke Conditional Use Permits
subject
to the provisions of this section.
C. Changes in use, expansion or contraction of site area, or alteration of structures or uses
classified as conditional, except for accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant
to a conditional use described in “3”, and existing prior to the effective date
of this Code shall conform to all regulations pertaining to conditional uses and shall
require a new Conditional Use Permit.
D. In permitting a conditional use or the modification of an existing conditional use, the City
may impose, in addition to those standards and requirements expressly specified by this
section, any additional conditions which the City considers necessary to protect the best
interests of the surrounding property or the City as a whole. These conditions may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Increasing the required lot size or yard dimensions, open spaces or buffer areas;
2. Limiting the height of buildings;
3. Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points;
4. Increasing the street width;
5. Increasing the number of off-street parking and loading spaces required, along with
the type of surfacing and drainage of parking areas;
6. Limiting the number, size and location of signs;
7. Requiring screening, fencing, and/or landscaping (and maintenance thereof) to
protect adjacent property; and
8. Requiring means of pedestrian/bicycle access pathways to serve the property;
9. Limiting the location, coverage or height of buildings because of obstructions to
view and reduction of light and air to adjacent property;
10. Limiting or prohibiting openings in sides of buildings or structures;
11. Enclosure of storage areas and limitation of outside display and/or storage of
merchandise;
12. Regulation of noise, vibration, odors, etc.;
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 279
13. Regulation of time for certain activities;
14. Establishing a time period within which the proposed use shall be developed;
15. The requirement of a bond for removal of such use within a specified period of
time;
16. Requirements under which any future enlargement or alteration of the use shall be
reviewed by the Planning Commission and new conditions imposed;
17. And such other conditions as will make possible the development of the city in an
orderly and efficient manner and in conformity with the intent and purposes set
forth in this Code and the City Comprehensive Plan.
Application. A property owner or their authorized agent may initiate a request for a conditional
use permit or the modification of an existing conditional use by filing an application with the City
in accordance with the provisions of §153.004.
The application shall be accompanied by a site plan (as described in §153.073), drawn to scale,
showing the dimensions and arrangement of the proposed development. The Planning
Commission may require other drawings or information necessary to understand the proposed use
and its relationship to surrounding properties.
Public Hearings. Before a conditional use is permitted, the proposed conditional use shall be
considered by the Planning Commission at a public hearing, or administratively. Notice of said
hearing or administrative action shall be provided as per §153.004 of this Code.
Action by the Commission. The Planning Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove the application for a Conditional Use permit. The Planning Commission may approve
the application for a temporary conditional use. Any future enlargement or alteration of a
conditional use shall require a new conditional use permit application to be in accordance with the
regulations and standards of this Code.
A. In order to grant any conditional use, the Planning Commission must find that the
establishment, maintenance or operation of the use applied for will not, under the
circumstances of the particular case, be in violation to the appropriate regulations and
standards contained in this Code.
B. The Planning Commission shall render a decision within 120 days after the application has
been deemed complete. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final unless
appealed to the City Council.
C. A Conditional Use permit shall become void one year after approval, unless a different time
frame is specified as a condition of approval, or, within that time period the required
building construction, alteration or enlargement has commenced and been diligently pursued
or, if no such construction, alteration or enlargement is required, the permitted activity is
being regularly conducted on the premises. The Planning Commission may extend the
permit for an additional period of one year. A conditional use permit shall become void if
the use is discontinued for a period of one year.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 280
D. Any conditional use authorized according to this section (excepting "F" below) shall be
subject to the following criteria, where applicable, and the Planning Commission must
find,based upon evidence in the record developed before the Planning Commission, both
factual and supportive, provided by the applicant, that:
1) If the conditional use is listed as a use permitted outright in any other zone district in the
City, the conditional use is appropriate with respect to the property in the application
taking into consideration such things as the suitability of lands in other zone districts,
market or other economic factors, the transportation system, infrastructure available to
serve the use, and the impacts of the conditional use relative to the same use in a different
zone district.
2) The use is consistent with the applicable goals and policies of the City Comprehensive
Plan.
3) The parcel is adequate for the proposed use. Considering its size, shape, location,
topography, existence of proposed improvements and natural features, the parcel will
accommodate said use and all yards, spaces, walls and fences, parking, loading,
landscaping and other features required by the site plan.
4) The proposed use will not alter the character of the surrounding area in a manner which
substantially limits, impairs or prevents the use of surrounding properties for the permitted
uses listed in the underlying zone.
5) Streets and highways, water and sewer service lines, must be adequate in width and
degree of improvement to handle the quantity and kind of vehicular traffic that would be
generated by the proposed use.
6) There are no outstanding code violations or conditional requirements on the subject
property.
E. Burden of Proof.
1) The specific findings made by the Planning Commission in granting a conditional use
permit must be factual and supported by substantial evidence. The burden of producing
substantial evidence to support the requisite findings is on the applicant seeking the
approval of the conditional use. If no evidence is produced concerning any of the findings
listed in subsection D above, the application must be denied based upon improper or
inadequate findings. All evidence must be cited in the findings for approval of any
conditional use permit application.
2) Where the planning commission is of the opinion that said conditional use permit shall be
granted, it shall, in open public meeting, by a majority of its members in attendance, enter a
Planning Commission order granting the conditional use permit, which order shall include
specific findings of fact, conclusions and supportive evidence and any conditions of
approval. Upon the filing of said order with the city recorder, the order shall be in full
force and effect. An order denying a conditional use permit shall be entered and filed in a
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 281
like manner, with the necessary findings of fact, where the Planning Commission, based on
the standards specified herein, determines that the conditional use permit should not be
granted.
F. Conditional Uses and Criteria for Certain Transportation Facilities and Improvements
1) Construction, reconstruction, or widening of highways, roads, bridges or other
transportation facilities that are (1) not designated in the adopted City of Tillamook
Transportation System Plan (“TSP”), or (2) not designed and constructed as part of an
approved subdivision or partition, are allowed in all Zones subject to a Conditional Use
Permit under Transportation Facilities, and satisfaction of all of the following criteria:
a. The project and its design are consistent with City of Tillamook adopted TSP, or, if the
city has not adopted a TSP, consistent with the State Transportation Planning Rule, OAR
660-012 (“the TPR”).
b. The project design is compatible with abutting land uses in regard to noise generation
and public safety and is consistent with the applicable zoning and development
standards and criteria for the abutting properties.
c. The project design minimizes environmental impacts to identified wetlands, wildlife
habitat, air and water quality, cultural resources, and scenic qualities, and a site with
fewer environmental impacts is not reasonably available. The applicant shall document all
efforts to obtain a site with fewer environmental impacts, and the reasons alternative sites
were not chosen.
d. The project preserves or improves the safety and function of the facility through access
management, traffic calming, or other design features.
e. The project includes provisions for bicycle and pedestrian access and circulation
consistent with the comprehensive plan, the requirements of this Code, and the TSP or
TPR.
2) State transportation system facility or improvement projects. The State Department of
Transportation (“ODOT”) shall provide a narrative statement with the application
demonstrating compliance with all of the criteria and standards in 1.b-e. Where applicable,
an Environmental Impact Statement or Environmental Assessment may be used to address
one or more of these criteria.
3) Proposal inconsistent with TSP/TPR. If the City determines that the proposed use or activity
or its design is inconsistent with the TSP or TPR, then the applicant shall apply for and
obtain a plan and/or zoning amendment prior to or in conjunction with conditional use permit
approval. The applicant shall choose one of the following options:
a. If the City’s determination of inconsistency is made prior to a final decision on the
conditional use permit application, the applicant shall withdraw the conditional use
permit application; or
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 282
b. If the City’s determination of inconsistency is made prior to a final decision on the
conditional use permit application, the applicant shall withdraw the conditional permit
application, apply for a plan/zone amendment, and re-apply for a conditional use permit
if and when the amendment is approved; or
c. If the City’s determination of inconsistency is made prior to a final decision on the
conditional use permit application, the applicant shall submit a plan/zoning
amendment application for joint review and decision with the conditional use permit
application, along with a written waiver of the ORS 227.178 120-day period within
which to complete all local reviews and appeals once the application is deemed
complete; or
d. If the City’s determination of inconsistency is part of a final decision on the conditional
use permit application, the applicant, after one (1) year, may submit a new conditional
use permit application without prior inconsistencies, along with a plan/zoning
amendment application for joint review and decision.
F. Expiration. If no improvements are made or actions taken, a Conditional Use Permit for
Transportation System Facilities and Improvements shall be null and void after five (5)
years.
7. Appeal. The applicant or any interested person of standing may appeal a decision of the
Planning Commission to the City Council in the form prescribed by the City. The appeal
procedures shall be set forth in §153.076.
8. Effect. No building or other permit shall be issued in any case where a Conditional Use Permit
is required by the terms of this Code until fourteen (14) days after the approval of the conditional
use by the Planning Commission. An appeal from an action of the Planning Commission shall
automatically stay the issuance of a building or other permit until such appeal has been
completed.
9. Violation of Condition. The Planning Commission, on its own motion, may revoke as being void
any Conditional Use Permit for non-compliance with conditions set forth in the granting of said
permit after first holding a public hearing and giving notice of such hearing as provided in
§153.077. Revoking the Conditional Use Permit shall not be the exclusive remedy, and it shall
be unlawful and punishable hereunder for any person to violate any condition imposed by a
Conditional Use Permit.
The Planning Commission, on its own motion, may also revoke any other conditional use
permit granted, if the permitted use has been discontinued for a period of one year, and if
theproperty owner, after notification of such proposed action, does not certify his or her
intent to resume the use during the following year.
10. Limitation on New Applications. In a case where an application is denied by the Planning
Commission, or denied by the City Council on appeal from the Planning Commission, unless
specifically stated to be without prejudice, it shall not be eligible for resubmittal for the period of
one year from the date of said denial, unless, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, new
evidence is submitted or conditions have changed to an extent that further consideration is
warranted.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 283
11. Notification of Action. The City Planner shall notify the applicant and all interested parties
submitting written or oral testimony into the record for a conditional use in writing of the
Planning Commission's action within five (5) days after the entry of the final order. A copy of
said order shall be provided to the applicant.
12. Applicability. The approved Conditional Use Permit shall apply to the specific use applied for
only, and shall transfer with the ownership of the property. A conditional use permit granted
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid
upon a change of ownership of the site or structure which was the subject of the use permit
application, except as otherwise provided in this section.
This Code, the City Comprehensive Plan text and map and zone map may be amended by changing
the boundaries of zone districts or by changing any other provisions thereof. Whenever the public
necessity, convenience, or the general welfare requires such an amendment, such a change may be
proposed by the City Council on its own motion or by motion of the Planning Commission, or by
petition as hereinafter set forth. Any such proposed amendment or change shall first be submitted to
the Planning Commission.
1. Application and Fee. An application for amendment by a property owner or his authorized agent
shall be filed with the City Recorder. If the amendment involves a boundary change, the
application shall be made on the forms provided by the City, accompanied by a site plan drawn to
scale showing the property involved and adjacent land. A fee as set forth in the City's fee
schedule, in Section 4, shall accompany each application. The applicant shall pay the costs of
notification and publication required by this Code. The failure of the applicant to meet any or all
conditions, stipulations, or limitations contained in the resolution, including the time limit placed
in the resolution, shall render the resolution of intent to re-zone null and void, unless an extension
is granted by the Council upon recommendation of the Planning Commission.
2. Public Hearing on an Amendment. Before taking final action on a proposed amendment, the
Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. After receipt of the report on the
amendment from the Planning Commission, the Council shall hold a public hearing on the
amendment.
A. Notice of hearing. Notice of time and place of the public hearing before the Planning
Commission and of the purpose of the proposed amendment shall be given by the City
Recorder in the following manner.
1) If an amendment to the text is proposed, the notice shall be by publication on the City’s
website and social media outlets, in a press release to local publications known to the
City, and posting in three prominent places of public viewing at least 10 days prior to the
date of hearing. If an amendment to the Zoning Map is proposed, the notice shall be as
provided in Section 4 of this Code.
2) Failure of a person to receive the notice shall not invalidate any proceedings in
connection with the proposed amendment.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 284
B. Recess of hearing. The Planning Commission may recess a hearing in order to obtain
additional information or to serve further notice upon other property owners or persons it
decides may be interested in the proposed amendment. Upon recessing for this purpose the
Commission shall announce the time and date when the hearing will be resumed.
C. Recommendation by the Planning Commission to City Council. At the conclusion of the
Planning Commission public hearing, the Planning Commission may make a recommendation
to the City Council to approve, approve with changes, or deny the zone change or
amendment(s). The Planning Commission shall, in any case, render its decision on any
application within 40 days after a hearing.
D. Public hearing held by council. Notice of the hearing to be held by the Council on the proposed
amendment to the Zoning Code shall be given as provided in Section 2A.
Action by the City Council. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Council may enact an
Ordinance granting the zone change or amendment, or may by motion deny the granting of the zone
change or amendment. The Council shall in any event render its decision on any application within
40 days after the public hearing, provided however, that nothing shall prohibit the City Council
from by motion, postponing disposition of the application to a definite time past the said 40 day
period.
Record of Amendments. The signed copy of each amendment to the text and the map of this Code
shall be maintained on file in the office of the City Recorder. A record of such amendments shall be
maintained in a form convenient for the use of the public.
Resubmittal. In a case where a petition for an amendment is denied by the City Council, said petition
shall not be eligible for resubmittal for one (1) year from the date of said denial, unless such denial
was specifically stated to be without prejudice. A new petition affecting the same property must be,
in the opinion of the Planning Commission and the City Council, substantially different from the
petition denied, to be eligible for consideration within one (1) year from the said date of denial,
unless the first denial was denied without prejudice, or the Planning Commission finds that
conditions have changed to the extent that further consideration is warranted.
Resolution of Intent to Re-Zone. If, from the findings presented and recommendations of the
Planning Commission, as required in Section 35 hereof, the City Council determines that the public
health, safety, welfare and convenience will be best served by a proposed change of zone, the
Council may indicate its general approval in principal of the proposed re-zoning by the adoption of
a "resolution of intent to re-zone" the area involved. This resolution shall include any conditions,
stipulations or limitations, which the Council may feel necessary to require in the public interest as
a pre-requisite to final action, including those provisions which the Council may feel necessary to
prevent speculative holdings of the property after re-zoning. The fulfillment of all conditions,
stipulations and limitations contained in said resolution, on the part of the applicant, shall make
such resolution a binding commitment on the City Council. Such a resolution shall not be used to
justify spot zoning, to create unauthorized zoning categories by excluding uses otherwise permitted
in the proposed zoning or by imposing setback, area or coverage restrictions not specified in the
Code for the zoning classification, or as a substitute for a variance. Upon completion of compliance
action by the applicant, the Council shall by ordinance effect such re-zoning.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 285
Submittals required for a Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Map Amendment.
A. Basic proposal description.
B. Size, shape and orientation of the subject property.
C. Analysis of residential land/commercial land/public & semi-public land within the UGB,
including such things as:
1. acreage needed for each land use type for the 20 year planning period;
2. acreage left for each land use type if proposed change occurs (if after the proposed change
there is a shortage in one of the land use types, the Planning Commission may consider
converting other land in surplus of 20-year planning period to fill the need).
Applicability of land use objectives of both existing and the proposed zoning districts.
Analysis of the need for the change.
Economic and population data for the affected area that may be necessary as part of the
amendment of the Comprehensive Plan.
Compatibility with surrounding land uses/current use of surrounding land.
Surrounding parcel sizes.
Zoning history of the subject property and surrounding properties.
Traffic circulation and proposed traffic impact analysis.
Existing/proposed/availability of public services, such as:
1. sewer,
2. water,
3. access roads,
4. fire/police protection,
5. parks and schools.
Environmental issues, such as:
1. floodplains,
2. wetlands,
3. steep slopes.
Feasibility for development of rezoned properties.
Additional criteria and standards within the applicable plan and Zoning Code should be addressed.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 286
Consistency with Statewide Planning Goals 1 (Citizen Involvement), 9 (Economic Development),
10 (Housing), 11 (Public Facilities and Services), and 12 (Transportation) as contained in the State
Administrative Rules.
8. The Planning Commission and Council, shall determine that text amendments to the
zoning codes or Comprehensive Plan and zone change requests meet the following criteria:
A. Rezoning of the subject property and any applicable text amendments to the zoning codes
or Comprehensive Plan will conform with the intent of and will be consistent with all
policies of the Comprehensive Plan;
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 287
§153.071 AMENDMENTS
B. Rezoning of the subject property any applicable text amendments to the zoning codes or
Comprehensive Plan will conform with the intent of the zoning designation to which the
subject property is proposed to be changed as defined in the purpose statement of the
proposed zone;
C. Rezoning of the subject property any applicable text amendments to the zoning codes or
Comprehensive Plan will not seriously interfere with the permitted uses on other nearby
and surrounding parcels;
D. Rezoning of the subject property any applicable text amendments to the zoning codes or
Comprehensive Plan are better suited to the purposes of the proposed zone that it is to
the purposes of the existing zone;
E. Rezoning of the subject property will not adversely impact the orderly provision of public
services (water, sewer, police, fire ,schools, etc.) in the area in which the property is
located; and
F. Rezoning of the subject property will not adversely impact the road and street
system serving the area in which the property is located.
G. Rezoning and any applicable text amendments to the zoning codes or Comprehensive
Plan are Consistent with Statewide Planning Goals as contained in the State Revised
Statute and State Administrative Rules as follows:
1. State Revised Statutes (ORS):
a. ORS 197.250 Compliance with Statewide Planning
goals; b. ORS 197.610 Submission of Proposed Changes;
c. ORS 227.186, Notice to Property Owners.
2. State Required Administrative Rules (OAR):
a. OAR 660-003-0010, Acknowledgement Procedures and Notice;
b. OAR 660-012-0060, Plan and Land use Regulation
Amendments; c. OAR 660-025-0010, Periodic Review; and
d. Associated Administrative Rules for each State Goal.
4
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 288
§153.072 LAND DIVISIONS: (PARTITIONS, SUBDIVISIONS)
1. Purpose. The purpose of this Code is to enact subdivision and land partitioning and expedited
land division regulations for the City of Tillamook which will provide for better living
conditions within new land divisions; assure necessary streets, utilities and public areas and
provide for their installation or improvement; enhance and secure property values in land
divisions and adjacent land; simplify and make land descriptions more certain and in general
to promote the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the people consistent with
the Tillamook City Comprehensive Plan.
2. Rules of Application. No person shall subdivide, submit a land division or partition an area or
Tract of land without compliance with the provisions of this Code.
A. No person shall dispose of, transfer, sell or agree, offer or negotiate to sell any lot in any
subdivision with respect to which approval is required by the City provisions of this Code
until such approval is obtained and the plat thereof has been acknowledged and recorded
with the County Recording Officer.
B. No person may dispose of, transfer, sell or agree to sell any parcel in a partition,
subdivision, and planned unit development (PUD) prior to approval as required by the
provisions of this Code.
C. No person subdividing or partitioning a parcel of land shall lay out, construct, open or
dedicate thereon a street, sanitary sewage disposal system, storm sewer, water supply or
other improvements for public or common use unless the partitioning has received
preliminary and
construction plan approval pursuant to the provisions of this Code.
3. Land Partitioning. A land partition is the division of one (1) lot into two (2) or three (3) lots
within a period of one (1) calendar year. Splitting a lot into two lots, where a flag lot is
created, is considered a land partition. Only one flag lot shall be created from a parent parcel.
This definition is subject to any exclusions provided for by State Law.
A land partition is used in situations where only the lot lines need to be changed or added. If
a partition will create a new street, compliance with the Subdivision regulations (Subsection
5 of this Section) is required.
An Expedited land partition is used solely for the purposes of residential use and will
create three or less parcels as defined by State Law.
A. Minimum Standards. The minimum standards for design and improvements in a land
partitioning shall conform to standards mentioned in this section and §153.051 of this
Code. A partition does not include the creation of a street.
B. Initial Submission. The person proposing the partition, or his authorized agent, or
representative, shall make an application in writing to the City Planner. Each application
shall be accompanied by one reproducible copy of the tentative plan map, and any proposed
deeds for easements. Ten (10) copies shall be submitted to the City Planner at least 45 days
prior to the Planning Commission Hearing at which such plan would be considered. A filing
fee as listed in §153.004 of this Code shall be paid at this time.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 289
C. All applicants shall submit to the City information and materials consistent with the
requirements of this section.
D. Completed Application Form. The applicant must submit a completed application form
signed by the owner of record of the real property covered by the application. If more than
one ownership is involved, the applicant shall submit a signed notarized statement from each
property owner agreeing to participate in the project as a group. An application form may be
signed by the duly authorized representative of the record owner if such authorization is
evidenced by a properly executed power of attorney.
E. Site Plan. A site plan is required only to the extent necessary to adequately and reasonably
permit findings that the provisions of this section have been met. The City Planner is
empowered to waive the submittal of any of the following site plan items, which are deemed
unnecessary or inapplicable based on the nature, scope, and significance of the proposed
project. Waiver of application items, if any, shall occur following a pre-application
conference. If the City Planner position is vacant, all application materials must be submitted.
F. The applicant shall submit ten (10) copies of a site plan, accurately drawn to a scale of
sufficient size to illustrate the following site plan details as determined to be required during
the application conference and the review for completeness:
1. The location and dimension of property boundaries and the location, name, surface type, and
width of public and private streets, pedestrian ways, driveways, and any off- street parking,
along with a north point and indication of scale.
2. The accurate location and outline of the exterior walls of all existing buildings and
structures, if any, with the square footages, uses, and heights of each clearly noted. Include
setback dimensions for front, side, and rear yards.
3. The site plan shall conceptually illustrate the location of existing major site features,
including water courses, topography for sites having slopes in excess of 5%, rock
outcroppings, drainage swales, springs, woodlands, and other physical features which may
influence future site layout and design. If there are any special or unusual seismic, soil or
geologic conditions on the site, a written disclosure to that effect must accompany the
application.
4. Street light, fire hydrant, water, sanitary sewer, and storm drain locations within 100 feet of
the subject property. Show direction of flow for the site.
5. Wells, septic tanks, and drainfields, if applicable.
6. Flood elevation of 100-year floodplain or floodway, if applicable.
7. Zoning, total land area; section lines, corners, city boundaries, monuments, and lot and block
dimensions and identifying numbers.
8. Location and purpose of easements, if applicable.
9. Title block with section, township and range; street address; title of proposal; names of
applicant and owner; name and stamp of person preparing the plan (if applicable); and date
of drawing.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 290
G. Application Fee. An application fee for processing all applications shall be charged by the
City. No part of any application fee is refundable. Application fees shall be established by
resolution of the City Council. Fees shall not exceed the actual average cost of processing
services incurred by the City.
H. Legal description of the existing property.
I. Vicinity map. Mark the location of the proposal on the vicinity map available from the City
Offices.
J. Deed Restrictions. A copy of any covenants, conditions, and restrictions applicable to the
subject property.
K. At the time an application is made to divide a parcel into any number of lots, a conversion plan
must also be submitted, if the parcel will have additional division potential after the current
proposal is completed. This conversion plan requirement does not apply to commercially or
industrially zoned property. The conversion plan must show how the parcel can be ultimately
divided into the maximum practical number of lots allowed by the zoning. The conversion plan
must provide all of the graphic information required for a land subdivision or a partition, as
applicable, based on the ultimate number of lots allowable under the zoning. The conversion
plan must show how the presently proposed division will be compatible with the allowable
ultimate land division. The conversion plan must be simultaneously recorded with the approved
partition plat and shall be binding unless amended with the Planning Commission's approval.
L. Review and Approval.
1. Processing a Land Division may be subject to the Expedited procedures put forth in ORS
197.360 if requested by the applicant. A decision by the local governing body must be
reached within 63 days of receipt of a completed application based on whether it satisfies
the substantive requirements of this Title. Appeal procedures for expedited land divisions
are contained in ORS 197.375.
2. Processing a commercial land partition proposal is a quasi-judicial action requiring
discretionary decision-making. Commercial land partition approval is a Land Use
Decision and subject to the procedures established by ORS 197.763. The Planning
Commission has the authority to base its decision on the evidence and interpretation of
City Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Code criteria and standards.
10. Within 30 days of the receipt of the completed partition application, the City Planner shall
distribute copies thereof to appropriate offices and agencies, and property owners within the
distance as described in §153.004 of this Code, for their review. Not more than 15 days
thereafter, such copies shall be returned to the City Planning Department together with
any comments or information the City Planner deems necessary. Upon receipt of this
information, the Planning staff shall transmit to the Planning Commission, or handle
internally for administrative processing, a written report and recommendation including
available reports and recommendation of the City Engineer and/or other affected
agencies.
4. After receipt of the report, the City Planning Commission shall take action on the
proposed partition at a regular meeting, or City Staff shall handle the process
administratively, as directed by §153.00 of this Code.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 291
5. If an application is incomplete, the City shall notify the applicant in writing of exactly
what information is missing within 30 days of receipt of the application and allow the
applicant to submit the missing information. The applicant has 180 days from the date
of initial submission to submit all additional information. The application shall be
deemed complete for purposes of this subsection upon receipt by the City of the missing
information.
6. The application must meet all of the following objective criteria:
7. The application does not violate any City or State regulations, including, but not limited
to, lot configuration requirements, unimpeded drainage, accessibility by public utilities
and vehicular/foot traffic, and zoning requirements.
(a) The project is compatible and suitable within the context of its surroundings. This
shall include, but not be limited to, consideration of human scale, street scape,
landscaping, and any noise and lighting impacts
(b) The development will be compatible with the use or character of any adjacent resource
land.
(c) Development conforms to or minimally alters existing topographic features and seeks
to preserve natural features. Development in areas adjacent to streams and those
characterized by erosive slopes has been limited to the extent necessary to minimize
risk to acceptable levels as determined by the City Comprehensive Plan or, where
objective levels are not available, as determined by the Planning Commission.
(d)) Natural wildlife habitats and wetlands have been identified, preserved, and
protected.
(e) Adjoining land under the same or separate ownership can either be developed or be
provided access that will allow its development in accordance with the City’s
Comprehensive Plan and this Code, and with the Tillamook County Comprehensive
Plan and Code, where applicable.
(f) After partition, all lots must directly access a public street with a minimum frontage
dimension determined in §153.051, except a flag lot as provided below.
(g) For Commercial land to be eligible for a land partition, the applicant must submit a
legitimate development proposal to substantiate the need for the partition and the
ability of the resulting parcels to provide adequate off-street parking and loading. If
the city grants the partition and the development is not effectuated to an agreed upon
point of construction within 180 days, the land reverts to the original configuration.
M. Flag Lot Standards.
MI. If the original lot cannot be otherwise divided separately or in conjunction with adjoining
lots and it can be demonstrated and guaranteed through a recorded building envelope, that
the building site of the rear lot will be within 200 feet of an existing street, a deep lot may
be split into a front and rear lot, creating a maximum of one flag lot. The length, width,
and yard dimensions of each resulting lot must be at least the minimum required in the
zoning district, with the front lot retaining a minimum lot depth of one hundred (100) feet.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 292
MII. The rear lot must have an access to the street that is at least twenty (20) feet wide with
twenty (20) feet of frontage and a maximum length of one hundred and fifty (150) feet.
The "flagpole" access must be conveyed with ownership of the rear lot and be an integral
part of the rear lot.
MIII. The driveway access shall be improved to a permanent surface of asphaltic concrete,
Portland cement, or similar surface acceptable to the Fire District with a minimum width
of fifteen (15) feet. However, in order to minimize the number of parallel driveways
accessing a public street, shared access agreements benefiting two adjacent parcels shall
be encouraged, particularly where two accesses are less than fifty (50) feet apart.
MIV. The partition must still comply with the legal frontage requirement. However, the
improvement requirement may be waived for the shorter driveway of two parcels sharing
such an agreement.
MV. In granting a permit, the Planning Commission may impose such reasonable conditions
or limitations as it deems necessary to assure compliance with comprehensive plan and
zoning c ode criteria and standards. The Planning Commission may require dedication of
land and easements, and may specify conditions or modifications in the drawing to
facilitate development, including, but not limited to, deed restrictions and constructed
improvements. Any conditioned changes shall be reviewed by the City Planner or his/ her
designee, prior to recording the final partition plat.
MVI. Approval and Filing.
1. Approved partitions shall be signed by the Planning Commission chairperson or
designee. The date of approval and any conditions attached to the approval must be
completed prior to final approval.
2. Decisions made by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council in
accordance with §153.076 of this Code.
3. Filing of Partition Map. A partition plat conforming to all applicable provisions of ORS
Chapter 92: Approval of Plans, Plats; ORS Chapter 209: County Surveyors; and other
applicable ORS requirements must be prepared under the direction of, and bear the seal
of, a licensed professional land surveyor. Prior to recording, the survey must be
monumented. If the surveyor finds a discrepancy in a previous survey, the discrepancy
must be corrected as part of the partition process. Signatures of all property owners
whose properties are directly affected by the partition must be included on the
application map.
4. Filing approved plat. Within 180 days after the partition has been approved by the
Planning Commission, all improvements must be completed and two (2) blueline copies
of the indelibly inscribed and recorded partition plat, with the approval date and a
reference adequately directing the reader to the file where conditions of approval are
stored, are to be delivered to the city. If the improvements have not been completed or
the two (2) copies of the partition plat are not submitted, then the partition plat shall
become null and void. The Planning Commission may extend a partition approval for
an additional period of up to one (1) year.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 293
4. Property Line Adjustments
A. Area of Application. A property line adjustment is a change to a property boundary that
only modifies existing lots and does not create a new parcel of land or reduce the number
of lots.
B. Standards
1. A property line adjustment cannot create or vacate a parcel. Creation or vacation of a
parcel requires a separate approval process by the City of Tillamook.
2. Following the property line adjustment, all lots must comply with lot size and dimensional
standards of the applicable land use district. For non-conforming lots, the adjustment shall
not increase the degree of non-conformance of the subject property or surrounding
properties.
3. If there are existing structures on the parcels, the lot property line adjustment may not
result in a setback violation.
C. Submittal Requirements. The following information and material must be submitted by the
applicant:
1. Applications for property line adjustments shall be submitted on forms provided by the
City to the City Planner and accompanied by the appropriate fee. The application must be
signed by the owners of all lots affected by the application.
2. All applicants shall submit to the City information and materials consistent with the
requirements of this section.
a. Completed Application Form. The applicant must submit a completed application
form signed by the owner of record of the real property covered by the application.
If more than one ownership is involved, the applicant shall submit a signed
notarized statement from each property owner agreeing to participate in the project
as a group. An application form may also be signed by the duly authorized
representative of the record owner if such authorization is evidenced by a properly
executed power of attorney.
b. Site Plan. A site plan is required only to the extent necessary to adequately and
reasonably permit findings that the provisions of this chapter have been met. The
City Planner is empowered to waive the submittal of any of the following site plan
items, which are deemed unnecessary or inapplicable based on the nature, scope,
and significance of the proposed project. Waiver of application items, if any, shall
occur following an application conference. If the City Planner position is vacant, all
application materials must be submitted.
The applicant shall submit three (3) copies of a site plan, accurately drawn to a
scale of sufficient size to illustrate the following site plan details as determined to
be required during the application conference and the review for completeness:
1. The location and dimension of property boundaries and the location, name,
surface type, and width of public and private streets, pedestrian ways,
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 294
driveways, and any off-street parking, along with a north point and indication
of scale.
2. The accurate location and outline of the exterior walls of all existing buildings
and structures, if any, with the square footages, uses, and heights of each clearly
noted. Include setback dimensions for front, side, and rear yards.
3. The site plan shall conceptually illustrate the location of existing major site
features, including water courses, topography for sites having slopes in excess
of 5%, rock outcroppings, drainage swales, springs, woodlands, and other
physical features which may influence future site layout and design. If there
are any special or unusual seismic, soil or geologic conditions on the site, a
written disclosure to that effect must accompany the application.
4. Street light, fire hydrant, water, sanitary sewer, and storm drain locations
within 100 feet of the subject property. Show direction of flow for the site.
5. Wells, septic tanks, and drainfields, if applicable.
6. Flood elevation of 100-year floodplain or floodway, if applicable.
7. Zoning, total land area; section lines, corners, city boundaries, monuments, and
lot and block dimensions and identifying numbers.
8. Location and purpose of easements, if applicable.
9. Title block with section, township and range; street address; title of proposal;
names of applicant and owner; name and stamp of person preparing the plan (if
applicable); and date of drawing.
c. Application Fee. An application fee for processing all applications shall be
charged by the City. No part of any application fee is refundable. Application
fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council. Fees shall not exceed
the actual average cost of processing services incurred by the City.
d. Legal description of the existing property.
e. Vicinity map. Mark the location of the proposal on the vicinity map available
from the City Offices.
f. Deed Restrictions. A copy of any covenants, conditions, and restrictions
applicable to the subject property.
3. At the time an application is made to adjust property lines, a conversion plan must also be
submitted, if the parcel will have additional division potential after the current proposal is
completed. This conversion plan requirement does not apply to commercially or
industrially zoned property. The conversion plan must show how the parcel can be
ultimately divided into the maximum practical number of lots allowed by the zoning.
The conversion plan must provide all of the graphic information required for a land
subdivision or a partition, as applicable, based on the ultimate number of lots allowable
under the zoning. The conversion plan must show how the presently proposed division will
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 295
be compatible with the allowable ultimate land division. The conversion plan must be
simultaneously recorded with the approved map of adjustment and shall be binding unless
amended with the Planning Commission approval.
If an application is incomplete, the City shall notify the applicant in writing of exactly
what information is missing within 30 days of receipt of the application and allow the
applicant to submit the missing information. The applicant has 180 days from the date of
initial submission to submit all additional information. The application shall be deemed
complete for purposes of this subsection upon receipt by the City of the missing
information.
D. Review Process. A property line adjustment is subject to City Planner review. Processing a
property line adjustment permit is an administrative action that does not require
discretionary decision-making. If the application fails to comply with all objective criteria
for a property line adjustment, the permit must be denied. The application must meet all
of the following objective criteria:
1. The application does not violate any City or State regulations, including, but not limited to, lot
configuration requirements, unimpeded drainage, accessibility by public utilities and
vehicular/foot traffic, and zoning requirements.
2. The drawing is technically correct and the map of survey conforms with the approved site
plan.
3. After property line adjustment, all lots must directly access either a public street or an
easement that benefited the subject property(s) prior to the property line adjustment.
E. After a property line adjustment is approved, the new boundary becomes effective only
after the following steps are completed:
1. A metes and bounds legal description of the adjusted lots is recorded with the
Tillamook County Clerk.
2. As required by ORS Chapter 92, a final plat of survey is prepared and all new
boundaries are monumented as required by ORS Chapters 92 and 209. The final plat is
submitted to the City for signatures. After signatures are received the applicant files the
final plat in the County Surveyor's office and returns three (3) copies to the City.
5. Subdivision of Land. A land subdivision is the division of one (1) lot into four (4) or more lots
or any division that will create a street. The land subdivision is used in situations where
substantial engineering and improvement work will need to be done.
A. Application Conference. It is in the best interests of the City to provide planning services
that assist applicants in constructing appropriate developments. In that spirit, the City
requires that prior to filing an application, a prospective applicant shall hold an application
conference with the City Planner or his/her designee.
The purpose of an application conference is to provide advice to prospective applicants
regarding compliance with the purpose and requirements of this Code, and to determine
which application materials must be submitted to constitute a complete application.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 296
B. Application Requirements. All applicants shall submit to the City information and materials
consistent with the requirements of this section. The City Planner is empowered to waive the
submittal of any of the following application items, except filing fees, which are deemed
unnecessary or inapplicable based on the nature, scope, and significance of the proposed
project. Waiver of application items, if any, shall only occur following an application
conference. If the City Planner position is vacant, all application materials must be
submitted.
C. Completed Application Form. The applicant must submit a completed application form
signed by the owner of record of the real property covered by the application. If more than
one ownership is involved, the applicant shall submit a signed notarized statement from each
property owner agreeing to participate in the project as a group. An application form may
also be signed by the duly authorized representative of the record owner if such
authorization is evidenced by a properly executed power of attorney.
D. Tentative Plan. The applicant shall submit 20 copies of the plan on sheets not less than 18
inches by 24 inches at a scale of 1" ‘ 50' with the following information:
1. Proposed name and the title "Tentative Plan." The name shall not be similar to or
pronounced the same as the name of any other subdivision in Tillamook County
except as provided in ORS 92.090.
2. The name, address, and telephone number of property owner(s), preparer of plan,
surveyor, and engineers. The stamp of the registered professional preparer of the plan
shall also be clearly indicated, along with the date the plan was prepared.
3. Boundary lines (to scale) of the tract to be divided. This shall include section lines,
corners, city boundaries, monuments, and lot and block dimensions and other
identifying numbers as deemed necessary. The plan shall also include a North arrow
and the zoning of the subject and adjacent properties. Location by section, township,
range, and tax lot sufficient to define the location and boundaries of the proposed
tract shall be called out in the title block.
4. A vicinity sketch shown on the plat at a small scale (i.e., 1" ‘ 400') showing all existing
and adjacent subdivisions, streets, tract lines of acreage parcels, names of the recorded
owners of parcels of land immediately adjoining the land to be divided, including
properties across a street, and between it and the nearest existing or proposed public
road.
5. Topographic contour lines having the following minimum intervals:
Overall Site Elevation Difference Contour Interval
0' - 25' 2'
26'- 50' 5'
51'+ 10'
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 297
With slopes indicated as follows:
Slopes 12% to 20% light shading.
Slopes exceeding 20% heavy shading
6. The existing uses of the property, including scaled location and present use of all
existing structures with an indication as to whether they will remain on the property
after platting. The accurate location and outline of the exterior walls of all existing
(dotted line) and proposed (solid line) buildings and structures, with the square
footages, uses, and heights of each shall be clearly noted. Include setback
dimensions for front, side, and rear yards.
7. The general type, size and location of existing (dotted line) and proposed (solid line)
trees, shrubs and ground cover, including the location, height, and type of trees
having a caliper of one and one half inches or greater measured four feet above the
base of the tree. Groups of three or more trees with a closed canopy may be indicated
using scalloped lines. The Landscaping Plan shall include a diagram of irrigation
system piping and sprinkler locations.
8. The accurate location, height, and dimensions of all signs which are not to be
attached to buildings.
9. Existing (dotted line) and proposed (solid line) exterior walls and fencing, including
specification of construction materials and height.
10. The location and type of all exterior lighting.
11. The location of existing major site features, including water courses (location,
direction, and extent of streams and their high banks), wetlands, rock outcroppings,
drainage swales, springs, woodlands, significant isolated trees, and other natural
features which influence site layout and design. Any proposed changes to such site
features shall be shown.
12. The existing drainage demonstrating disposition of storm water runoff and the
direction of flow for the site. A drainage Plan showing all proposed drainage ways,
sized inlets, culverts, drainage lines, drainage easements, disposition of storm water
runoff, and approximate slopes of drainage channels to demonstrate adequate
disposition of storm water runoff. A grading plan is required if more than 100 cubic
yards of material will be disturbed. Include slope calculations, contours, and erosion
control.
13. The location and elevation of 100-year floodplains or floodways, and all other areas
subject to seasonal ponding.
14. The location of setback lines, along with the location, widths, and purpose of all
existing or proposed easements on or abutting the tract.
15. The location and size of all existing and proposed sanitary sewer mains, storm drains,
water lines, fire hydrants, street lights and irrigation canals on and within 100 feet of
the tract. Include wells, septic tanks, and drainfields, if applicable.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 298
16. The location of waste handling facilities and outdoor storage areas, along with
screening technique.
17. The typical cross-sections of proposed streets, showing all utility improvements
proposed within the street right-of-way and adjacent easements at such scale to
clearly show the details thereof.
18. Existing Transportation: Location, names, surface types, grades, pavement
dimensions of public and private streets, pedestrian ways, driveways, alleys, any offstreet
parking, and rights-of-way on and abutting the tract. Source of datum shall be
indicated on the plan and shall be acceptable to the review body.
19. Proposed Transportation: Location, names, surface types, grades, pavement
dimensions of public and private streets, pedestrian ways, driveways, alleys, any offstreet
parking, and rights-of-way on and providing service for the direct benefit of the
proposed land division, including approximate radius of curves and grades. Include
entry and exit points for motor vehicles and pedestrians using off-street parking areas,
and internal circulation patterns, and location of any street plugs required to direct
future street extensions.
20. A Future Transportation Plan: The pattern of future transportation routes from the
boundaries of the proposed land division. This pattern must include other tracts
within 200 feet of the proposed land division and properties to each side of a
proposed route which will primarily benefit the proposed subdivision.
(a) A Future Transportation Plan shall not be required for any portion of the area for
which a proposed street layout has been established by a Transportation System
Plan previously approved by the governing body.
(b) The Planning Commission may adopt a Future Transportation Plan submitted by
an applicant, provided the Transportation Plan does not conflict with a
Transportation System Plan previously approved by the governing body and
contains only local streets.
(c) If a Future Transportation Plan submitted by an applicant does conflict with a
Transportation System Plan previously approved by the governing body or
contains other than local streets, review and adoption of the Future
Transportation Plan by the City Council will be required before a Tentative
Plan can be approved.
21. The numbering, location, dimensions, and lot sizes (in square feet or acres) of all
proposed lots and blocks.
22. The Building Envelopes necessary to show compliance with all setback
requirements. Approved building envelopes shall be enforceable and recorded as a
supplement to the final plat and/or covenants, conditions, and restrictions
23. The locations of all areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use, with the
purpose, condition, or limitations of such reservations clearly indicated.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 299
E. Development Schedule. The applicant shall submit a construction timeline schedule showing
all major events. If the project is to be constructed in phases, a schedule shall be submitted for
each phase. Areas designated for staged development shall be indicated on the Tentative Plan.
F. Architectural Details. The applicant shall submit the details of any structures proposed to
be built in conjunction with the proposed subdivision.
G. Deed Restrictions. The applicant shall prepare preliminary covenants, conditions, and
restrictions (CCRs) that affect all resulting properties. These CCRs shall also establish a
homeowners association if necessary to address the development and maintenance of all
common areas. The proposed preliminary covenants, conditions, and restrictions, once
approved, may not be substantially altered when presented back to the City in their final
form.
H. Names and Mailing Addresses. The applicant shall submit the correct name and mailing
address of all fee title holders of real property situated within 300 feet of the outer boundaries
of the property covered by the application. The names and mailing addresses shall be
submitted on an 8-1/2 by 11 inch sheet(s) of peel-and-stick transferable label paper. This
information shall be provided to the City Recorder's office twenty-five (25) days in advance
of the hearing at which the application is scheduled for consideration.
I. Application Fee. The applicant shall pay an application fee for processing all applications.
No part of any application fee is refundable. The amount for such fees shall be established by
resolution of the City Council. Fees shall not exceed the actual average cost of processing
services incurred by the City.
J. Legal description of the property. The applicant shall submit a land division guarantee issued
by a title insurance company in the name of the owner of the land showing all parties whose
consent is necessary and their interest in the premise.
K. Supplemental Information. The applicant shall submit the following information:
1. Land use Tabulation:
(a) Total Site Area (Acres).
(b) Area Dedicated to Public Right of Way (Acres).
(c) Useable Site Area (Acres - Item (a) minus item (b).
(d) Density Factor Used (du/Acre).
(e) Minimum Allowable Dwelling Units
(f) Maximum Allowable Dwelling Units (du - item (c) times item (d)).
(g) Actual Dwelling Units (du) total, and per stage of development.
(h) Area Recreation/Open Space (Acres and % Useable Site).
(i) Area Impervious Surface (Acres, # of parking spaces, and % Usable).
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 300
2. If the subdivision proposal is adjacent to any resource land, either in the City or in the
County, a written mitigation plan is required that describes buffering techniques that will
utilize current best management practices.
3. A written disclosure to that effect that there are no special or unusual seismic, soil or
geologic conditions on the site. If there are any such conditions, an engineer's report and
recommendations as to mitigation of those concerns are required.
4. A written statement that there are no wetlands on the subject. If, when compared to City
wetland maps, there are any wetlands identified on or potentially impacted by the tentative
plan proposal, the Division of State Lands shall be notified at least 30 days prior to any
hearing.
5. A statement showing the source and availability of the municipal water supply, sanitary
sewer, adequate drainage, public parks, schools, transportation facilities, and police and
fire services. The statement must be accompanied by a certification from the Public
Works Director that verifies the statement's accuracy and that the services contemplated
are available and can be furnished without unreasonable detriment to the existing service
commitments of the City. In the absence on such certification, the statement shall be
deemed insufficient to meet this requirement.
6. A statement as to how the proposal satisfies all applicable zoning requirements.
L. Conversion Plan Requirement. If the land being subdivided is only a part of the land owned or
controlled by the applicant or if the land will have additional division potential after the
current proposal is completed, the applicant must submit a conversion plan (Shadow plat) for
the unsubdivided portion, or convey the remaining development rights on that unsubdivided
portion to a disinterested third party.
The conversion plan (Shadow plat) must provide all of the graphic information required for a
land subdivision above, based on the ultimate practical number of lots allowable under the
zoning. The conversion plan (Shadow plat) must show the location and gradient of the
streets and how they will connect to existing streets and streets proposed for the new
subdivision. The conversion plan (Shadow plat) must show how the presently proposed
division will be compatible with the allowable ultimate land division.
The conversion plan (Shadow plat) must be simultaneously recorded with the approved
subdivision plat and shall be binding unless amended with the Planning Commission's
approval.
M. Preparation of Tentative Plan. The tentative plan must be prepared under the direction of a
registered civil engineer, or registered surveyor, licensed by the state of Oregon.
N. Additional Requirements for Commercial Proposals: For Commercial land to be eligible for a
subdivision, the applicant must submit a legitimate development proposal to substantiate the
need for the subdivision and the ability of the resulting parcels to provide adequate off-street
parking and loading. The applicant shall submit the following:
1. Parking Plan: A parking plan with adequate, convenient, well-marked and safely lighted
off-street parking. Include shade trees and landscaping to ameliorate the effect of paved
areas. Handicapped access is required. Loading areas must be safely integrated.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 301
2. Pedestrian Plan: A pedestrian circulation plan that provides adequate pedestrian access
in the vicinity and within the project. The plan must provide hard surfaced, safely
lighted walkways suitable for use by the handicapped.
3. Traffic Plan: A traffic plan that provides adequate vehicle circulation in the vicinity of
and within the project. The traffic plan must coordinate internal and external
transportation networks, including bikeways and mass transit to extent possible. Traffic
noise must be minimized.
4. Loading Plan: A plan for loading dock or space that provides adequate room for safe
truck backing and turning movements.
5. Landscape Plan: A plan for landscaping including trees, bushes, shrubs, ground cover for
site aesthetics, shade, visual buffers, screening, pedestrian paths, pavers, other site
features, etc.
6. Public Safety Plan: A plan for minimizing the likelihood of criminal activity by
eliminating areas that are neither clearly private nor clearly public and by using
landscaping that allows maximum observation while providing desired aesthetics.
7. Perimeter Plan: A plan for the perimeter of the project to protect adjacent properties from
noise, visual incompatibility, light glare, heat pumps, fans, or other potential nuisances.
This may be accomplished through screening, setbacks, siting, or other means. O.
Determination of a Complete Application.
1. If an application is incomplete, the City shall notify the applicant in writing of exactly
what information is missing within 30 days of receipt of the application and allow the
applicant to submit the missing information.
2. The applicant must submit all additional information 180 days from the date of initial
submission. The application shall be deemed complete for purposes of this subsection
upon receipt by the City of the missing information.
3. The applicant must make available for public inspection at the Tillamook City Offices,
the complete application and all evidence to be used by the applicant in seeking approval
no less than 14 days prior to the first public hearing date regarding the proposal.
4. Initial Submission. Twenty (20) copies of a tentative plan consistent with Section D (1-
through-18) shall be submitted to the City Planner at least 30 days prior to the meeting of
the City Planning Commission.
5. Preliminary Review. Upon receipt of a notice of a complete application within 30 days,
accompanied with filing fees, the applicant shall transmit copies of the tentative plan to
each of the following:
a) School District.
b) State Department of Transportation (ODOT) if the property abuts a state highway.
c) Electric, telephone, garbage, and cable TV utilities.
d) County Surveyor.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 302
e) Affected Governmental Agencies and Special Districts, and others, as determined by
the City Planner.
Any comments received will be included in the staff report as part of the official record
and distributed to the review body.
6. The City Planner shall prepare a report on the findings for submission to the City Planning
Commission. The report shall include information on the Comprehensive Plan, Comprehensive
Plan Background Report, zoning, adjoining streets and property, existing sewers, water mains,
culverts, electric conduits, and other community facilities, in addition to features of the proposal,
together with any other data pertinent to the review of the plan.
7. The City Planner shall provide adequate public notice according to §153.003 (subsections 10 &
11), of this Code. Individual notices shall be mailed to all owners of parcels of land within
250 feet of the subdivision boundaries, according to §153.003 (3) of this Code.
8. Planning Commission Determination. The City Planning Commission shall determine whether
the tentative plan is in conformity with the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan and this
Code.
P. Limited land use decision. Subdivision approval shall be considered a "Limited Land Use Decision"
and subject to the procedures established by ORS 197.195. Following review and a recommendation
by the City Planner, the Planning Commission shall approve, approve with condition(s), or deny the
application based on the evidence and the application of the
comprehensive plan and zoning Code criteria.
Q. Proposal presentation. The licensed professional(s) who is retained by the applicant to prepare the
application, including the tentative plan, must supervise the presentation of the proposal before the
Planning Commission and be available for questioning during the presentation.
R. Burden of Proof. The applicant must produce substantial evidence to support the requisite
findings of compliance with all the standards and criteria applicable to subdivisions. As a quasijudicial
process, the Planning Commission shall determine whether the tentative plan is in
conformity with the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan and of this Code.
1. The review body shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the request, based upon
the following criteria:
a) That the project will maintain a high-quality visual appearance, and to the extent
possible, a distinct rural/urban transition at city limits along major city entryways.
b) That the project will be compatible with the use or character of any adjacent resource
land.
c) That the project conforms to or minimally alters existing topographic features and seeks
to preserve natural features. Development in areas adjacent to streams and those
characterized by erosive slopes has been limited to the extent necessary to minimize risk
to acceptable levels as determined by the Comprehensive Plan, or where objective levels
are not available, as determined by the Planning Commission.
d) That the project identifies, preserves, and protects natural wildlife habitats and wetlands.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 303
e) That the project demonstrates the adequate availability of the following:
1. public sanitary sewers
2. drainage facilities
3. municipal water facilities
4. transportation facilities 5.
police and fire services
6. public elementary schools
7. improved parks or recreation facilities
f) Alternately, that the applicant agrees to provide, concurrent with the subdivision
development, such improvements as would bring any inadequate facilities and services
to the level necessary to accommodate the project.
g) That the project's proposed transportation plan affords the most economic, safe,
efficient and least environmentally damaging circulation of people, goods, and
information and layout of utilities and parking possible.
h) That the project, through sensitive housing and site design, minimizes the cost of
housing and barriers to the handicapped.
i) That the project demonstrates that adjoining land under the same or separate
ownership can either be developed or be provided access that will allow its
development in accordance with the City’s Comprehensive Plan and this Code, and
with the Tillamook County Comprehensive Plan and Code, where applicable.
j) That the project complies with all design standards contained in this Title and
applicable portions of the Comprehensive Plan, this code, and State and Federal Laws.
2. In granting a land subdivision permit, the Planning Commission may impose such
reasonable conditions or limitations as it deems necessary to assure compliance with
Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Code criteria and standards, or State and Federal
laws. The Planning Commission may require dedication of land and easements, and
may specify conditions or modifications in the drawing to facilitate development,
including, but not limited to, deed restrictions and constructed on-site and off-site
improvements. All conditions of approval shall be satisfied prior to final plat
approval unless otherwise specified by the review body.
3. If the City Planning Commission does not approve the plan, it shall state the reasons
for denial. The action of the Planning Commission shall be noted on two copies of
the tentative plan, including any conditions attached thereto. The Planning
Commission shall retain one copy and the other returned to the subdivider. An
appeal, to the City Council of a Planning Commission decision, may be made
consistent with §153.076 of this Code.
S. Revised Tentative Plan. Prior to receiving a development permit for the tentative plan, the
applicant shall submit a revised plan to the Planning Commission demonstrating compliance
with the conditions of tentative plan approval. The review body may waive this requirement if
no significant modifications are required. Any significant modifications must be approved by
the Planning Commission.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 304
T. Filing Tentative Plan. After the tentative plan has been approved, or approved as revised, two
(2) copies are to be indelibly inscribed with the approval date and a reference adequately
directing the reader to any documents that describe conditions of approval. One (1) copy of the
inscribed tentative plan is to be given to the applicant and one (1) copy is to be filed with the
city recorder.
U. Expiration of Tentative Plan. Within 18 months following the effective date of approval of a
tentative plan, improvements must be completed and the final plat shall be submitted to the City
Planner and shall incorporate any modification or condition required by the approval of the
tentative plan. If the improvements have not been completed or the final plat has not been
submitted for approval, then the tentative plan shall become null and void.
1. The Planning Commission may extend the validity for good cause, for one (1) additional
year. An extension must be applied for in writing before the original eighteen months
expire. Upon granting such an extension, the City Planner shall make written findings that
the facts upon which the approval was based have not changed to an extent sufficient to
warrant taking the tentative plan back through the application process and that no other
development approval would be affected.
V. Staged Development. When an applicant desires to record and develop subdivision plats in
stages, the reviewing body may authorize a time for the submittal of the final plat and
development in various stages. The time period may exceed one year, but in no case shall the
total time period for all stages exceed five years without resubmission of the tentative plan
application for review and approval. Each stage so platted and developed shall conform to the
applicable requirements of this Code. Stages platted after one year are subject to further review
against current standards for compliance with modifications or any changes in the
Comprehensive Plan or implementing regulations.
W. Preparation of Final Plat. The subdivision final plat must be prepared under the direction of, and
bear the seal of, a licensed professional land surveyor. All subdivisions shall be surveyed by a
registered professional land surveyor, setting lawfully approved monuments at all the parcel
corners. If the surveyor finds a discrepancy in a previous survey, the discrepancy must be
corrected as part of the subdivision process. Signatures of all property owners whose properties
are altered by the subdivision must be included on the final plat.
1. Submission of Final Plat. Within eighteen (18) months after approval of the tentative plan,
the subdivider, or land divider shall cause the proposed subdivision, or any part thereof, to
be surveyed and a plat thereof prepared in conformance with the tentative plan as approved
or conditionally approved, unless an extension is requested in writing and granted by the
Planning Commission.
a. A request for extension must be submitted prior to the expiration of eighteen
(18) months, as described in “U” above.
b. An original drawing and five blue line or black line prints of the plat shall be
submitted to the City Recorder.
2. A subdivision final plat must subsequently be approved if it is substantially the same as the
approved tentative plan and complies with all other city and state requirements.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 305
X. Determining Complete Submittal and General Conformance. Within 18 months of tentative
plan approval, or not later than the extension date authorized by the Planning Commission, a final
plat shall be submitted to the City Planner for review and processing. With 30 days of submission,
the City Planner shall determine whether or not the application is complete and the final plat
generally conforms with the approved tentative plan and conforms with the applicable
requirements of this Code. If the City Planner determines that generally the final plat fails to
conform, or if the required supplemental information required is inadequate, then the applicant
shall be advised and afforded an opportunity of up to 30 days to make corrections.
1. Information on Final Plat. At the time of submittal of the final plat, all required materials
and required fees shall be accepted by the City Planner prior to review of the final plat. The
final plat shall be prepared under the supervision of a licensed professional land surveyor
and contain the following information, along with any additional information required by
Oregon Revised Statute Chapter 92, Section 209.250 and other applicable ORS statutes:
a) The date, north arrow, and scale.
b) Legal description of the tract boundaries.
c) Name of the owner or owners, subdividers, and engineer or surveyor.
b) Reference points of existing surveys identified, related to the plat by distances and
bearings, and referenced to a field book or map as follows:
1) Stakes, monuments, or other evidence found on the ground and used to determine the
boundaries of the subdivision.
2) Adjoining corners of adjoining subdivisions.
3) City boundary lines when crossing or adjacent to the subdivision.
4) Other monuments found or established in making the survey of the subdivision or
required to be installed by provisions of this Code.
c) The exact location and width of streets and easements intercepting the boundary of the
tract.
d) Tract, block and lot or parcel boundary lines and street right-of -way and centerlines, with
dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, radii, arcs, points or curvature, and tangent
bearings. Approximate high water lines and high banks for any creek, lake or other body
of water. Tract boundaries and street bearings shall be shown to the nearest 30 seconds
with bases of bearings. Distances shall be shown to the nearest 0.01 feet. No ditto marks
shall be used.
e) The width of the portion of streets being dedicated and the width of existing right-of-way.
For streets on a curvature which are being dedicated, curve data shall be based on the
street centerline dimensions, the radius and central angle shall be indicated.
f) Easements denoted by fine dotted lines, clearly identified and, if already of record, their
recorded reference. New easements shall be referenced in the owner's certificates of
dedication.
g) Lot numbers beginning with the number "1" and numbered consecutively.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 306
j) The area of each lot or parcel which is one acre or larger to the nearest hundredth of an
acre. If less than one acre, the area to the nearest square foot.
k) Block numbers in any addition in the subdivision of the same name shall be a
continuation of the numbering in the original subdivision. No other block numbers shall
be used.
l) Identification of land to be dedicated for any purpose, public or private, to distinguish it
from lots or parcels intended for sale. The following phrasing shall be used when
identifying open space dedications.
1) Common Open Space - shall be used to identify those parcels of land created for
the purpose of common ownership, enjoyment and maintenance by an approved
Homeowners Association group or is listed as being held in common ownership,
with appropriate deed restrictions and responsibilities, by owners of property
within the subdivision.
2) Public Open Space - shall be used when identifying those parcels of land
dedicated in fee simple to the City of Tillamook or Tillamook County for open
space purposes.
3) Open Space or Landscape Easement - shall be used to identify that portion of a lot
or lots that has established an open space or landscape easement agreement with the
City of Tillamook, or a Homeowners’ Association.
m) The following certificates which may be combined where appropriate:
1) A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any proprietary
interest in the land, consenting to the preparation and recording of the final plat.
2) A certificate signed and acknowledged as above, dedicating all lots for land shown
on the final plat intended for the exclusive use of the owners in the subdivision,
their licensees, visitors, tenants, and servants.
3) A certificate conforming to ORS 92.060 through 92.070 with the seal and
signature of the surveyor responsible for the survey and final plat.
4) A certificate or transfer deed signed by all parties having any proprietary interest
in the land, dedicating to the public all streets and roads, without any reservation
or restriction other than reversionary rights upon vacation of any such street or
road, and easement for public utilities.
5) Other certifications now or hereafter required by law.
n) Statement of Water Rights: A statement of water rights noted on the subdivision plat
together with the water rights certificate number, if applicable, per ORS 92.120 (5).
o) Final Plat Notes: The City may require, through the terms of approval, additional notes to
be placed on the face of the plat including, but not limited to, restrictions, notices, and
special conditions which are peculiar to the subdivision. The City shall not require that
the plat show graphically any information or requirement that is, or may be, subject to
administrative change or variance.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 307
p) Supplementary Information. As required by the City Planner, the applicant must submit:
1) A subdivision guarantee issued by a title insurance company in the name of the owner
of the land, showing all parties whose consent is necessary and their interest in the
premises, and written documentation stating that all taxes and assessments are paid to
date. The report must not be more than thirty (30) days old at the time it is submitted.
2) A copy of all final conditions, covenants and deed restrictions applicable to the
subdivision.
3) A copy of all dedication agreement requiring separate documents.
4) Contracts with the private companies that will install public utilities and
improvements.
5) Mylar Sheets and drawings showing the following:
i) Traverse data including the coordinates of the boundary of the subdivision and
ties to section corners and donation land claim corners, and showing the error of
closure, if any.
ii) The computation of distances, angles, and courses shown on the plat.
iii) Ties to existing monuments, proposed monuments, adjacent subdivision, street
corners and street highway stationing.
iv) Floodway or 100 year Floodplain designation, as applicable.
6) Building envelope and/or setback lines, if any, are to be made a part of the
subdivision's Deed Restrictions.
7) Any and all instruments of improvement guarantees, including warranty bonds.
8) Payment of 110% in advance of all outstanding inspection fees incurred by the City
and bonding for 110% of all estimated inspection fees that are likely to be incurred by
the City with any remaining work yet to be completed.
q. Referral for Review. On the same day the applicant submits the application to the
city, the applicant must also mail or deliver copies of the application to each of the
following:
1) School District.
2) State Department of Transportation if the property abuts a state highway.
3) Electric, garbage, telephone and cable TV utilities.
4) County Surveyor.
4) Affected Governmental Agencies and Special Districts, and others, as determined by the City
Planner.
Any comments received will be included in the staff report as part of the official record and
distributed to the review body.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 308
r. Technical Review. Upon receipt of the final plat and accompanying data, the City
Planner shall review the plat and documents, to determine that it conforms to the
proposed tentative plan. The City Planner shall review the final plat and shall state
findings on whether to approve or deny the request. A denial of the final plat shall
render the tentative plan void.
s. The City Planner shall approve or deny the request based upon the following criteria:
1) The final plat must be accompanied by application must contain all of the final plat
and supplemental all of the information asked for in this chapter.
2) The layout shown on the subdivision plat must be substantially the same as the
layout approved for the tentative plan.
3) The subdivision plat must be technically correct.
4) All required off-site and on-site improvements and other conditions of approval
have been satisfied or guaranteed.
t. Processing a subdivision final plat is an administrative action that does not require
discretionary decision-making. The application for Final Plat and all required material
is judged solely on its merits by the City Planner. If the application fails to comply with
all objective criteria, the subdivision final plat must be denied.
u. Following the final action of approval by the City Planner, the applicant shall obtain the
following signatures on the original of the final plat:
1) The County Surveyor
2) The director of any Special District (such as Fire) shown on the final plat.
3) The County Assessor certifying that all taxes on the property have been paid or
bonded for in accordance with State law.
4) The City Administrative Services Department certifying that all fees, charges, and
special assessments on the property have been paid.
5) Following (1) through (4) above, the review authority of the final plat, and other
officials as required by law.
6) Following (5) above, the Tillamook Planning Commission.
v. At the applicant’s expense a City engineer or surveyor may examine the plat for
compliance with requirements for accuracy and completeness and shall collect such fees
as are provided by state law. He may make checks in the field to verify that the map is
sufficiently correct on the ground, and he may enter the property for this purpose. If he
determines that there has not been full conformity, he shall advise the subdivider of the
changes or additions that must be made and afford the subdivider an opportunity to make
such changes or additions. If the engineer determines that full conformity has been made,
he shall so certify and transmit the plat to the Planning Commission.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 309
2. Final Plat Approval of City Planning Commission/ City Manager or Designate. If the City
Planning Commission determines that the plat conforms to all requirements, it shall approve
same, but before certifying its approval thereon, it shall be required that the subdivider file
the agreement and bond, or make the deposit, required in Section 8 of this Section and
when the agreement and bond have been filed as approved and prescribed, the City
Planning Commission approval shall be endorsed upon the plat by execution of the
appropriate certificate as prescribed by law. The approval of the plat does not constitute or
affect an acceptance by the public of the dedication of any street or other easement shown
on the plat.
3. Filing of Final Plat. After obtaining all required approvals and signatures, the developer
shall:
a) Within 90 days, file the plat with the County Recorder. Failure to file
within 90 days will render the final plat null and void, and will require
resubmission of the tentative plan in the same manner as a new tentative
plan.
b) File one print each of the approved and recorded plat with the City Planner
and the City Engineer.
4. Approval of the plat shall be null and void if the plat is not recorded within 90
days after the date the last required approving signature has been obtained. Y. Appeal.
2) A person may appeal to the City Council a decision or requirement of the Planning
Commission. Written notice of the appeal must be based on criteria and filed with
the city within 10 days after the notice of decision has been mailed. The notice of
appeal shall state the nature of the decision or requirement and the grounds for the
appeal.
3) The City Council shall hold a hearing on the appeal according to 153.076 of this
Code. The City may continue the hearing for good cause according to 153.076 of
this Code. The Council may uphold, modify, or overrule the decision of the
Planning Commission.
6. Planned Unit Development (PUD)
A. Purpose. To encourage development of large land areas as planned building groups by
making possible greater variety, functionality, and diversification in the location and
orientation of buildings and open spaces. It is further the purpose of Planned Unit
Developments to:
1. Promote creative and imaginative design for urban development in a way that is more
compatible with the natural topography.
2. Promote the preservation of important natural features, view sheds, and scenic qualities of
the land.
3. Promote a mixture of housing types.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 310
4. Promote a more economic and efficient use of urbanizable land while integrating with the
surrounding neighborhood and not compromising the public health, safety or general
welfare.
5. Promote clustering of housing to preserve open space, historic & heritage resources and
limit the amount of key facilities or infrastructure to service the development.
6. Promote a mixture of land use types that are thoughtfully planned and integrated.
7. Promote the development, public utilization and appropriate maintenance of open spaces
and other elements intended for common use and ownership.
8. Provide opportunities to further the objectives and policies of the Tillamook City
Comprehensive Plan.
9. Promote the use of energy-efficient, sustainable, development.
10. Promote construction of pedestrian ways including internal pedestrian circulation.
B. Application Requirements. The owner or his agent may make application for planned unit
development approval by filing an application with the city. When an application is submitted
for a planned development, the following items will be submitted:
1. A filing fee in an amount established by general resolution of the City Council. No part of the
fee shall be refundable;
2. A current assessor's map with the boundaries of the proposed PUD identified;
3. Preliminary Plan. All applications shall be accompanied by a general development plan (12
copies). Additionally, such plans shall include preliminary plans for the provision of public
access, water and sanitary sewer service and a proposal for the PUD's operative Covenants,
Codes, and Restrictions (CCRs). The applicant shall also submit one copy of the
Preliminary PUD Plan which has been reduced to a size suitable for photocopy
reproduction.
4. If a tentative plan for a land division is submitted concurrently with a Preliminary PUD Plan,
the Preliminary PUD Plan and tentative plan shall be on separate sheets, with the tentative
plan submitted in accordance with the application requirements of subsection 9.
5. The following Quantitative data is required:
a. Total number and type of dwelling units;
b. Parcel sizes;
c. Proposed lot coverage of buildings and structures;
d. Approximate residential densities; total amount of open space (including separate
figures for common open space and usable open space);
e. The total amount of non-residential acreage (including a separate figure for commercial
and industrial acreage).
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 311
f. A Development Schedule shall be submitted for each phase. Areas designated for
staged development shall be indicated on the Tentative Plan. The schedule shall
indicates the approximate date when construction of a Planned Unit Development is
expected to begin and end, or if developed in phases, the development schedule for
each phase shall be keyed to a plan that indicates phasing boundaries. The schedule
coordinates the improvement of the common open space, and the construction of
buildings and other structures in the common open space with the construction of the
primary structures in the Planned Unit Development.
6. Site Plan and Supporting Maps: A site plan and any maps necessary to show the major details
of the proposed planned development must contain the following minimum information:
a. The existing site conditions, including contours at two-foot intervals, shorelines, flood
plains, unique natural features, and forest cover;
b. A grading plan for the site showing future contours if the existing grade is to be
changed by more than two feet;
c. Proposed lot lines and other divisions of land for management, use or allocation
purposes;
d. The approximate location of present and proposed buildings and structures;
e. The location and size of all areas proposed to be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved for
streets, parks, playgrounds, public and semi-public buildings, and similar uses;
f. The existing and proposed vehicular circulation system including off-street parking and
loading areas;
g. The existing and proposed pedestrian circulation system, including its interrelationships
with the vehicular circulation system, indicating proposed treatments of points of
conflict;
h. The existing and proposed utility systems including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and
water, electric, gas, and telephone lines;
i. Enough information on land areas adjacent to the proposed development to indicate the
relationship between the proposed development and existing and proposed adjacent
areas, including land uses, zoning classifications, densities, circulation systems, public
facilities, and unique natural features of the landscape;
j. The proposed treatment of the perimeter of the development, including materials and
techniques used such as screens, fences, and walls;
k. Any additional information as required by the review authority necessary to evaluate
the character and impact of the proposed development. When the approval of
architectural plans for buildings has been proposed, the Preliminary PUD Plan shall show
the footprint of planned buildings in conceptual form and indicate their approximate
height(s). Such building envelopes shall reasonably anticipate and separately define the
maximum extent of the footprint for each building in the PUD.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 312
7. A narrative description of the PUD shall cover the following:
a. The nature, planned use, future ownership and method of perpetual maintenance of
accessways and land to be left in natural or developed open space or which is otherwise
to be held in common ownership.
b. A listing of all deviations from the strict provisions of this Code by citing each
provision of the Code to be deviated from, followed by a brief explanation which
covers the nature and extent of the deviation.
c. A proposed development schedule which indicates the approximate date when
construction of the PUD is expected to begin and end. If the PUD will be developed in
phases, the development schedule for each phase shall be keyed to a plan that indicates
PUD phasing boundaries.
d. Such other pertinent information shall be included as may be considered necessary by
the Planning Commission to make a determination that the contemplated arrangement or
use makes it necessary and desirable to adopt regulations and requirements differing
from those ordinarily applicable under this chapter.
8. Written findings of fact and conclusions of law which address the approval criteria.
9.The names and mailing addresses of the owners of property which are located within
200 feet of the exterior boundary of the whole PUD. The names and mailing addresses
shall be typed on mailing labels.
C. Limitation on application. No application shall be accepted for a use which will require a change
of zoning district, unless said application is accompanied by an application for a zoning
amendment as set forth in §153.003 of this Code.
1. Applicability of Planned Unit Development Regulations. The requirements for a Planned
Unit Development set forth in this Section are in addition to the conditional use procedures
and standards of §153.070.
2. PUD approval process. Approval of a PUD shall be a two-step process involving approval of
a Preliminary PUD Plan as the first step and approval of a Final PUD Plan as the second step.
Where use is made of the planned unit development process as provided in this section, no
building or other permit shall be issued for such development or part thereof until the
Planning Commission has approved said development.
3. Findings for Project Approval. The Planning Commission shall approve a Planned Unit
Development only if it finds that the Planned Unit Development will satisfy the criteria of
this section including the following:
a. The applicant has, through investigation, planning and programming, demonstrated the
soundness of the proposal, the fact that it will result in a safe, functional and attractive
development, and the ability to carry out the project as proposed.
b. The proposal conforms with all requirements found in §153.073 and §153.051 that are
relevant to the property or properties upon which that development proposal is located
or to the off-site facilities and services which are affected by the proposal, and any
other implementing ordinances of the City in terms of location and general
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 313
development standards, except those for which a specific deviation has been approved
under this section.
c. The project shall accrue benefits to the city and the general public in accordance with
this section sufficient to offset any requested deviations to the zoning district.
d. The project will satisfactorily take care of the traffic it generates by means of adequate
off-street parking, access points and additional street rights-of-way improvements.
e. The project will be compatible with the adjacent natural environment and resource
areas, and shall compliment the character of the area.
f. The property is or can be supplied, at the time of development, with the following
types of public facilities that are determined to be sufficient in their condition and
capacity to support development of the property as anticipated by the PUD:
1. Public sanitary sewerage collection facilities;
2. Public domestic water distribution facilities;
3. Storm drainage facilities;
4. Public Streets;
5. Parks and Recreational facilities. In instances where the Planning Commission
determines that there is insufficient public facility capacity to support the
development of a whole PUD project, nothing in this criterion shall prevent the
approval of early phase of a PUD which can be supplied with adequate public
facilities.
g. In the case of proposed commercial developments, that such development is needed at
the proposed location to provide adequate commercial facilities of the type proposed;
that traffic congestion will not likely be created by the proposed center, or will be
obviated by presently proposed improvements and by demonstrable provisions in the
plan for proper entrances and exits, and by internal provisions for traffic and parking;
that such development will be an attractive and efficient center which will fit
harmoniously into and will have minimal adverse effects upon the adjacent or
surrounding development.
h. The proposal has met three of the above criteria objectives in this subsection.
i. Developments shall be designed to provide pedestrian and bicycle access and link with
existing and planned pathways.
j. Designs such as detached garages to the rear of the residence shall be encouraged to
reduce the conflict between automobiles and pedestrians. If an alley is available, it shall
service the detached garage, if traffic impacts on other properties adjacent to the alley
can be mitigated. If lot size, shape, topography, or traffic circumstances prohibit such
relationships or render them impractical, attached garages may be permitted provided
that the garage is located at least ten (10’) feet behind the front wall of the house.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 314
4. Potential Uses in a residential zone. The following uses are allowed in a residential planned
development if the Planning Commission considers them appropriate for the particular
development being proposed and if other applicable standards are satisfied:
a. Single-family dwellings, detached or attached, row houses, on individual lots or in
cooperative or condominium ownership;
b. Duplexes and triplexes;
c. Multi-family housing developments;
d. Manufactured home, mobile house, or modular home;
e. Commercial uses supported mainly by residents of the planned development when such
commercial uses require an area no larger than five percent of the area devoted to
residential uses;
f. Non-residential uses permitted in the underlying zone as either an outright use or a
conditional use.
5. Size of the Planned Unit Development Site. A tract of land to be developed as a Planned
Unit Development shall contain not less than four (4) contiguous acres and be of a
configuration that is conducive to a Planned Unit Development.
6. Density. The density of a planned development shall not exceed the density of the
underlying zone, if any, with uses permitted singly or in combination. When calculating
density, the gross area of the PUD shall be used (total area including street dedications).
Areas of common use may be included in calculating allowable density.
7. Deviations to be authorized. The Planning Commission may authorize the design and
approval of PUD's which deviate from the strict standards of this Code. It is further
provided that the nature and extent of potential Code deviations shall be limited to the
limitations, restrictions and design standards which are listed below and pertain to:
a. The size, dimension, location, position and coverage of lots;
b. The location, size, height, yards and setbacks for buildings and other structures;
c. Off-street vehicle parking and loading;
d. Lot frontage, access, buffer yards and agricultural buffering;
e. Streets with respect to length, width, intersection standards, grades, curve radii,
turnarounds, easements, street lighting, sidewalks, curbs and driveway approaches
for streets within the PUD, provided they allow for adequate fire access.
f. It is further provided that any deviations from the standards adopted in this Code shall
be of an equivalent or better structural quality with respect to the amount, quality and
installation of construction materials. It is also provided that, when deviations are
proposed for the design of streets, the City Engineer shall have sole discretion whether
said streets will be accepted as dedicated city streets or shall be held in private
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 315
ownership and such determination shall be made at the time the Preliminary PUD Plan
is approved. In no instance, shall this section be used to deviate from the standards of
this Code, which apply to collector or arterial streets whether such streets occur adjacent
to or within the PUD.
The overall residential housing density for the entire portion of the PUD, which is
devoted to residential uses, may be increased by not more than thirty-five percent
over the maximum density allowed in the underlying zone. Density bonuses shall be
applied in seven (7%) percent increments by the Planning Commission; satisfied by
the applicant's design.
g. One or more additional uses may be approved without the need to comply with the
conditional use permit process or other criteria as part of the PUD provided that the
amount of land devoted to uses other than those permitted outright in the underlying
zone shall not exceed twenty percent of the gross acreage of the entire PUD is satisfied.
h. The percentage of land within the PUD allowed for other uses shall be computed by
multiplying the gross area of the PUD by a factor of 0.2 and rounding the result down
to the nearest whole number.
8. Dimensional and Bulk Standards.
a. The minimum lot area, width, frontage, and yard requirements otherwise applying to
individual buildings in the zone in which a Planned Unit Development is proposed do
not apply within a Planned Unit Development. Such standards may be less than
the minimums set forth in this Code, provided that the residential density, open
space, and other requirements of this section are satisfied.
b. Other setbacks may be established by the Planning Commission to provide adequate
light, ventilation, privacy, and other characteristics.
c. If the spacing between main buildings is not equivalent to the spacing, which would
be required between buildings similarly developed under this Code on separate
parcels, other design features shall provide light, ventilation and other characteristics
equivalent to that obtained from the spacing standards.
d. Buildings, off-street parking and loading facilities, open space, landscaping, and
screening shall provide protection outside the boundary lines of the development
comparable to that otherwise required of development in the zone.
e. The maximum building height shall, in no event, exceed those building heights
prescribed in the applicable zoning district in which the Planned Unit Development is
proposed, except that a greater height may be approved if surrounding open space
within the Planned Unit Development, building setbacks, and other design
features are used to avoid any adverse impact due to a greater height.
9. Common Areas.
a. In all planned developments, forty percent (40%) of the total land area shall be devoted to
open space. This open space may be in the form of yards, buffers, setbacks, common open
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 316
areas, or recreational facilities. Of this 40%, seventy-five percent (75%) of this area shall
be common or shared open space, and the remaining twenty-five percent (25%) of said
open space may be utilized privately by individual owners or users of the planned
development. Notwithstanding the previous standards, the Planning Commission may
increase or decrease the open space requirements depending on the particular site and the
needs of the development.
b. No open area may be accepted as common open space within a Planned Unit
Development unless it meets the following requirements:
1. The location, shape, size and character of the common open space is suitable for the
planned development.
2. The common open space is for amenity, recreational, or other common functionality
purposes and the uses authorized are appropriate to the scale and character of the
Planned Unit Development, considering its size, density, expected population,
topography, and the number and type of dwellings provided.
3. Common open space will be suitably improved for its intended use, except that
common open space containing natural features worthy of preservation may be left
unimproved. The buildings, structures and improvements to be permitted in the
common open space are appropriate to the uses which are authorized for the
common open space.
4. If buildings, structures or other improvements are to be made in the common open
space, the developer provides a bond or other adequate assurance that the buildings,
structures and improvements will be completed. The City Manager shall release the
bond or other assurances when the buildings, structures and other improvements have
been completed according to the development plan.
c. Land shown on the final development plan as common open space shall be conveyed
under one of the following options:
1. To a public agency, which agrees to maintain the common open space and any
buildings, structures, or other improvements which have been placed on it.
2. To an association of owners or tenants, created in accordance with the laws of the
state, which shall adopt and impose articles of incorporation and bylaws, and adopt
and impose a declaration of covenants and restrictions on the common open space
that is acceptable to the Planning Commission as providing for the continuing care
of the space. Such an association shall be formed and continued for the purpose of
maintaining the common open space and other common elements.
3. No common open space may be put to a use not specified in the final development
plan unless the final development plan is amended to permit the use.
However, no change of use may be considered as a waiver of any of the covenants
limiting the use of common open space areas, and all rights to enforce these
covenants against any use permitted are expressly reserved.
4. If the common open space is not conveyed to a public agency, the covenants
governing the use, improvement and maintenance of the common open space shall
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 317
authorize the City to enforce their provisions at the City’s discretion, and shall
require City Council ratification of any amendments after initial approval.
d. The development schedule which is part of the development plan coordinates the
improvement of the common open space and the construction of buildings and other
structures in the common open space with the construction of primary structures in the
planned development.
e. Where a PUD has open spaces, parking areas or other elements to be owned or
maintained in common by the owners or future owners of land or improvements within
the PUD, the Final PUD Plan shall not be approved and in no event shall any lot or unit
be sold or conveyed until the PUD has been found to comply with the following
requirements, as applicable:
1. If the PUD is a planned community under ORS Chapter 94, the declaration and plat
for the planned community shall be submitted with the Final PUD Plan for approval
by the Planning Commission before being recorded in the official records of
Tillamook County.
2. If the PUD is a condominium under ORS Chapter 100, the declaration and plat for
the condominium shall have been recorded in the official records of Tillamook
County and a copy of the recorded declaration and plat shall be submitted with the
Final PUD Plan. A condominium declaration and plat that has been approved by the
Oregon Real Estate Commissioner and recorded in the official records of Tillamook
County is not required to be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission and
the Planning Commission shall have no authority under this Subsection to require
changes thereto.
3. If the PUD contains elements intended for common ownership but ORS Chapters 94
and 100 do not apply, there shall be appropriate legal documents which assure that
the common elements will be improved and perpetually maintained for their
intended purposes. The legal documents, in such instance, shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission for approval as part of the Final PUD Plan before being
recorded in the official records of Tillamook County.
4. When a PUD is proposed to be developed in phases, the phased provision of
improved common elements shall be proportional with the development of housing
and other elements intended for private ownership. Nothing in this Subsection shall
prevent the provision of improved common elements at a rate that is proportionally
greater than the development of housing and other elements intended for private
ownership.
5. Land shown on the Final Development Plan as a common element shall be
conveyed under one of the following options:
a. To a public entity which shall agree in writing to perpetually maintain
the common element(s) being conveyed.
b. To an association of owners created pursuant to ORS Chapters 94 and 100or as
otherwise created under Subsection 17.64.090(3), in which instance the City
shall be made a party to the legal document which establishes the association
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 318
and such document shall provide that the association cannot be terminated or
discontinued without the City's prior consent, and that the City may enforce any
and all of its provisions.
10. Transportation.
a. Principal vehicular access points shall be designed to permit smooth traffic flow with
controlled turning movements and minimum hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
Minor streets within planned developments shall not be connected to streets outside the
development in such a way as to encourage their use by through traffic.
b. Streets in a planned development may be dedicated to public use. All streets will be
constructed in accordance with City Public Works design standards unless an alternative
is accepted by the Planning Commission based upon the applicant’s engineer attestation
as to its equal functionality, safety, and durability.
c. All uses shall comply with access, parking, and loading standards as shown in Section 25
of this Code. The Planning Commission may authorize exceptions where warranted, or
may specify additional requirements when appropriate.
11. Signs. All signs larger than eight (8) square feet within a planned development are subject
to approval of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall consider each
such sign on its merits based on the aesthetic impact on the area, potential traffic hazards,
and the need for the sign.
12. Compatibility with Adjacent Development. If topographical or other barriers near the
perimeter of the development do not provide reasonable privacy for existing uses
adjacent to the development, the Planning Commission shall require buildings in the
planned development to be setback an adequate distance, as determined by the Planning
Commission, from the perimeter and/or require an attractively designed and maintained
buffer in the form of vegetation, fencing, walls, and/or berms.
13. Utility Easements. Easements necessary for the orderly extension and maintenance
of public utilities may be required as a condition of approval.
14. Accessory Uses in a Planned Unit Development. In addition to the accessory uses typical of
the primary uses authorized, accessory uses approved as a part of a Planned Unit
Development may include the following uses:
a. Golf courses;
b. Private park, lake or waterway;
c. Recreation area;
d. Recreation building, club house or social hall;
e. Other accessory structures which the Planning Commission finds are designed toserve
primarily the tenants of the Planned Unit Development, and are compatible to the
design of the Planned Unit Development.
15. Review Procedures.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 319
a. Planned developments will be reviewed in two phases; a preliminary development plan
phase and a final development plan phase. However, pre-application review of the
project before these phases is required.
b. The preliminary development plan will include the information and procedures specified
in subsection 6, of this Section. If the proposed planned development involves
subdividing land, the preliminary plat shall be reviewed concurrently with the preliminary
development plan.
1. Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall act upon the
application for a Planned Unit Development within 120 days of a determination of
complete application by the City Planner, excluding such time as may be required to
complete any necessary zoning amendment. A Public hearing shall be held in
accordance with provisions in §153.070 as modified by this section.
2. Planned Unit Development is a limited land use decision and shall be conducted in
accordance with ORS 197.195, excepting that the Planning Commission may take
verbal testimony. Pursuant to ORS 197.195, only those submitting written testimony
during the 14-day comment period shall have the right to appeal said decision.
3. In taking action, the Planning Commission may approve, approve with conditions or
deny the Planned Unit Development based on the Preliminary Development Plan. Any
Planned Unit Development authorized shall be subject to all conditions imposed. Any
approval of a Planned Unit Development granted hereunder, shall be exempted
from other provisions of this Code only to the extent specified in said authorization.
Any approval of a preliminary Planned Unit Development granted hereunder, shall
lapse and become void unless, within 18 months after the final granting of approval, or
within such other period of time as may be stipulated by the Planning Commission as a
condition of such approval, construction of the buildings or structures involved in the
development has begun and diligently pursued. The Planning Commission may
further impose other conditions limiting the time within which the development or
portions thereof must be completed.
4. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final unless appealed to the City
Council according to the procedures set forth in §153.076.
c. Within three (3) months to a year following the approval of the preliminary development
plan, or approval of the plan with conditions, the applicant shall file with the City a final
development plan containing in final form the information required in the preliminary
plan. This plan may be for the entire development or, when submission in stages has been
authorized, for the first stage of the development.
d. If the City Planner finds evidence of a material deviation from the preliminary
development plan, the City Planner shall advise the applicant to submit an application
for amendment of the Planned Unit Development to the Planning Commission. An
amendment shall be considered in the same manner as an original application. If no
significant deviation from the preliminary development plan is found, the City Planner
will approve the final planned development.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 320
e. Approval of final PUD plan; Approval criteria. The following provisions shall govern
the submittal and approval of a Final PUD Plan:
1. Filing Requirements; Time Extensions: Within twelve months following final
approval by the Planning Commission of the Preliminary PUD Plan, the applicant
shall file a Final PUD Plan on forms supplied by the City. The Final PUD Plan shall
contain in final form all information and materials required by the Preliminary PUD
Plan approval. However, there shall be no burden to demonstrate compliance with
the above approval criteria and no findings of fact and conclusions of law for these
criteria are required in order for the Planner to approve a Final PUD Plan. The Final
PUD Plan shall incorporate all conditions imposed by the Planning Commission at
the time the Preliminary PUD Plan was approved. In its sole
discretion and upon the written request by an applicant, the Planning Commission
may extend the time for filing a Final PUD Plan for one additional twelve-month
period or such lesser period as may be established by the Planning Commission.
2. Phased PUD: Time Limit Between Phases: The Final PUD Plan may be submitted for
the entire project or on a phase-by-phase basis consistent with the approved
Preliminary PUD Plan. If a Preliminary PUD Plan was not approved as a phased
project, nothing in this Subsection shall prevent the Planner from approving a Final
PUD Plan in phases provided that the Final PUD Plan complies with all other
requirements of this Chapter. If the Planner approves a Final PUD Plan for the first
phase of a PUD having approved multiple phases, such approval shall perfect the
applicant's rights under this Section to complete subsequent future phases. However,
it is further provided that after Final PUD Plan approval for the first phase and for
each successive phase thereafter, no more than five years shall elapse between the
approval of phases. If more than five years pass between the Final PUD Plan approval
of any two PUD phases, the Planning Commission may, without consent of the
owners of the PUD, initiate action to terminate undeveloped portions of the PUD
under the public hearing provisions of §153.070. Nothing in this Subsection shall
prohibit or limit the ability of the Planning Commission to establish time periods
within which substantial construction of a PUD or any phase thereof is required to
occur after a Final PUD Plan has been approved.
3. Final Plat for Land Division: Application for the approval of a Final PUD Plan may
occur before, after or concurrent with the approval of a final plat for a land division
by the City Planner. However, it is further provided that no building permits shall
be issued by the City and no buildings intended for human occupancy shall be
constructed and no lot shall be sold until the Final PUD Plan has been approved.
4. Final PUD Plan Approval Criteria: A Final PUD Plan shall be approved by the
Planner or Planning Commission if they conclude that compliance exists with each
of the following criteria:
a. Provisions for the establishment and maintenance of elements to be held in
common ownership, if any, have or will comply with the standards in subsection
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 321
b. The Final PUD Plan is substantially consistent with Preliminary PUD Plan and the
conditions, if any, which were attached by the Planning Commission to the
approval of the Preliminary PUD Plan. An applicant may seek written clarification
from the Planner or Planning Commission regarding whether any anticipated
differences between the Preliminary and Final PUD Plans meet the test of being
substantially consistent. In no instance shall a Final PUD Plan be approved if
inconsistencies with the approved Preliminary PUD Plan exist in any of the ways
listed below, and when such inconsistencies are found to occur, these shall result
in the need to approve a revision to the approved Preliminary PUD Plan.
1. The exterior boundaries of the PUD shall not change except for slight
deviations which are the result of correcting boundary errors or
inconsistencies that are found to exist at the time the PUD property is
surveyed.
2. The number of housing units shall not be increased and in no instance shall
the number of housing units be decreased by more than two percent.
3. There are new deviations to provisions of this Code which were not approved
by the Planning Commission as part of the Preliminary PUD Plan.
5. Engineering construction plans.
a. Engineering construction plans, profiles, details and specifications for all public
facility and utility improvements shall be prepared by a qualified engineer
registered in Oregon. The required engineering plans shall be submitted to and
approved by the City before the start of construction.
b. Unless specifically authorized by the Planning Commission at the time of
Preliminary PUD Plan approval, all public facilities and utilities shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with the standards and procedures of the City or
other public entity to which ownership of said facilities or utilities will be
conveyed. The procedures for engineering design, plan approval and inspection
shall in all respects be the same as for land divisions under this Code.
6. Zoning Clearance and Building permits: Development and operation of a PUD.
a. All site, building and construction plans submitted for the purpose of obtaining
building and other site improvement permits shall be consistent with the approved
Final PUD Plan. In addition to other provisions of the Tillamook Municipal Code
and law, the City shall have authority under this Section to ensure the successful
completion of all public improvements. The development and operation of the PUD
shall conform in all respects with the approved Final PUD Plan.
16. Control of the Development After Completion. The final development plan shall continue
to control the Planned Unit Development after it is finished, and the following shall apply:
a. The building official in issuing a Certificate of Completion of the Planned Unit
Development shall note the issuance to the City on the recorded final development plan.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 322
b. After the Certificate of Completion has been issued, the use of the land and the
construction, modification or alteration of a building or structure within the Planned Unit
Development shall be governed by the approved final development plan.
c. After the Certificate of Completion has been issued, no change shall be made in
development contrary to the approved final development plan without approval of an
amendment to the plan, except as follows:
1. Minor modifications of existing buildings or structures may be authorized by the
Planning Commission if they are consistent with the purposes and intent of the final
plan and do not increase the cubic footage of a building or structure.
2. A building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed may be reconstructed
without approval of an amended Planned Unit Development if it is in compliance with
the purpose and intent of the final development plan.
d. An amendment to a completed Planned Unit Development may be approved by the
Planning Commission if it is required for the continued success of the Planned Unit
Development, if it is appropriate because of changes in conditions that have occurred
since the final development plan was approved, or because there have been changes in
the development policy of the community as reflected by the Comprehensive Plan or
related land use regulations.
e. Revision of a preliminary or final PUD plan. The revision of a Preliminary or Final
PUD Plan shall follow the same procedures required for initial approval, provided that:
1. For changes deemed by the Planner to be minor, the Planner shall exercise
appropriate discretion to limit and waive the submittal of any of the required filing
materials that are deemed to be excessive, repetitive or unnecessary based upon the
scope and nature of the proposed PUD revisions; and
2. At the sole discretion of the Planner, revisions to an approved PUD Plan may be
consolidated into a single procedure, the effect of which will be the approval of both a
Preliminary PUD Plan and Final PUD Plan; and
3. The burden of proof and supporting findings of fact and conclusions of law for the
criteria shall be strictly limited to the specific nature and magnitude of the change.
4. No modification or amendment to a completed Planned Unit Development is to be
considered as a waiver of the covenants limiting the use of the land, buildings,
structures and improvements within the area of the Planned Unit Development; and
all rights to enforce these covenants against any change permitted by this section are
expressly reserved.
17. Commercial/Industrial P.U.D.
In addition to the criteria contained in subsection 6 of this section, a P.U.D. within a
Commercial or industrial zone shall be subject to the following standards:
a. The principal uses conducted on the site are either outright or conditional uses for the
respective zone. Conditional uses shall meet the review criteria of §153.070.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 323
b. Secondary uses shall be directly related to the principal use, or provide support services
including, but not limited to, transportation, housing, commercial service and commercial
retail.
c. Secondary uses should be limited to 30% of the buildable area within the P.U.D.
18. Cluster Developments (CLD).
a. The purpose of a Cluster Development (CLD) is as follows:
1. To provide a greater flexibility in development of land on sites that may be too small
(infill sites) or not desirable for a Planned Unit Development;2. To provide housing
types that respond to changing household sizes and ages (e.g., retirees, single person
households, small families); 3. To promote opportunities
for ownership of dwelling units;
4. To encourage a creative approach in land development and for a consistent
and interesting
5. To encourage creation of more usable open space for residents of the
development through flexibility in density and lot standards; and,
6. To provide guidelines to ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses.
b. Throughout 153.072 Section 18 the term “Development” shall mean a Cluster
Development (CLD).
c. The uses shown in Table A below are permitted in a residential Cluster Development.
d. Every CLD is subject to land use review and approval as a Conditional Use (153.070).
Table A . Uses Permitted. The following uses are permitted in Cluster Developments:
LAND USE COMMENTS & REFERENCE
Accessory Dwelling
Accessory Structure Includes sheds, storage bldgs., res. garages
Apartments Called Multi-family dwellings/complexes
Child Care, Day Nursery
Church, Religious Institution
Complex, Multi-family (over 4 dwellings) 30% parking reduction for senior facility
Condominium State regulated
Dwelling, Duplex
Dwelling Multi-family (incl. 3 % 4 plex)
Dwelling, Single family
Park (public or private) Playground, rec. centers, pools, etc.
Parking garage (public or private) Private only: common area maintained by HOA
Public Transportation Station
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 324
Residential Use other than ground floor
Residential Care Facility Only permitted where MFR’s are allowed
Residential Care Home Only permitted where SFR’s are allowed
RV Storage Residential use only: HOA maintenance required
Schools (public or private)
Single family Manufactured Home
Townhouse
Utility Facility
e. The following exceptions to City standards may be allowed through the CLD approval process
without a variance:
1. Minimum lot sizes.
2. Yard setbacks, except perimeter yard requirements.
3. Permitted land uses.
4. Grid street spacing standards.
5. Street frontage requirements on public roads.
6. Connection to public utilities, subject to review and acceptance by City Engineering.
7. Landscaping requirements, as stated herein.
8. Solar setback standards (only on lots that are not along the northern border of the
development).
9. Street and right of way widths on non-grid streets.
10. Sidewalk placement and size standards.
11. Changes to an approved Plan, when the requested change is so minor that the City Planner or
designate determines that it would be appropriate for an administrative decision. Examples of minor
changes include, but are not limited to:
(1) a reduction in the overall number of lots,
(2) minor architectural changes to approved buildings,
(3) changes to phases that do not impact public facilities or change the number of approved phases,
(4) changes that result in a reduction of impacts (i.e. reduced traffic flows), or
(5) changes that are required to protect or increase public safety.
f. Development Standards. CLDs shall meet the following Standards unless otherwise specified.
In the case that these standards conflict with other standards within the CCT Zoning Code, these
standards shall take precedence:
1. Cluster Developments may only take place on sites of 1 acre minimum to 7 acres
maximum.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 325
2. Densities. TABLE B
ZONE
DENSITIES (per net acre)
R-1 Not applicable (CLD’s not allowed)
R-2 Not applicable (CLD’s not allowed)
R-3 Not applicable (CLD’s not allowed)
R-4 5 to 12 units/acre
R-5 8 or more units/acres
Higher Density Overlay Zone Up to 30 units/net acre
3. Design Requirements: TABLE C
FEATURE STANDARD
Building Height Underlying zone
Lot Area No minimum
Lot Width No minimum
Lot Depth No minimum
Floor Area No maximum
Open Space Based on size of parent unit
Setbacks
Perimeter
20’ when abutting an arterial or collector street (along perimeter),
underlying zone in all other cases. Setbacks to common areas determined
at the discretion of the Planning Commission.
Front
10’ to house, 5’ when house fronts common open space, 5’ to
townhouse, 20’ to garage.
Side (corner lot) No minimum; clearance vision applies
Side (non-corner lot) No minimum
Rear
No minimum; garage setback for alleys, if needed for parking or
maneuvering, to be determined by Planning Commission.
Solar Northern perimeter only
Non-permeable
surface area
Varies according to open space requirements.
Building coverage No maximum
Parking – Residential 2 spaces/dwelling unit
Other
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 326
4. Open Space, Park, and Common Area.
a. “Open space” means land area, which can be physically accessed and used by
occupants and users of the CLD for scenic, landscaping, or open recreational
purposes within the development.
b. Open Space Land Area Requirements: For all CLDs, the required land area used as
open space, park or common areas shall be 15% of the net land area (minus roads).
Providing a recreation center, developed park, pool, tennis courts, recreation rooms,
clubhouse, or other similar facilities (as determined by the Planning Commission)
will reduce the required land area by up to 5% at the discretion of the Planning
Commission.
c. Open Space – General Requirements.
1. Public and private roads and the landscaped portions of such roads and rights
of-ways shall not be considered as open space.
2. Development plans shall assure that natural features of the land are preserved
and landscaping is provided, or a finding shall be made by the Planning
Commission that preservation of significant natural feature(s) is not feasible
for the Waterways located on the property may be considered as open space
development.
3. The Planning Commission may require at its discretion the dedication of park
land or open space to the City.
4. All common areas, open space areas, and landscaped rights of way shall
undergo Site Design Review concurrently with the development review, and
Are subject to Site Design Review standards for landscaping, with the
exceptions noted herein.
5. Non-accessible open space may be considered as “open space.” However, if
these areas are not physically accessible by the users of the Development for
recreational purposes, up to half of such non-accessible land area, measured
On the horizontal, may be counted towards the required area for open
space. Full area credit may only be allowed wherever such features are
completely accessible to occupants of the development.
6. Up to 10% of the required open space/common area/landscaped areas may
be left in a natural and non-irrigated state at the discretion of the Planning
Commission; however, this shall not apply to any required landscaped
screening or landscaped strips abutting public or private roads. If the
development has a significant natural feature in excess of the 10% allowance,
the Planning Commission may allow additional natural feature open space
credit.
7. Open space, common areas, and common structures shall be financially
assured of continued maintenance. A legal mechanism shall be provided which
guarantees the continued maintenance of such areas and structures.
8. Parking areas and their required landscape screening shall not be considered
as open space.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 327
5. Construction Standards. In each Development, all provisions of the International and Uniform
Building Code, and International Fire Code incorporating Oregon Fire Code amendments shall
apply and control design and construction of improvements, except as specifically varied as
provided within these standards. City Standards and Specifications shall apply unless a deviation is
granted by the Planning Commission as part of the CLD approval process.
a. Non Residential Off-Street Parking and Loading. In residential CLDs, off-street
parking and loading space for all non-residential uses shall be limited to 80% of the
minimum standards of section 153.054 of the Tillamook Zoning Code. All
nonresidential parking and loading areas shall be screened from view from roads and
residences, and shall be located behind structures where feasible. All parking lots
shall be accessed from interior roads or alleys within the CLD unless the Planning
Commission determines that this is not feasible.
b. Signage.
1. Monument or entrance signage shall be reviewed with initial Site Design Review
and integrated into the overall building and site design or separately
At the discretion of the developer. If other similar signage is proposed
separately from the overall development, then it shall require sign permit review
at the time of submittal.
2. All entrance or monument signage within or adjacent to a CLD related to the
Development shall integrate the Development theme into the design of the
signage.
3. All entrance or monument signage shall conform to the requirements within each
respective zone, and with CCT 153.053, “Signs.”
4. In a Residential CLD, other than the entrance signs, no signs shall be visible from
adjacent residential properties.
5. Monument signs may be incorporated into the fence or wall design subject to Site
Design Review approval.
c. Streets and Utilities.
1. All construction of streets and utilities within developments shall be required
to comply with City Standards and Specifications at the discretion of the
Planning Commission if recommended by the City Engineer, except that the
Planning Commission can grant exceptions to specific Standards and
Specifications as follows:
A. Street width
B. Right of way width
C. Sidewalk width / placement
2. The City may require those streets needed for traffic circulation to be public
streets under the provisions of the Tillamook Transportation Plan and the
City street standards of CTC Section 153.051.
3. The applicant shall provide to the City easements for all public utilities (sewer
and water) on the subject property subject to acceptance by the Engineering
Division. If required, all public easements may need to be dedicated without
reservation, also at the discretion of the Tillamook Engineering Division.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 328
d. Landscaping.
1. A portion of the required landscaping shall be provided on the property to
visually screen any multifamily complex residential uses from adjoining
single family and duplex property.
2. Street Trees. Street trees shall be placed adjacent to all public and private
roads within all types of Developments, as specified in 153.055 of the CCT.
However, street trees along alleys and private internal driveways are not
required.
e. Fences and Walls. Perimeter walls or fencing, if required or proposed, shall integrate
the architectural character plan and site plan elements into the design. Walls or fences
may be required if the Planning Commission determines it is necessary to meet one or
more approval criterion.
1. Approval of any perimeter fencing or wall is discretionary to the Planning
Commission, and may be required to be modified based on approval
criterion and the specific design submitted for review.
2. If a perimeter fence is required, the Planning Commission can consider a
vegetative screen in lieu of a fence.
3. All such fencing, if approved, shall comply with CCT 153.055.
f. General Development Design Requirements.
1. The total minimum number of dwelling units of all combined zones within a
Residential CLD may be located anywhere within the Development subject to
Planning Commission approval, and subject to all applicable setbacks and
regulations established herein.
2. All Development parking lots shall be screened from view from public or private
streets (excluding driveways of 20’ width or less), and from all residences by a
screen of no less than 3’ in height. Screening shall not exceed a height of 4’.
3. Parking lot screening shall be achieved by either landscaping or fencing, or a
combination of each.
4. All parking spaces shall be paved, and shall meet the parking space standards
within sections 153.054 of the CCTC and all applicable code standards.
5. If detached parking structures are proposed, they shall integrate the architectural
character plan and site plan into the design. The Planning Commission may
require a compatible design with adjacent development if necessary to meet one
or more approval criterion.
6. Accessory dwelling units, when allowed in the underlying zone, are permitted.
7. Community or Recreation Buildings. A Development may contain community
building(s) or recreation center(s) that are clearly incidental in use or size and
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 329
related to the dwelling units. Such buildings shall be located on the same parent
parcel of the development, and shall be commonly owned by the residents.
8. Existing Non-Conforming Structures. An existing attached or detached single
family dwelling that is incorporated in to a Development may be permitted to
remain, and at the discretion of the Planning Commission may be considered as
an existing nonconforming residence subject to all non-conforming structure
requirements within the CCT.
9. Architectural Theme. An architectural theme is required for all structures within
any Development. The theme shall be continued on all elevations for each
building, and onto the entire site (including but not limited to lighting, fencing,
accessory structures and signage) as is applicable based on the specific theme
chosen by the developer. For assurance of ongoing compliance, an Architectural
Review Committee (ARC) shall be created for each Development through the
CC&R’s for each Development. The ARC shall be formed for the purpose of
reviewing future changes and additions to structures including fencing and trim
within the development, which shall be self-regulating following the City
approval of each structure within the development, as stated within the CC&R’s.
10. Usable Open Space. All required open space within any planned development
shall be ‘usable’ as passive or active recreational land without sharing the
space as a combined use with non-recreational uses, including (but not limited
to) drainage retention areas that are fenced or otherwise not visual or usable
open space amenities.
g. Trash Enclosures. All developments within CLD’s that contain Multi-family
dwellings or Multi-family complexes shall provide centrally located trash collection
enclosures for the Multi-family dwellings or Multi-family complexes. Trash enclosures
shall be architecturally compatible in terms of color and materials with adjacent
residential units. Trash collection bins or carts within the enclosures shall be as approved
by the collection company.
19. Cottage Developments.
1. The purpose of a Cottage Development (COD) is as follows:
A. To provide a greater flexibility in development of land on sites that may be too
small or not desirable for a Planned Unit Development;
B. To provide housing types that respond to changing household sizes and ages
(e.g., retirees, single person households, small families);
C. To promote opportunities for ownership of dwelling units;
D. To encourage a creative approach in land development and for a consistent
and interesting architectural theme within each development;
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 330
E. To encourage creation of more usable open space for residents of the
development through flexibility in density and lot standards; and,
F. To provide guidelines to ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses.
2. Throughout section 19, the term “Development” shall mean a Cottage Development (COD).
3. The uses shown in Table D below are permitted in a residential Cottage Development.
4. Every COD is subject to land use review and approval as a Conditional Use (153.070).
Table D. Uses Permitted. The following uses are permitted in Cottage Developments:
LAND USE COMMENTS & REFERENCES
Accessory Structure Includes shed, storage bldgs., residential garages
Dwelling, Single family
Park (public or private) Playgrounds, recreation centers, pools, etc.
Parking Garage (public or private) Private only: common areas maintained by HOA
5. The following exceptions to City standards may be allowed through the COD approval process
without a variance:
A. Minimum lot sizes.
B. Yard setbacks, except perimeter yard requirements.
C. Permitted land uses.
D. Grid street spacing standards.
E. Street frontage requirements on public roads.
F. Connection to public utilities, subject to review and acceptance by City Engineering.
G. Landscaping requirements, as stated herein.
H. Solar setback standards (only on lots that are not along the northern border of the
development).
I. Street and right of way widths on non-grid streets.
J. Sidewalk placement and size standards.
K. Changes to an approved Plan, when the requested change is so minor that the City
Planner or designate determines that it would be appropriate for an administrative
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 331
decision. Examples of minor changes include, but are not limited to: (1) a reduction in
the overall number of lots, (2) minor architectural changes to approved buildings, (3)
changes to phases that do not impact public facilities or change the number of approved
phases, (4) changes that result in a reduction of impacts (i.e. reduced traffic flows), or (5)
changes that are required to protect or increase public safety.
6. Development Standards. CODs shall meet the following Standards unless otherwise specified.
In the case that these standards conflict with other standards of the Tillamook Zoning Code,
these standards shall take precedence:
A. Cottage Developments (CODs) have no minimum site size but must include a
minimum of 4 cottage units per development.
B. Densities: TABLE E:
ZONE DENSITIES (per net acre)
R-1 Not applicable (COD’s not allowed)
R-2 4 to 9 units/acre
R-3 4 to 10 units/acre
R-4 5 to 12 unites/acre
R-5 8 or more unites/acres
C. Design Requirements: TABLE F:
FEATURE STANDARD
Building Height 25 feet
Lot Area No minimum
Lot Width No minimum
Lot Depth No minimum
Floor Area 1000 s.f. or less (300 s.f. exempt for garage)
Open Space 500 s.f. per each dwelling unit
Setbacks
Perimeter
20’ when abutting an arterial or collector street (along
perimeter), underlying zone in all other cases. Setbacks to
common areas determined at the discretion of the Planning
Commission.
Front No minimum
Side (corner lot) No minimum, but 10’ required between buildings.
Side (non-corner lot) No minimum, but 10’ required between buildings.
Rear No minimum, but 10’ required between buildings.
Solar Northern perimeter only
Non-permeable surface area 60% of parent property (maximum)
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 332
Building coverage 50% of parent property (maximum)
Parking – residential 1.75 spaces per cottage dwelling unit
D. Open Space, Park, and Common Area.
1. “Open space” means land area which can be physically accessed and used by occupants
and users of the COD for scenic, landscaping, or open recreational purposes within the
development.
2. Open Space Land Area Requirements:
For all CODs, the required land area used as open space or common area shall:
a. Be a minimum of 500 square feet per cottage.
b. About 100% of the cottages in the development.
c. Have cottages abutting on at least 2 sides.
d. Cottages shall:
1. Be oriented around and have the main entry taken from the common
open space.
2. Be within 100 feet walking distance from the common open space.
3. Open Space – General Requirements.
a. Public and private roads shall not be considered as open space.
b. Development plans shall assure that natural features of the land are preserved and
landscaping is provided, or a finding shall be made by the Planning Commission that
preservation of significant natural feature(s) is not feasible.
c. The Planning Commission may require at its discretion the dedication of park land or
open space to the City.
d. Up to 10% of the required open space / common area / landscaped areas may be left
in a natural and non-irrigated state at the discretion of the Planning Commission;
however this shall not apply to any required landscaped screening or landscaped
strips abutting public or private roads. If the development has a significant natural
feature in excess of the 10% allowance, the Planning Commission may allow
additional natural feature open space credit.
e. Open space, common areas, and common structures shall be financially assured of
continued maintenance. A legal mechanism shall be provided which guarantees the
continued maintenance of such areas and structures.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 333
5. Landscaping & Street Trees. Street trees shall be placed adjacent to all public and
private roads within all types of Developments, as specified within Article IV of the
Tillamook Zoning Code. However, street trees along alleys and private internal
driveways are not required.
6. General Development Design Requirements.
a. All Development parking lots shall be screened from view from public or private
streets (excluding driveways of 20’ width or less), and from all residences by a
screen of no less than 3’ in height. Screening shall not exceed a height of 4’.
b. Parking lot screening shall be achieved by either landscaping or fencing, or a
combination of each.
c. All parking spaces shall be paved, and shall meet the parking space standards within
section 153/054 of the CCT, and all applicable code standards.
d. If detached parking structures are proposed, the following shall apply:
1. Pitched roofs are required on all parking structures, and shall be no less than a
4:12 pitch.
2. Paint color and building materials shall be consistent with the design of the
dwelling closest to the structure.
e. Usable Open Space. All required open space within any planned development
shall be ‘usable’ as passive or active recreational land without sharing the space as
a combined use with non-recreational uses, including (but not limited to) drainage
retention.
f. Yards. Private open space shall be a minimum of 300 s.f. of private, contiguous,
usable open space adjacent to each dwelling unit, for the exclusive use of the
cottage resident.
g. Porches. Cottages shall have a roofed porch at least 80 square feet in size with a
minimum dimension of eight feet on any side. Porches are not included within
floor area calculations.
h. Required Parking Distance from Cottages. All required parking for
Cottage Developments shall be located within 100 feet of the cottage that
it serves.
i. Accessory structures in cottage developments are limited to storage buildings that
may be up to 80% of the smallest cottage, and to parking structures or garages that
may contain up to 6 parking spaces on the interior. All accessory structures in
cottage developments shall have an architectural theme that matches the theme of
the cottages.
7. Trash Enclosures. Centralized Trash Enclosures may be required at the discretion of
the Planning Commission. If required, Trash Enclosures shall be architecturally
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 334
compatible in terms of color and materials with the cottage units. Trash collection bins
or carts shall be as approved by the collection company.
20.Termination of a PUD. A PUD may be terminated by action of the Planning Commission
subject to the following procedures:
a. If substantial construction or development of the PUD has not occurred or if no lots or
units therein have been sold, the PUD may be terminated by filing with the City a
written petition signed by the owner or owners who control a majority interest in the
land covered by the approved PUD. Upon receipt of a petition submitted by the PUD
owners, the Planning Commission shall consider the matter in open meeting and may
declare the PUD terminated. The Planning Commission's termination of a PUD shall
be evidenced by a Final Order declaring the same and, after the Final Order is signed,
the PUD shall be terminated and previous PUD Plan approvals shall be considered
void and of no further effect. Termination of a PUD shall in no way affect other land
use actions taken by the City which concern the PUD property.
b. If substantial construction or development of the PUD has occurred or if lots or
units within the PUD have been sold, the PUD may be terminated by filing with
the city a written petition signed by the owner or owners who control a majority
interest in the land covered by the approved PUD. Upon receipt of the petition, the
Planning Commission shall give public notice of the proposed PUD termination
and conduct a public hearing on the matter. The Planning Commission may declare
the PUD terminated if it concludes that the termination will not produce greater
than minimal harm to the public health, safety or general welfare. The Planning
Commission's termination of a PUD shall be evidenced by a Final Order declaring
the same and, after the Final Order is signed, the PUD shall be terminated and
previous PUD Plan approvals shall be considered void and of no further effect.
Termination of a PUD shall in no way affect other land use actions taken by the
City which concern the PUD property.
21. Monuments.
A. In addition to requirements of state law and other provisions of this Code, permanent monuments
of a type approved by the city shall be set in the following locations:
1. At each boundary corner of the subdivision, at the beginning and end of the property line
curves and at any other points required by the city.
2. At intersections of street center line tangents or offsets therefrom, and where such intersect
on private property, at the beginning and end of the center line curve or offsets therefrom.
B. Any required monument that is disturbed or destroyed before acceptance of all improvements
shall be replaced by the applicant.
C. Complete field notes, in a form satisfactory to the city, showing references, ties, locations,
elevations, and other necessary data relating to monuments and bench marks set in accordance
with the requirements of this Code shall be submitted to the city, to be retained by the city as a
permanent record.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 335
§153.073 SITE PLAN REVIEW
1. Purpose. The purpose of the Site Plan Review process is to bring under special review those
projects involving building design and the development of land where inappropriate development
may cause a conflict between uses in the same adjoining district by creating unhealthful or unsafe
conditions, and thereby adversely affecting the public health, safety, and general welfare.
2. Types of Development Requiring Site Plan Review Approval.
A. An administrative site plan review shall be conducted when plans are made in the R-0, CC,
N-C, H-C, L-I, G-I Zone District as described in 153.004(15).
B. A site plan review shall be conducted before the City Planning Commission when plans are
made in the R-0, P & S-P, C-C, N-C,H-C, L-I, G-I Zone District:
1. For all new developments, expansion and major modification of existing
developments
2. For expansion of an existing structure, which is greater than 50% of the existing
structure or greater than 10,000 square feet.
C. A site plan review shall be conducted in conjunction with any conditional use permit in any
zone district of the City of Tillamook.
4. Site Plan Review Requirements.
Planning Commission Authority. The Planning Commission shall approve, approve with
conditions or disapprove, the site plans for all buildings or structures in those zoning districts
where Site Plan Review is required, except those eligible for administrative review as listed in
this section.
5. Application for Site Plan Review. A request for site plan review may be initiated by a property
owner or authorized representative. The application shall be filed with the Planning Department,
accompanied by a filing fee as determined by the Tillamook City fees schedule, and by a written
statement addressing each of the Criteria and Standards as listed in this section. The applicant
shall also pay the cost of publication and notification as required.
One (1) copy of the site plan shall be submitted for preliminary approval, and a preapplication
conference needs to be scheduled, prior to acceptance of the application, as per §153.004 and
the following subsection.
6. Preliminary Site Plan Approval. A site plan for the total parcel shall be prepared and one (1)
copy shall be submitted to the City Planner for review, at the time a pre-application conference is
held. If, at the time of the pre-application conference, the City Planner finds that the site plan
meets all submittal requirements, the application shall be prepared for the Planning Commission
for review and a hearing, according to the relevant application procedures described in §153.004.
Additional materials may be requested that are essential to the proposed use, site or its
relationship to surrounding properties.
7. Site Plan Procedures. The site plan shall be drawn to scale and indicate the following:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 336
A. Site Plan to locate where appropriate:
1. Structures, both existing and proposed
2. Driveways
3. Landscaped areas
4. Off-Street vehicle and bicycle parking spaces
5. Points of egress and ingress, including on-site traffic movement
6. Loading areas
7. Utility service and drainage areas
8. Pedestrian pathways and internal circulation
9. Fences and walls
10. Relationship of site to abutting properties
B. Landscape Plan
1. Topography, existing grades, elevation and proposed grades
2. Existing trees
3. Species, size and location of plant materials
C. Architectural Drawings
1. Floor Plans
2. Any other improvements
3. Elevations (existing and proposed)
D. Exterior Surface Specifications
1. Type
2. Color
3. Texture
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 337
4. Elevations
5. Any other improvements
E. Exterior Lighting
1. Type
2. Height
3. Area of illumination
F. Sign Plan
1. Location
2. Size
3. Design
4. Material
5. Color
6. Method of illumination, if lighted
G. Traffic Capacity Plan
1. Points of egress and ingress, including on-site traffic movement
2. Off-street parking
3. A carrying capacity plan detailing trips and general traffic generated by the
business activity of full development.
4. Vision clearance areas
8. Criteria
A. All negative environmental and historical impacts have been mitigated;
B. All development, parking, signage, and utility standards have been met; and
C. There is adequate public utility capacity available (or can be made available by the
developer) to service the impacts of the development.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 338
9. Additional Materials for submittal.
A. Traffic Capacity Analysis*
1. The City Planner, or Planning Commission upon their review, may require a
proposed development to submit a detailed Traffic Capacity Plan.
2. The following requirements are to be dealt with as part of the total Site
Development Plan for high traffic generating developments adjacent to
highway:
a) The analysis shall include alternatives for access to the development from
highways, country roads, and city streets.
b) The analysis of alternative access should include:
1. Existing daily and P.M. peak hour counts by traffic movements at intersections
affected by generated traffic from the development.
2. Projected daily and P.M. peak hour volumes for these same intersections and proposed
access points when the development is in full service. This shall be shown by the use of
traffic flow diagrams.
3. A determination of the existing levels of service and projected levels of service at each
intersection and access points studies. These determinations shall be in conformance
with nationally accepted capacity manuals or equivalent manuals.
4. An analysis of the need for traffic signals. This should include a traffic warrant
computation based on the National Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
5. A complete analysis of the trip generation for the development, following the "1976
Institute of Transportation Engineer's Information Report" Trip Generation or the most
current information.
6. The recommendation made in the analysis should be specific, and should be based on a
minimum level of service "D" when the development is in full service. As an example, if
a traffic signal is recommended, the recommendation should include the type of signal
control and what movements should be signalized. If storage lanes for right and left turns
are needed, the recommendation should include the amount of storage needed. If several
intersections are involved for signalization, and an interconnect system is considered,
specific analysis should be made concerning progression of traffic between intersections.
7. The analysis should also include considerations for bicycle and pedestrian usage of the
development.
* Oregon Department of Transportation, Highway Division, "Minimum Requirements for Traffic Report"
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 339
B. Other Requirements
1. Other conditions found necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding
property, or neighborhood, or the city as a whole, may be imposed administratively
or by Planning Commission. These conditions may include, but not be limited to,
the following:
a) Development of a Preservation Plan for historic sites and structures;
b) Requiring fences, walls or landscape screening and/or buffering where
necessary to reduce noise, glare and maintain the property in a character in
keeping with the surrounding area;
c) Requiring landscaping and maintenance thereof;
d) Increasing street widths, controlling the location and number of vehicular
access points to the property for ingress/egress;
e) Requiring means of pedestrian/bicycle access pathways to serve the
property;
f) Increasing or limiting the number of off-street parking and loading spaces
required; surfacing and proper drainage of parking areas;
g) Limiting size, location and number of signs;
h) Limiting the location, coverage or height of buildings because of
obstructions to view and reduction of light and air to adjacent property;
i) Increasing, limiting, or prohibiting openings in sides of buildings or
structures;
j) Enclosure of storage areas and limitation of outside display and/or storage of
merchandise;
k) Requiring maintenance of grounds;
l) Regulating noise, vibration, fumes, etc.;
m) Regulating time for certain activities;
n) Establishing a time period within which the proposed use shall be
developed;
o) The requirement of a bond for removal of such use within a specified
period of time;
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 340
p) Requiring any future enlargement or alteration of the use be reviewed by the
Planning Commission and new conditions imposed;
q) Requiring specific lot size, yard dimensions, open spaces or buffer areas;
r) And such other conditions as will make possible the development of the city
in an orderly and efficient manner and in conformity with the intent and
purposes set forth in this section.
2. Any other such architectural or engineering data may be required by the City
Planner, or Planning Commission upon their review, to permit the necessary
findings that provisions of the Development Code are complied with.
10. Phased Site Plan Development. The Planning Commission shall approve a time schedule for
developing a site in phases over a period of time of one year, but in no case shall the total time
period for all phases be greater than three years without reapplying for site development review.
All of the following criteria shall be satisfied in order to approve a phased site development
review proposal:
A. All underground utilities are constructed during the initial phase of the development and the
remaining public facilities are constructed in conjunction with or prior to each phase.
B. The development and occupancy of any phase is not dependent on the use of temporary
public facilities. A temporary public facility is any facility not constructed to the applicable
city or district standard.
C. The phased development shall not result in requiring the city or other property owners to
construct public facilities that were required by an approved development proposal.
11. Final Site Plan Approval. Within 120 days of determination of completeness of the application,
after preliminary plan approval, the Planning Commission shall approve, approve with
conditions, or disapprove, the site plan. In approving the plan, the Planning Commission shall
find that all applicable provisions of this Development Code are complied with. The decision of
the Planning Commission shall be final unless appealed to the City Council.
12. Revisions of Site Plans. Revisions made by the applicant to an approved site plan shall be made
pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section. Where required Site Plan Approval has been
granted, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause a major modification or permit
the proposed construction, alteration, improvement or use in any manner that involves one or
more of the following:
A. A change in the type and/or location of access-ways, drives or parking areas affecting
offsite traffic;
B. An increase in the floor area proposed for non-residential use by more than 15% of the area
previously specified;
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 341
C. A reduction of more than 10% of the area reserved for common open space or
landscaping;
D. Increase in automobile parking spaces by more than 10%;
E. Proposals to add or increase lot coverage within an environmentally sensitive area or
areas subject to a potential hazard;
F. Changes that exceed 10 feet in the location of buildings, proposed streets, parking configuration,
utility easements, landscaping or other site improvements;
G. Change to a condition of approval, or change similar to these sections that could have a
detrimental impact on adjoining properties. The City Planner shall have discretion in
determining detrimental impacts warranting a major modification.
If the revision/modification does not involve one of the criteria listed above, it is considered a
minor modification and can be handled administratively.
13. Time Limitation for Site Plan Review and Expiration of approval.
A. Site plan approval shall be null and void after one (1) year, unless a building permit been issued
and substantial construction has taken place.
B. The site development review approval by the City Planning Commission shall lapse if:
1. Substantial construction of the approved plan has not been completed within the
agreed upon time period; or
2. Construction on the site is a departure from the approved plan.
C. The City Planner may, upon written request by the applicant, grant an extension of the approval
period not to exceed one year; provided, that:
1. No changes are made on the original site development review plan as approved by the
planning commission;
2. The applicant can show intent of initiating construction on the site within the one year
extension period; and
3. There have been no changes to the applicable comprehensive plan policies and Code
provisions on which the approval was based.
D. Notice of the decision shall be provided to the applicant.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 342
§153.074 NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
A structure or use lawfully occupying a site on the effective date of the original zoning Code
dated July 28, 1980, of or amendments thereto, which does not conform to the regulations for the
district in which it is located, shall be deemed to be a non-conforming structure or use.
1) DEFINITIONS:
(a) ALTERATION of a NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A partial change to
a structure, not involving enlargement of the external dimensions of the structure.
(b) ALTERATION of a NONCONFORMING USE: A change in the characteristics
of the use (for example, hours of operation; type of vehicle serviced) but not a change
in the use.
(c) EXPANSION: Any increase in any external dimension of a structure, or any
increase in land area devoted to a use.
(d) REPLACEMENT OF USE: The discontinuance of an existing use and
commencement of a new use.
(e) REPLACEMENT OF STRUCTURE: Removal that exceeds 80 percent of an
existing structure and placement of a new structure.
(g) 50% MARKET VALUE THRESHOLD: ALTERATIONS or EXPANSIONS within
any five- year period, of which equals or exceeds 100% of the market value of the
structure (as indicated by the records of the County Assessor) at the beginning of the
five-year period. The 50% MARKET VALUE THRESHOLD shall not apply to an
ALTERATION or EXPANSION for purposes of conformance with the Flood Hazard
Overlay Zone.
2) BURDEN OF PROOF: In matters relating to the continuation, alteration, expansion or replacement
of a nonconforming structure or use, the applicant bears the burden of proof for establishing:
(a) The current use or structure lawfully existed at the time the applicable zoning
requirement went into effect; and
(b) The level of use and/or dimensions of the structure that existed at the time the applicable
zoning requirement went into effect.
Standard evidence that a use or structure has been maintained over time may include dated documents
such as: building permits, land use approvals, development permits, other governmental permits,
utility bills, tax records, assessor records, loan statements, business license, directory listings,
published references or other documents deemed admissible by the Planner.
If the regulation, which rendered the structure or use nonconforming, was enacted more than 20 years
prior to the time of application, the applicant need only provide evidence or information pertaining to
the 20 years immediately previous to application.
As part of the application process, the Planner may require the applicant to submit a site survey or
similar information to assist in making these determinations.
3) Non-conforming uses and structures may be continued, subject to the following regulations:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 343
a. Routine maintenance and repairs, including elevation changes for flood requirement compliance,
may be performed on sites, the structure or use of which is non-conforming.
b. No non-conforming structure or use, shall be moved, altered or enlarged without permission of
the Planning Commission unless required by law or unless the moving, alteration or enlargement
will be performed in the elimination of the non-conformity.
c. No structure partially occupied by a non-conforming use shall be moved, altered or enlarged in
such a way as to permit the enlargement of the space occupied by the non-conforming use,
without permission of the Planning Commission.
d. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, alteration or expansion of a
NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE shall be allowed, if necessary, to comply with
any lawful requirement.
4) The Planning Commission may grant an application for an alteration, expansion or
replacement of a nonconforming structure or use, filed in accordance with the provisions of this
Code, only if the nonconforming structure or use is brought into conformance, or, on the basis of
the application and the evidence submitted, they make findings that support the following criteria:
(a) All proposed new construction will comply with all standards of the zone;
(b) The request will have no greater adverse impact on neighboring areas than the existing use or
structure when the current zoning went into effect, considering:
i. A comparison of existing use or structure with the proposed change using the following factors:
1) Noise, vibration, dust, odor, fumes, glare, or smoke detectable at the property line or off-site;
2) Numbers and kinds of vehicular trips to the site;
3) Amount and nature of outside storage, loading and parking;
4) Visual impact;
5) Hours of operation;
6) Effect on existing vegetation;
7) Effect on water drainage and water quality; and
8) Service or other benefit to the use or structure provides to the area.
ii. The character and history of the use and of development in the surrounding area. (c) The request
shall maintain a minimum separation of six feet between structures, and comply with clear vision
requirements; and
i. Either:
1. The nonconforming structure or use, including the proposed alteration/expansion,
preserves the rights of neighboring property owners to use and enjoy their land for legal
purposes; or
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 344
2. The applicant demonstrates that bringing the structure or use into compliance is
either physically impracticable or financially onerous, and that mitigation will be
implemented and maintained which will substantially offset the impact(s) to
neighboring property owners.
(ci) If a non-conforming use has been changed to a conforming use, or if the non-conforming
use of a building, structure, or premises ceases for the period of one (l) year or more, said use
shall be considered abandoned, and said building, structure or premises shall thereafter be used
only for uses permitted as a matter of right or as a conditional use in the district in which it is
located.
(cii) If a structure containing a non-conforming use is destroyed by any cause, it may be rebuilt
for that use subject to the requirements that, if the structure is not returned to that use within one
(1) year
from the date of destruction, a future use on the site shall conform to the Code.
(ciii) Nothing contained in this Code shall require any change in the plans, construction, altercation,
or designated use of a structure for which a valid permit exists prior to the adoption of this Code and
subsequent amendments thereto, except that if the designated use will be non-conforming, it shall be
considered a discontinued use if not in operation within one (1) year of the date of issuance of the
Zoning permit.
(civ) If an existing non-conforming use, or portion thereof not housed or enclosed within a
structure, occupies a portion of a lot or parcel of land on the effective date hereof, the area of such
use may not be expanded. Nor shall the use, or any part thereof, be moved to any other portion of
the property not theretofore regularly and actually occupied by such use. Notwithstanding the
preceding, this shall not apply where such increase in area is for the purpose of increasing an offstreet
parking or loading
facility to the area specified in this Code for the activity carried on in the property. This shall not be
construed as permitting unenclosed commercial activities where otherwise prohibited by this Code.
(c v) A building or structure lawfully occupying a site on the effective date of this Code of or
amendments thereto, which does not conform to the setback or coverage regulations for the
district in which it is located, shall be deemed to be a non-conforming structure and may be
continued, subject to the following regulations:
A. If a building or structure, in existence on the effective date of this Code and subject to any
yard, location or coverage restriction imposed by this Code, fails to comply with such
restriction, such building or structure may be enlarged or altered to the extent that such
alteration or enlargement does not itself encroach upon any required restriction.
B. If a non-conforming structure is destroyed by any cause other than a willful act by the
owner(s) or his agent, it may be rebuilt within the foundation and building outlines of that
pre-existing structure. This is subject to the requirement that, if destruction exceeds 50
percent of its assessed value as indicated by the records of the County Assessor and it is not
returned to use within (1) year, a future structure on the site shall conform to this Code.
The willful removal or destruction of the structure by the owner(s) or his agent does not
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 345
entitle the right to replace the structure to its original form and, hence, any new structure on
the property must conform to the lot requirements as specified for the applicable zoning
district.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 346
§153.075 VARIANCES
1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to assure that variances may be granted as provided in
this section where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and results inconsistent with
the general purposes of this Code may result from the strict application of certain provisions.
This section shall not be used to allow a use that is not permitted by this C ode for the district
in which the land is located. In granting a variance, the City may impose conditions similar to
those provided for conditional uses to protect the best interests of the surrounding property,
the neighborhood or the city as a whole.
2. Authorization to Grant or Deny Variances. The Planning Commission may authorize
variances from the requirements of the Code where it can be shown that, owing to special
and unusual circumstances related to a specific piece of property, the literal interpretation of
this
Code would cause an undue or particular hardship, except that no variance shall be granted to
allow the use of property for purposes not authorized within the district in which the proposed
use would be located.
In granting a variance, the City may attach conditions which it finds necessary to protect the
best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood and to otherwise achieve the
purposes of this Code. The conditions to an authorized variance shall also be a part of the
public record on the deed and be a part of the requirements for an issuance of a Zoning
Clearance permit.
3. Application. The property owner or his authorized agent may make application for a variance
from the provisions of this Code by filing an application, on a form and in a manner
prescribed by the City in §153.004, with the Planning Department at least forty days prior to
the meeting date the matter is intended to be considered.
Such application shall be accompanied by a legal description of the property, plans and
elevations necessary to show the proposed development, a filing fee in the amount established
by general resolution of the City Council, a map showing the subject property and surrounding
properties and current property owners within two hundred fifty feet of the property subject to
such variance application, a statement, plans and supportive evidence that all of the following
conditions in subsection 5 below exist.
4. Burden of Proof. In order for the City Planning Commission to grant a variance, all the
conditions and circumstances listed in subsections A, B, C and D of subsection 5 must be
found to exist. The specific findings by the Planning Commission in granting a variance must
be factual and supported by substantial evidence. The burden of producing substantial
evidence to support the requisite findings is on the applicant seeking the variance from the
provisions of this title. If no evidence is produced concerning any or all of the findings listed
in subsections A, B, C and D of subsection 5, the application must be denied based upon
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 347
improper or inadequate findings. All evidence produced must be recited in the findings for
approval of any variance application.
5. Criteria for Granting a Variance. No variance shall be granted unless it can be shown that
ALL of the following conditions exist:
A. Exceptional or extraordinary conditions apply to the property that do not apply generally to
other properties in the same district or vicinity, which conditions are a result of lot size or
shape, topography or other circumstances over which the applicant has no control.
B. The variance is necessary for the preservation of a property right of the applicant
substantially the same as is possessed by owners of other property in the same district or
vicinity.
C. The authorization of the variance shall not be materially detrimental to the purposes of this
Code, be injurious to property in the district or vicinity in which the property is located or be
otherwise detrimental to the objectives of any city development plan or policy.
D. The variance requested is the minimum variance from the provisions and standards of this
Code which will alleviate the hardship.
6. Before a variance is granted, the proposed variance shall be considered by the Planning
Commission at a public hearing, or administratively by staff. Notice of said hearing or
administrative action shall be provided as per §153.004 of this Code.
7. Action of the Planning Commission. The City Planning Commission shall make its findings
and conclusions available in writing within 10 days after the decision on the proposed
variance. Upon the filing of said order with the City Recorder, the order shall be in full force
and effect. An order denying the variance shall be entered and filed in a like manner, with the
necessary findings, where the planning commission, based on the standards specified herein,
determines that the variance should not be granted.
A. The Commission, at the time of a public hearing, or staff, in the case of an administrative
action, may attach conditions to an authorized variance, which it feels are necessary to
protect the public interest and carry out the purpose of this Code.
B. The conditions to an authorized variance shall also be part of the public record and be a part
of the requirements for an issuance of a building permit. The variance shall not be effective
if any such express condition is not fulfilled or is violated or if the activity of the applicant
exceeds any express limitation in the variance. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause
or permit the use of any property in violation of the express conditions or limitations of any
variance granted with respect to such property.
8. Appeal. Appeal of a decision made by the Planning Commission shall be filed and conducted
in accordance with §153.076.
9. The following type of variance application can be handled administratively:
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 348
A. Deviation from the minimum building setback of not more than twenty percent (20%).
B. Deviation from the building height limitation of not more than ten percent (10%)
C. Deviation from a residential accessory dwelling living area of not more than five percent
(5%).
D. Expansion of a conditional or nonconforming use by not more than twenty percent (20%) of
the gross building volume.
10. Time Limit on and Extension of Approval of a Variance.
A. Authorization of a variance shall be void after six months if:
1. A building permit has not been issued and substantial construction has not taken place;
or
2. Construction on the site is a departure from the approved plan.
B. The City Planner, in the case of an administrative action, or Planning Commission, may,
upon written request by the applicant, grant that authorization may be extended for an
additional six months; provided, that:
1. No changes are made on the original approved variance;
2. The applicant can show intent of initiating construction on the site within the six month
extension period; and
3. There have been no changes to the applicable comprehensive plan policies and Zoning
Code provisions on which the approval was based.
C. Notice of the decision regarding the extension shall be provided to the applicant.
11. Effect. No building or zoning permit shall be issued in any case where a variance is required
until fourteen days after the decision of the City Planning Commission is filed with the city
recorder, and then only in accordance with the terms and conditions of said approval. An appeal
from the action of the commission shall automatically stay the issuance of the building or other
permit until such appeal has been completed and the council has acted thereon.
12. Time Limitation. In the case where an application is denied by the planning commission, or
denied by the City Council on appeal from the planning commission, unless specifically stated
to be without prejudice, it shall not be eligible for resubmittal for the period of one year from
the date of said denial unless, in the opinion of the planning commission, new evidence is
submitted or conditions have changed to an extent that further consideration is warranted.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 349
§153.076 APPEALS, GENERAL
The Planning Commission shall have the power to hear appeals from administrative decisions, and
to declare the meaning and intent, and interpret the provisions of the Development Code, unless a
corresponding interpretation has been made by Resolution of the City Council. In thus resolving
ambiguities on appeal, the Planning Commission shall so interpret the Development Code as to
carry out Section 1, of this Section. In the event of an ambiguity in this Development Code
affecting enforcement thereof, the City Council shall have the power to hear and decide appeals
from Planning Commission interpretations, and to declare the meaning and intent, and interpret the
provisions of the Development Code. In thus resolving ambiguities on such appeal the City
Council shall so interpret the Code as to carry out Section 2, of this Section. Final action on an
application for a permit, limited land use decision, conditional use permit, variance, or zone
change, including resolution of all appeals, shall be taken by the governing body of the City within
120 days after the application is deemed complete (according to ORS 227.180).
1. Appeal to Planning Commission.
A. Any appeal from a decision of the administration, shall be based on a specific issue about
the criteria and/or standards raised in the administrative decision that pertains to this
Ordinance, and shall be filed with the Planning Commission within fourteen (14) days of
written notice (signed and mailed) of the administrative decision. The Commission shall
consider such appeal on the record and render its decision within sixty (60) days of the
receipt of the appeal. Any action of the Planning Commission interpreting any uncertainty
or ambiguity may be in the form of a final order, and shall be signed by the President or
presiding member of the Commission and filed with the City Recorder.
Notice of the appeal hearing shall be the same as that required for the original decision, but
shall include other interested parties who may testified during the original decision.
B. The action of the Planning Commission shall be final and an appeal shall not be heard by
the City Council if the appeal period has lapsed.
2. Appeal to City Council.
A. The appellant must be an interested party who has participated either orally or in writing in
previous Planning Commission proceedings pertaining to the decision under appeal. The
appeal must be made within fourteen (14) days of the written notice of decision of the
Planning Commission, in writing to the Tillamook City Council. All appeals shall be made
in writing, based on a specific issue about the criteria and/or standards raised during the
Planning Commission Hearing, dated and signed by the appellant. Such appeal shall be
filed with the City Recorder with the appropriate fee listed in §153.004 of this Ordinance
within fourteen (14) days after the written notice of decision of the Planning Commission.
The City Council shall consider such appeal and render its decision within sixty (60) days of
the receipt of the appeal. In no instance, however, shall this period extend the date of the
hearing and final action beyond 120 days from the date of the initial submission of a
complete application, unless voluntarily agreed to by the applicant. Notice of the appeal
hearing shall be the same as that required for the original decision, but shall include other
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 350
interested parties who testified during the original decision. B. City Council – Land Use
Hearings Procedures.
1) It shall be the duty of the City Council, upon receiving an application of Appeal of a
Decision by the Planning Commission, to receive and examine available information,
including Planning Commission transcripts per §153.004, and conduct a hearing on behalf
of the applicant or other interested party. Individual Council Members may tour the site at
any time prior to the Council rendering its decision, and must disclose exparte contact, but
there is no requirement that Council Members do so. The Mayor may call a special City
Council Meeting to tour the site should he/she determine a unique need exists due to site
characteristics or complexity of proposed development. A written decision will be rendered
within thirty (30) days of the hearing and will be considered final. In no case, however,
shall this decision and preparation of written findings extend beyond 120 days from the
date of initial submittal of a complete application (ORS 227.178).
2) Appeal Hearings shall be conducted de novo. The City Council shall review the record of
the prior proceeding(s), and may ask for clarification or additional information from the
participating parties as it relates to the record. Full disclosure of both parties of the issues
of concern must have been made at the staff or Planning Commission level.
3) The City Council shall establish and issue rules of procedures and standards for the
conduct of hearings.
4) The City Council may affirm, rescind, or amend the action of the Planning Commission
and may grant approval subject to conditions necessary to carry out the Comprehensive
Plan and the Zoning Code. The City Council may also remand the matter back to the
Planning Commission for additional information subject to the agreement of the
applicant to extend the 120-day review period.
5) The City Council shall make and enter findings from the record and conclusions thereof
which support its decision; and the findings and conclusions shall set forth and demonstrate
the manner in which the decision shall be carried out, as well as the implementation of the
goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Code, and other official
policies and objectives of the City.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 351
§153.077 REVOCATION OF PERMITS, PLANS OR VARIANCES
1. Revocation of Permits, Automatic if not used.
Any Planned Unit Development Permit, Conditional Use Permit, Home Occupation Permit, Change
of Use Permit, Site Plan Approval, or Variance granted in accordance with the terms of this Code
shall be deemed null and void if not used within one (1) year from the date of approval or such time
as specified by the Planning Commission. Said permit shall not be deemed used until the applicant
has actually obtained a building permit, and commenced construction there under.
2. Revocation for Non-Compliance with Conditions.
Any Planned Unit Development Permit, Conditional use Permit, Home Occupation Permit, Change of
Use Permit, Site Plan Approval, Variance or other land use action, as listed in this
Code, granted in accordance with the terms of this Code may be null and void if any of the
conditions or terms of such permit or variance are violated, or if any law or Code is violated in
connection therewith. If, after notice and hearing, a Planned Unit Development Permit is revoked for
a substantial violation of any of its conditions, the City Council may reconsider any zone change
granted in connection with the Planned Unit Development and restore the zoning existing prior to
such revocations, but any such proposed change of zone shall follow the procedures otherwise
specified for zone changes herein.
3. Public Hearing.
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on any proposed revocation after giving
written notice to the permittee and to other owners of property as set forth in §153.004. The
Planning Commission shall render its decision within forty-five days after the conclusion of the
hearing. In case the permittee is not satisfied with the action of the Commission, they may appeal
the Planning Commission decision to the City Council in the manner provided in §153.004 and
§153.076.
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 352
§153.099 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to enforce this Code All departments, officials
and public employees of the City of Tillamook City, vested with the duty or authority to issue permits
shall conform to the provisions of this Development Code and shall issue no permit, certificate, or
license for any use, building or purpose which violates or fails to comply with conditions or standards
imposed by this Development Code. Any permit, certificate or license issued in conflict with the
provisions of this Development Code, unintentionally or otherwise, shall be void.
1. Penalties for Violation. Unless otherwise indicated, any person, firm or corporation, whether as
principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the
provisions of this Development Code shall be found to have committed an offense. Any offense
under this chapter is classified as a violation punishable by a fine set by resolution.
2. Such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day during any portion of which any violation of this Development Code is committed or
continued by such a person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable as herein provided.
3. Injunctive Relief. The foregoing sanctions shall not be exclusive, and where the public health,
safety, morals, or general welfare will be better served thereby, the City Manager may institute
such proceedings for injunctive relief against a continuing violation as may be authorized by the
statutes of the State of Oregon. In the enforcement of provisions prohibiting nuisances caused
by odor, sound, vibration and the like, the City Manager may seek injunction against the specific
device, activity or practice causing the nuisance.
4. Evidence. In any prosecution for causing or maintaining any condition or use of, or activity on,
or constructing, moving or maintaining any structure on, any premises in violation of this
Development Code, a person in possession or control of the premises, as owner or lessee at the
time of the violation or continuance thereof, shall be presumed to be the person who
constructed, moved, caused or maintained the unlawful activity, use, condition or structure. This
presumption shall be rebuttable and either the City or the defendant in such prosecution shall
have the right to show that the offense was committed by some person other than, or in addition
to, an owner of lessee or other person in possession or control of the premises; but this shall not
be construed as relieving a person in possession and control of property from any duty imposed
upon him by this Development Code. For the purposes hereof, the person to whom the premises
are taxed according to the records of the Tillamook County Assessor shall be prima facie the
person in possession or control of the premises. Where premises on which the violation is
committed are commercial or industrial premises on which a sign is situated identifying the
commercial or industrial activity conducted thereon, or displaying the real or assumed business
name of a person or proprietor thereof, the same shall constitute prima facie evidence that the
person whose name is thus displayed is in possession or control of the premises as owner or
lessee, but this shall not be construed to relieve from responsibility any agent, manager,
employee or other person who actually committed the violation.
5. Abatement. Where, because of the absence of the responsible person, or persons from the City or
from the State, as the case may be, the courts of the City of Tillamook City or the State of Oregon
cannot secure effective jurisdiction over the person or persons responsible for the cause or
continuation of a structure or condition erected or maintained in violation of this Development Code,
[Rev. 06/05/2020:UH] 353
or where the City Council deems it important to the public interest that the unlawful structure or
condition be removed or corrected without delay, the City Council may, after notice and hearing,
order the removal of the unlawful structure or condition and, if such removal or correction is not
effected within the time prescribed in the order, the City Manager shall cause such abatement, going
upon the premises with such men or equipment as may be necessary and the City Council shall
thereafter by Code assess the cost of abatement against the real property. The lien of the assessment
shall be enforced in the same manner as in the case of street improvement liens. Notice of hearing
shall be sufficient if give thirty (30) days in advance of the hearing, either by personal delivery or by
mailing the same to the last known address of the owner of the property as shown by the County
Assessor's records. The order shall be served upon the owner or responsible person in the manner
prescribed for the notice of hearing, and the owner or responsible person shall have such period of
time after service of the order, but less than thirty (30) days, as the City Council may deem to be
reasonably necessary to accomplish the requirements of the order. The notice of hearing and the
abatement order shall contain a notice to the property owner, or other person served, that the City of
Tillamook City shall not be responsible for the condition or storage of the component parts of, or
personal property situated within, the structure following abatement by the City.
The remedy of abatement shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the other remedies
prescribed in this section.
1
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
I. ELECTIONS
II. FRANCHISES, CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
III. PUBLIC WAYS; DEDICATIONS AND VACATIONS
IV. SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
V. ANNEXATIONS
VI. ZONING MAP CHANGES
VII. MISCELLANEOUS
Tillamook - Table of Special Ordinances
2
3
TABLE I: ELECTIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed 1977 Code Description
608 6-3-1946 Spec. Ord. List B Charter amendment, bond issue (sewers)
620 7-2-1947 Spec. Ord. List B Charter amendment, providing for
establishment of a City Manager plan of
government
639 3-21-1949 Spec. Ord. List B Charter amendment, bond issue (streets)
646 9-6-1949 Spec. Ord. List B Charter amendment, bond issue (streets)
655 4-17-1950 Spec. Ord. List B Charter amendment, prohibit right of appeal
in minor offenses, abolishing Office of
Treasurer and combining duties with
Recorder
658 5-1-1950 Spec. Ord. List B Charter amendment, bond issue (streets)
706 2-4-1957 Spec. Ord. List B Charter amendment
777 10-6-1966 Spec. Ord. List B Charter amendment, Article XVIII
793 10-21-1968 Spec. Ord. List B Revenue bonds for sewer improvements
847 12-29-1975 Spec. Ord. List B Charter amendment, Article IV, 1a, 1b, 1c
[defeated]
851 5-17-1976 Spec. Ord. List B Charter amendment, bond issue (sewers)
852 7-6-1976 Spec. Ord. List B Charter amendment, Article IV, 1a, 1b, 1c
856 1-3-1977 Spec. Ord. List B Firefighters tax levy
902 - - Spec. Ord. List B Annexation and construction of planned unit
development
952 4-16-1979 Spec. Ord. List B Charter amendment, Article XX
4
5
TABLE II: FRANCHISES, CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed 1977 Code Description
28 11-14-1891 Spec. Ord. List C Telegraph franchise between Bay City and
Tillamook Telegraph (indefinite term)
144 - - Spec. Ord. List C Electricity franchise with Clark E. Hadley, for
99 years
305 12-6-1915 9-1 Grant permission to Standard Oil Company to
locate, operate and maintain buildings and tanks
for storage and distribution of petroleum and
products (no date)
389 3-22-1920 9-2 Grant permission to Union Oil Company of
California to maintain warehouses, tanks for
distribution of petroleum and its products (no
date)
602 5-15-1945 Spec. Ord. List C Spur line permit for Southern Pacific RR
(indefinite term)
772 9-20-1965 Spec. Ord. List C Railroad franchise for Southern Pacific RR
(indefinite term)
1147 7-22-1996 B Loan contract with Oregon Economic
Development Department
1179 11-4-2002 B Amending Ordinance 1043, Urban Growth
Management Agreement
1203 11-21-2005 B Telecommunications franchise to United
Telephone Company of the Northwest, d.b.a.
Sprint (ten years)
Tillamook - Table of Special Ordinances
6
Ord. No. Date Passed 1977 Code Description
1260 12-21-2011 Intergovernmental agreement with Tillamook
County for urban growth management to
provide for future intergovernmental planning
and regulatory action
1281 8-5-2013 Telecommunications franchise to CoastCom,
Inc. (ten years)
489 7-16-2014 Intergovernmental Agreement with Tillamook
County for Building Inspection Services
(Agreement file--no expiration date—either
party may terminate with 180 day notice)
1306 1-13-2016 Cable Services Franchise Agreement Between
Falcon Telecable, d.b.a. Charter
Communications, a California Limited
Partnership, and the City of Tillamook (expires
1-13-2026)
1319 9-19-2016 Lightspeed Networks, Inc. Franchise Agreement
to construct, operate, and maintain
telecommunications network within the City of
Tillamook (expires 9-19-2026, renewable
without changes until 9-19-2036)
1321 11-21-2016 City of Tillamook and Tillamook People’s
Utility District Franchise Agreement (expires
11-21-2021, six-month extension to
renew/renegotiate)
1331 11-6-2017 Solid Waste Management and Franchise
Ordinance for the City of Tillamook with City
Sanitary Service
7
TABLE III: PUBLIC WAYS; DEDICATIONS AND VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed 1977 Code Description
618 5-5-1947 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating middle Block 1, Park Addition
618a 6-16-1947 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating alley Block 1, Park Addition
647 8-9-1949 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating portion Fifth Avenue West, Stillwell’s
Addition
702 8-6-1956 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating alley Blocks 1 and 2, Parkway Manor
Addition
714 8-21-1958 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating Cedar Avenue, between Blocks 5 and 7,
Coats Subdivision; also portion of Dogwood
Avenue, Block 7
746 10-3-1960 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating alley Lots 2 and 3, Block 1, First
Addition
751 5-1-1961 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating alley Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, Block 5,
Tillamook Addition
756 7-2-1962 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating alley Eleventh and Twelfth Streets,
Block 7, Norton’s Addition
759 12-17-1962 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating portion of Hemlock Avenue
775 4-4-1966 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating portion of Twelfth Street
784 12-18-1967 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating portion of Eighth Street
787 2-19-1963 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating alley Block 2, Stillwell’s Addition
819 1-15-1973 Spec. Ord. List D Vacation (unnamed)
821 3-19-1973 Spec. Ord. List D Amends Ordinance 775
Tillamook - Table of Special Ordinances
8
Ord. No. Date Passed 1977 Code Description
825 3-18-1974 Spec. Ord. List D Amends Ordinance 775
826 6-17-1974 Spec. Ord. List D Amends Ordinance 775
831 1-20-1975 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating portion plat of Hathaway Meade Acres
876 4-11-1977 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating alley Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, Block 8,
Goodspeed’s Second Addition
954 5-21-1979 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating portion of Fir Avenue lying northerly of
Front Street
954 5-22-1979 Spec. Ord. List D Vacation of portion of Fir Avenue lying northerly
of Front Street
962 10-2-1979 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating alley Block 5, Tillamook Addition
963 10-15-1979 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating portion of Tenth Street lying east of
Miller Avenue
964 10-15-1979 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating alley Block 4, Norton’s Addition
999 8-3-1981 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating portion of Grove Avenue lying northerly
of Front Street
1025 11-15-1982 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating portion of Nestucca Avenue
1036 10-18-1983 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating easterly one foot of Stillwell Avenue
1068 4-21-1986 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating portion of alley between Fifth and Sixth
Streets and Douglas and Elm Avenue
1082 12-21-1987 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating portion of Eighth Street lying east of the
east right-of-way line of Park Avenue
1083 12-21-1987 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating portion of Laurel Avenue lying between
Blocks 29 and 30 of Thayer’s Third Addition
1105 5-7-1990 Spec. Ord. List D Vacating southerly 100 feet lying between Lot 5,
Block 29 and Lot 8, Block 48 of the Thayer’s
Addition
Public Ways; Dedications and Vacations
9
Ord. No. Date Passed 1977 Code Description
1132 9-19-1994 B Vacating an alley within Block 8 of Norton’s
Addition
1133 10-3-1994 B Vacating an alley within Block 2 of Maple Grove
Addition
1134 10-17-1994 B Vacating 20 feet of right-of-way on Douglas
Avenue between Front and First Streets
1141 9-5-1995 B Vacating a portion of Sixth Street adjacent to Tax
Lot 12600
1151 2-3-1997 B Vacating Ash Avenue between Second Street and
Third Street
1163 1-2-2001 B Vacating a street/alley within Block 2, Park
Addition
1181 1-6-2003 B Vacating an alley within Block 4, Park Addition
1191 4-19-2004 B Vacating a portion of Fifth Street, as described
1200 2-22-2005 B Vacating a portion of Ivy Avenue south of the
right-of-way of Third Street and north of the north
right-of-way of Fourth Street, McDermott’s
Addition
1235 7-21-2008 B Vacating an alley within Block 3, Tillamook
Addition
1247 3-1-2010 B Renaming Marine Park to Sue H. Elmore Park
1255 3-7-2011 B Vacating a portion of Fifth Street, as described
1258 9-19-2011 B Vacating an alley within Block 3 of Maple Grove
Addition
1259 10-3-2011 B Naming the right-of-way north of Hoquarton
Slough, south of Wilson River and the city limits
line, as North Main Avenue
Tillamook - Table of Special Ordinances
10
Ord. No. Date Passed 1977 Code Description
1268 6-26-2012 Vacation of a portion of Second Street west of
Birch Avenue, east of Ash Avenue between
Blocks 3 and 10 of the Second Stillwell Addition
and a portion of Ash Avenue extending a distance
of approximately 270 feet north of Second Street
west of Block 3 of the Second Stillwell Addition
1307 1-19-2016 Vacating Grove Avenue, between
First Street and Front Street, and between Block 3
and Block 4 of the Town of Lincoln, now the City
of Tillamook, Tillamook County, Oregon
1310A 3-7-2016 Vacating a portion of Cedar Avenue and a portion
of Elm Avenue
1323 11-21-2016 Vacation of right of way between Pacific Avenue
and Miller Avenue (Pursuant to MOU signed
April 20, 2015 for vacation and land-swap)
11
TABLE IV: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed 1977 Code Description
713 7-13-1958 Spec. Ord. List E Sewer
1034 9-6-1983 Spec. Ord. List E Sewer
1131 7-18-1994 B Creating Local Improvement District (LID) 70,
curbs and sidewalks
1139 5-1-1995 B Creating LID 71, curbs and sidewalks
12
13
TABLE V: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed 1977 Code Description
675 12-1-1952 Spec. Ord. List F High school property
692 12-19-1955 Spec. Ord. List F Hathaway Meade area
694 2-6-1956 Spec. Ord. List F Hathaway Meade area
758 11-5-1962 Spec. Ord. List F Hathaway Meade area - jurisdiction over public
ways
824 2-19-1974 Spec. Ord. List F Portion Goodspeed’s Park Addition
827 10-7-1974 Spec. Ord. List F Property north of Twelfth Street
828 11-4-1974 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds
880 4-18-1977 Spec. Ord. List F Portion Meadowlark Estates, hearing
920 4-17-1978 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds, hearing
921 5-1-1978 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds, hearing
922 6-5-1978 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds
923 6-19-1978 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds
928 9-18-1978 Spec. Ord. List F Northeast corner of Twelfth Street and Evergreen
Drive; large parking area and Ace Hardware
building; hearing
930 10-2-1978 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds, withdrawal
933 11-20-1978 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds
934 11-20-1978 Spec. Ord. List F Northeast corner of Twelfth Street
Tillamook - Table of Special Ordinances
14
Ord. No. Date Passed 1977 Code Description
935 11-6-1978 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds
939 1-2-1979 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds
940 1-2-1979 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds, hearing
941 1-2-1979 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds, withdrawal
946 2-20-1979 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds, withdrawal
948 2-20-1979 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds
953 5-21-1979 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds, withdrawal
967 12-17-1979 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds, hearing
968 3-17-1980 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds
987 12-1-1980 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds, hearing
1012 6-21-1982 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds
1017 9-7-1982 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds, withdrawal
1018 9-7-1982 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds, hearing
1023 11-1-1982 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds
1026 12-20-1982 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds, withdrawal
1035 10-3-1983 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds, hearing
1037 11-7-1983 Spec. Ord. List F United Methodist Church
1045 4-2-1984 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds, withdrawal
1046 4-2-1984 Spec. Ord. List F Metes and bounds, withdrawal
1067 3-17-1986 Spec. Ord. List F Amends Ordinance 1037
1084 2-2-1988 Spec. Ord. List F United Methodist Church
15
Ord. No. Date Passed 1977 Code Description
1100 1-16-1990 Spec. Ord. List F Shilo Inn, Phase 2
1104 4-16-1990 Shilo Inn
1108 9-17-1990 Spec. Ord. List F East Third Street
1110 9-17-1990 Spec. Ord. List F West Third Street
1138 5-1-1995 B Annexing approximately eight acres west of
Highway 101, between Dougherty and Hall
Sloughs, metes and bounds
1199 2-7-2005 B Annexing 76 tax lots, being 123.44 acres, as
identified
1248 3-15-2010 B Annexing 18 tax lots, being 43.53 acres, as
identified
1261 12-5-2011 Annexing properties located in Sections 28 and
29, Township 1 South, Range 9 West
1299 1-20-2015 Annexation of Territory (Isaland Annexation)
1300 3-2-2015 Annexation of Miscellaneous Properties by Triple
Majority Rule
1308 3-7-2016 Annexing enclosed territories, as identified
16
17
TABLE VI: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1050 5-21-1984 Rezoning Lots 3-12 of Block 2 and all of Block 3 in
the Maple Gove Addition from C-C Central
Commercial to R-O Residential
1064 7-15-1985 Rezoning Tax Lots 3400, 3700, 3800, 3900, 4000
and 4100 of 1S930DA from R-5.0 Single Family
Duplex to R-O Residential Office
1081 7-6-1987 Rezoning Tax Lot 200 of 1SO 29 from I-L Light
Industrial to R-O Residential Office
1137 5-1-1995 Rezoning eight acres adjacent to Main Avenue from
County Farm (F-1) to City Highway Commercial
(C-H); amending Urban Growth Boundary
1148 10-7-1996 Rezoning 8.54 acres, being Parcel 2 of Partition Plat
1995-43, from Public Semi-Public (P&S-P) to
Multi-Family Residential (R-O)
1149 12-2-1996 Rezoning ten acres, being Parcel 1 of Partition Plat
1995-43, from Public Semi-Public (P&S-P) to
Multi-Family Residential (R-O)
1210 5-15-2006 Rezoning the AArmory Site,@ Tax Lots 7800 and
7801 of Map #1S 10W 25AD, from Public
Semi-Public (P&S-P) to Central Commercial (C-C)
1218 5-7-2007 Rezoning the AOld Library,@ Tax Lot 9400 of Map
#1S 10W 25AD, from Public Semi-Public (P&S-P)
to Central Commercial (C-C)
1224 9-17-2007 Rezoning Tax Lot 900 of Map #1S 10 25AC from
Single-Family Residential (R-7.5) to Light Industrial
(I-L)
Tillamook - Table of Special Ordinances
18
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1231 4-7-2008 Rezoning Tax Lot 600 of Map #1S 9W 30BB, Lot
1000 of Map #1S 10W 24D, Lot 200 of Map
#1S 10W 25AA, Lots 300 and 301 of Map
#1S 10W 25AA from Highway Commercial (C-H)
to Open Space (OS); and rezoning Tax Lot 200TC of
Map #1S 9W 30BC from Central Commercial (C-C)
to Open Space (OS)
1299 1-20-2015 Annexation of Territory into the City Limits of
Tillamook (Island Annexation)
1300 3-2-2015 Annexation of Miscellaneous Properties into the City
Limits of Tillamook by Triple Majority Rule
1328 6-5-2017 Re-Zoning for Multi-Family Residential/Workforce
Housing
Miscellaneous
19
TABLE VII: MISCELLANEOUS
Ord. No. Date Passed 1977 Code Description
245 5-29-1912 Spec. Ord. List H Creation of Sewer District No. 1
581 9-15-1941 Spec. Ord. List H Changing names of certain streets and avenues
715 3-16-1959 Spec. Ord. List H Naming of avenues and numbering of buildings in
annexed area
745 7-5-1960 Spec. Ord. List H Amends Ordinance 715
749 1-3-1961 Spec. Ord. List H Creation of Sewer District No. 36
834 5-5-1975 Spec. Ord. List H Acquiring of property for City Hall and off-street
parking
835 5-5-1975 Spec. Ord. List H Acquiring of property for City Hall and off-street
parking
960 8-20-1979 Spec. Ord. List H Sewer system improvements
1011 6-21-1982 Spec. Ord. List H Sewer system improvements
1019 9-7-1982 Spec. Ord. List H Sewer system improvements
1187 11-3-2003 Transportation System Plan Adopted
1204 11-21-2005 Storm Water Drainage Master Plan
1208 4-17-2006 Transportation System Plan Amended
1215 11-20-2006 Urban Renewal Plan, Adopted
1243 11-16-2009 Urban Renewal Plan, Amended
1270 10-15-2012 Tillamook Comprehensive Plan (Repealed Prior)
1270 7-15-2013 Amends the Comprehensive Plan EOA for the
Tillamook Region
1287 4-7-2014 Moratorium on Medical Marijuana Dispensaries
1289 5-5-2014 Codification Acceptance and Incorporation of
New Legislation, Amends Ordinance 893
1312 5-16-2016 Amending the Tillamook Comprehensive Plan
1313 5-16-2016 Adopting the Hoquarton Waterfront Plan,
Amending the Tillamook Comprehensive Plan
1316 7-5-2016 Adopting the Hoquarton Waterfront Overlay
District
1318 9-6-2016 Amending the Tillamook Comprehensive Plan
1322 1-17-2017 Amending the Hoquarton Waterfront Plan;
Amending the City of Tillamook Comprehensive
Plan
1330 8-24-2017 Amending the Hoquarton Waterfront Plan
1348 7-1-2019 Adopting the City of Tillamook Transporation
System Plan, Repeals Ords.1187 & 1208
Tillamook - Table of Special Ordinances
20

1
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Oregon Revised Statutes
References to 1977 Code
References to Ordinances
2 Tillamook - Parallel References
3
REFERENCES TO OREGON REVISED STATUTES
O.R.S. Section Code Section
34.010 through 34.100 35.158, 52.87
35.500 through 35.530 151.03
88.010 et seq. 130.60
Ch. 92 153.153
92.010(6) 153.004
92.080 153.004
93.740 130.61
105.580 130.60
105.585 130.61
133.537 130.59
Ch. 153 10.19
163.305 112.05
Ch. 167 112.65, 153.004
167.002 through 167.027 112.20
167.060 to 167.090 153.004
Ch. 171 153.127
Ch. 181 32.16
181.555 32.16
181.555(3) 32.16
181.557 32.16
192.410 10.18
Ch. 197 Ch. 33, 33.45
197.660 through 197.670 153.056 - 153.058
Ch. 209 153.153, 153.155
221.230 33.07
222.170(1) 153.035
223.297 to 223.314 52.087
223.387 through 223.485 153.004
223.405 to 223.485 35.100
223.505 to 223.650 35.110
4 Tillamook - Parallel References
O.R.S. Section Code Section
Ch. 227 153.067
227.020 153.004
227.178 153.244, 153.367
227.180 153.365
227.350 153.004
243.650 et seq. 34.02
243.676 34.07
243.682 34.08
243.686 34.05
244.020 30.24
271.080 through 271.230 153.034
271.080(1) 153.034
271.080(2) 153.034
271.300 through 271.360 153.034
Ch. 287A 33.31
310.140 et seq. 35.112, 35.162
310.140 35.091
319.210 35.058
319.300 35.064
321.005 35.066
443.400 153.004
448.315 51.20
Ch. 523 153.127
454.225 52.054
454.605 153.127
454.745 153.127
455.446 153.069
455.447 153.069
Ch. 457 151.03
457.010 32.03
457.035 32.03
457.045(2) 32.03
457.115 151.03
Ch. 459 50.02, 50.05
459.005 50.03
459.015 50.01, 50.02
459.085 50.04, 50.11
459.386 50.03
Ch. 459A 50.02, 50.05
459A.085 50.01, 50.09
459A.085(6)(a) 50.09
466.005 50.03
References to Oregon Revised Statutes 5
O.R.S. Section Code Section
Ch. 475 112.20
475.005 111.026
475.005(15) 132.01
475.005(16) 132.01
475.864(3),(4) 132.01
480.110 to 480.165 130.11
662.405 to 662.455 34.11
806.010 72.072
807.010 72.072
811.175 72.072
811.182 72.072
813.010 72.072
819.180(2) 72.060
Ch. 825 153.127
6 Tillamook - Parallel References
7
REFERENCES TO 1977 CODE
1977 Code Section 2013 Code Section
1-1 31.02
1-2 10.99
1-5 32.01
1-6 31.01
1-7 32.15
1-11 33.25 - 33.31
1-13 34.01 - 34.15
2-6 35.130 - 35.134
3-4 51.01, 51.02
3-6 52.015 - 52.020, 52.050 - 52.060, 52.999
3-7 52.035 - 52.039, 52.999
4-1 50.30 - 50.36, 50.99
4-5 51.15 - 51.20, 51.99
4-13 90.01 - 90.14, 90.99
4-20 132.01 - 132.04, 132.99
5-10 70.02, 70.99
6-3 111.080, 111.081, 111.999
6-5 111.045 - 111.047, 111.999
6-7 113.20 - 113.38, 113.99
6-11 111.020 - 111.029, 111.999
6-12 114.01 - 114.04, 114.99
6-13 35.015 - 35.032, 35.999
6-17 110.030 - 110.044, 110.999
6-21 35.045 - 35.075, 35.999
7-1 150.02, 150.99
7-5 150.03, 150.99
8 Tillamook - Parallel References
1977 Code Section 2013 Code Section
8-2 151.05, 151.99
8-4 152.001 - 152.004, 152.015 - 152.024, 152.040
- 152.045, 152.060 - 152.063, 152.075 -
152.081, 152.095 - 152.102, 152.999
8-6 151.15 - 151.19
8-8 152.115 - 152.122, 152.999
8-9 151.06, 151.99
9-1 TSO II
9-2 TSO II
Special Ordinance List, B TSO I
Special Ordinance List, C TSO II
Special Ordinance List, D TSO III
Special Ordinance List, E TSO IV
Special Ordinance List, F TSO V
Special Ordinance List, H TSO VII
9
REFERENCE TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
144 - - TSO II
902 - - TSO I
1114 - - 151.01
28 11-14-1891 TSO II
245 5-29-1912 TSO VII
305 12-6-1915 TSO II
389 3-22-1920 TSO II
659 6-19-1930 111.067
554 10-16-1939 111.080, 111.081, 111.999
567 6-2-1941 31.02
581 9-15-1941 TSO VII
602 5-15-1945 TSO II
603 5-21-1945 50.30 - 50.34, 50.99
608 6-3-1946 TSO I
618 5-5-1947 TSO III
618a 6-16-1947 TSO III
620 7-2-1947 TSO I
630 10-18-1948 111.045 - 111.047, 111.999
639 3-21-1949 TSO I
647 8-9-1949 TSO III
646 9-6-1949 TSO I
648 10-3-1949 113.20 - 113.38, 113.99
655 4-17-1950 TSO I
658 5-1-1950 TSO I
675 12-1-1952 TSO V
692 12-19-1955 TSO V
694 2-6-1956 TSO V
702 8-6-1956 TSO III
10 Tillamook - Parallel References
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
701 9-17-1956 Ch. 73 Sched. III
706 2-4-1957 TSO I
710 11-18-1957 Ch. 73 Scheds. I, II
713 7-13-1958 TSO IV
714 8-21-1958 TSO III
715 3-16-1959 TSO VII
719 8-3-1959 31.01
721 8-3-1959 33.06, 33.07
723 8-3-1959 50.35, 50.36
745 7-5-1960 TSO VII
746 10-3-1960 TSO III
749 1-3-1961 TSO VII
751 5-1-1961 TSO III
755 2-19-1962 32.15
756 7-2-1962 TSO III
758 11-5-1962 TSO V
759 12-17-1962 TSO III
787 2-19-1963 TSO III
772 9-20-1965 TSO II
775 4-4-1966 TSO III
777 10-6-1966 TSO I
780 3-20-1967 51.15 - 51.20, 51.99
784 12-18-1967 TSO III
793 10-21-1968 TSO I
819 1-15-1973 TSO III
821 3-19-1973 TSO III
824 2-19-1974 TSO V
825 3-18-1974 TSO III
826 6-17-1974 TSO III
827 10-7-1974 TSO V
828 11-4-1974 TSO V
831 1-20-1975 TSO III
834 5-5-1975 TSO VII
835 5-5-1975 TSO VII
836 5-19-1975 33.25 - 33.31
842 11-3-1975 10.99
847 12-29-1975 TSO I
849 5-15-1976 34.01 - 34.15
851 5-17-1976 TSO I
Reference to Ordinances 11
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
852 7-6-1976 TSO I
855 1-3-1977 111.020 - 111.029, 111.999
856 1-3-1977 TSO I
859 2-14-1977 33.06
870 3-28-1977 111.066, 111.999
871 3-28-1977 111.046, 111.047, 111.999
874 3-28-1977 111.999
876 4-11-1977 TSO III
877 4-11-1977 51.01, 51.02
879 4-11-1977 Ch. 73 Scheds. I, III
880 4-18-1977 TSO V
886 4-25-1977 51.20
890 5-9-1977 114.01 - 114.04, 114.99
893 5-23-1977 35.015 - 35.027, 35.029 - 35.032, 35.999
895 5-23-1977 50.30 - 50.36, 50.99
898 5-23-1977 113.25, 113.99
901 8-1-1977 35.028
910 12-5-1977 152.001 - 152.004, 152.015 - 152.024,
152.040 - 152.045, 152.060 - 152.063,
152.075 - 152.081, 152.095 - 152.102,
152.999
911 12-5-1977 35.130 - 35.134
920 4-17-1978 TSO V
921 5-1-1978 TSO V
922 6-5-1978 TSO V
923 6-19-1978 TSO V
926 8-7-1978 52.015 - 52.020, 52.050 - 52.060, 52.999
928 9-18-1978 TSO V
930 10-2-1978 TSO V
935 11-6-1978 TSO V
933 11-20-1978 TSO V
934 11-20-1978 TSO V
938 1-2-1979 34.03, 34.10, 34.11, 34.13
939 1-2-1979 TSO V
12 Tillamook - Parallel References
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
940 1-2-1979 TSO V
941 1-2-1979 TSO V
946 2-20-1979 TSO V
948 2-20-1979 TSO V
952 4-16-1979 TSO I
953 5-21-1979 TSO V
954 5-21-1979 TSO III
954 5-22-1979 TSO III
959 7-16-1979 52.018, 52.059, 52.999
960 8-20-1979 TSO VII
962 10-2-1979 TSO III
963 10-15-1979 TSO III
964 10-15-1979 TSO III
967 12-17-1979 TSO V
968 3-17-1980 TSO V
969 3-17-1980 52.035 - 52.039, 52.999
971 5-5-1980 151.15 - 151.19
972 6-16-1980 114.03
975 7-7-1980 111.028, 111.029
977 7-21-1980 52.058, 52.059
979 7-28-1980 153.001 - 153.004, 153.015 - 153.018,
153.030 - 153.044, 153.055 - 153.061,
153.063, 153.066, 153.067, 153.080 -
153.082, 153.095 - 153.106, 153.150 -
153.157, 153.170 - 153.179, 153.190 -
153.202, 153.215 - 153.226, 153.240 -
153.250, 153.265 - 153.280, 153.295 -
153.299, 153.310 - 153.319, 153.345 -
153.351, 153.365 - 153.367, 153.380 -
153.382, 153.395 - 153.401, 153.415 -
153.418, 153.999
984 9-15-1980 110.030 - 110.044, 110.999
987 12-1-1980 TSO V
988 1-19-1981 153.017
989 2-3-1981 111.026
993 4-20-1981 114.03
994 5-4-1981 111.022, 111.023, 111.027, 111.028
999 8-3-1981 TSO III
1010 5-3-1982 153.365 - 153.367
1011 6-21-1982 TSO VII
Reference to Ordinances 13
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
1012 6-21-1982 TSO V
1014 7-19-1982 35.045 - 35.075, 35.999
1016 8-2-1982 114.03
1017 9-7-1982 TSO V
1018 9-7-1982 TSO V
1019 9-7-1982 TSO VII
1023 11-1-1982 TSO V
1025 11-15-1982 TSO III
1026 12-20-1982 TSO V
1027 1-17-1983 111.024 - 111.026
1028 4-4-1983 33.07
1029 4-4-1983 152.115 - 152.122, 152.999
1030 4-18-1983 52.999
1033 8-1-1983 153.004, 153.099, 153.100
1034 9-6-1983 TSO IV
1035 10-3-1983 TSO V
1036 10-18-1983 TSO III
1037 11-7-1983 TSO V
1038 11-21-1983 153.030 - 153.044, 153.056 - 153.059,
153.097, 153.100, 153.226, 153.299
1041 1-3-1984 153.100
1042 2-7-1984 111.028
1043 2-7-1984 153.080 - 153.082
1044 3-5-1984 153.004, 153.015, 153.103, 153.104, 153.244
1045 4-2-1984 TSO V
1046 4-2-1984 TSO V
1047 4-2-1984 52.018, 52.999
1049 5-21-1984 153.017, 153.056, 153.058, 153.100, 153.101,
153.242 - 153.244
1050 5-21-1984 TSO VI
1052 7-16-1984 153.170, 153.171, 153.174
1056 11-20-1984 153.004, 153.056 - 153.060, 153.063,
153.066, 153.150 - 153.157
1060 4-1-1985 151.06, 151.99
1064 7-15-1985 TSO VI
-1067 3-17-1986 TSO V
1068 4-21-1986 TSO III
14 Tillamook - Parallel References
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
1070 5-19-1986 111.026
1974 7-21-1986 111.026
1077 4-16-1987 153.067
1081 7-6-1987 TSO VI
1082 12-21-1987 TSO III
1083 12-21-1987 TSO III
1084 2-2-1988 TSO V
1090 11-7-1988 153.064
1093 3-20-1989 110.039
1099 12-18-1989 132.01 - 132.04, 132.99
1100 1-16-1990 TSO V
1102 3-5-1990 70.01, 70.99
1104 4-16-1990 TSO V
1105 5-7-1990 TSO III
1108 9-17-1990 TSO V
1110 9-17-1990 TSO V
1115 6-3-1991 52.053
1117 9-3-1991 35.016
1118 9-3-1991 35.029
1121 1-21-1992 153.297
1122 2-18-1992 114.03
1123 6-1-1992 111.001 - 111.006, 111.999
1124 8-17-1992 92.20 - 92.25, 92.99
1127 6-7-1993 92.23, 92.99
1129 9-20-1993 153.330, 153.397
1130 7-5-1994 92.23, 92.26, 92.99
1131 7-18-1994 TSO IV
1132 9-19-1994 TSO III
1133 10-3-1994 TSO III
1134 10-17-1994 TSO III
1137 5-1-1995 TSO VI
1138 5-1-1995 TSO V
1139 5-1-1995 TSO IV
1141 9-5-1995 TSO III
1142 3-4-1996 70.99
1144 4-1-1996 150.01
1145 5-20-1996 112.01 - 112.05, 112.20 - 112.27, 112.40 -
112.45, 112.60 - 112.65, 112.99
Reference to Ordinances 15
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
1146 7-1-1996 131.01 - 131.03, 131.99
1147 7-22-1996 TSO II
1148 10-7-1996 TSO VI
1149 12-2-1996 TSO VI
1150 12-16-1996 151.01, 153.065
1151 2-3-1997 TSO III
1153 6-16-1997 151.01
1154 6-16-1997 151.01
1155 6-1-1998 50.01 - 50.13, 50.99
1157 9-7-1999 35.091 - 35.113
1161 3-20-2000 36.01 - 36.08
1163 1-2-2001 TSO III
1165 4-2-2001 50.04
1167 5-21-2001 36.20
1166 7-2-2001 110.037
1168 8-20-2001 36.20
1170 12-3-2001 151.01, 153.057, 153.058
1173A 4-15-2002 35.026
1174 5-6-2002 35.001
1175 6-17-2002 110.001 - 110.017, 110.999
1176 6-17-2002 153.067, 153.080 - 153.082
1177 8-5-2002 35.048, 35.073
1178 9-16-2002 153.019, 153.170 - 153.179, 153.201,
153.265 - 153.280
1179 11-4-2002 TSO II
1181 1-6-2003 TSO III
1182 1-6-2003 153.150 - 153.157, 153.365 - 153.367
1183 1-21-2003 151.01
1185 6-2-2003 151.01
1190 4-19-2004 35.029
1191 4-19-2004 TSO III
16 Tillamook - Parallel References
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
1192 6-21-2004 92.01 - 92.05, 92.99
1194 9-20-2004 36.20
1195 9-20-2004 35.001
1196 10-4-2004 35.015, 35.016, 35.029
1197 1-3-2005 33.45
1199 2-7-2005 TSO V
1200 2-22-2005 TSO III
1202 10-3-2005 52.001
1203 11-21-2005 TSO II
1204 11-21-2005 151.02
1205 12-5-2005 91.20 B 91.24, 91.99
1207 3-20-2006 10.19
1210 5-15-2006 TSO VI
1211 7-17-2006 32.03
1215 11-20-2006 151.03
1216 12-4-2006 72.105– 72.108, 72.110-72.111, 72.999
1218 5-7-2007 TSO VI
1219 5-21-2007 114.03
1223 9-17-2007 35.048, 35.073
1224 9-17-2007 TSO VI
1231 4-7-2008 TSO VI
1232 5-5-2008 50.04, 50.05, 50.07
1233 6-16-2008 32.16
1234 7-21-2008 35.048, 35.073
1235 7-21-2008 TSO III
1236 7-21-2008 50.05
1241 4-20-2009 35.150 - 35.163
1243 11-16-2009 151.03
1244 12-21-2009 32.16
1247 3-1-2010 TSO III
1248 3-15-2010 TSO V
1249a 6-7-2010 71.001 - 71.003, 71.015 - 71.017, 71.030 -
71.035, 71.050 - 71.053, 71.065, 71.080 -
71.085, 72.001 - 72.005, 72.020 - 72.025,
72.040 - 72.045, 72.060 - 72.072, Ch. 73
Scheds. I, II, III
Reference to Ordinances 17
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
1250 6-21-2010 35.016, 35.029
Res. 1546 8- -2010 153.037
1252 9-20-2010 92.23, 92.24, 92.99
1253 12-6-2010 130.01 - 130.23, 130.35 - 130.43, 130.55 -
130.63, 130.99
1254 1-3-2011 35.150 - 35.163
1255 3-7-2011 TSO III
1256 6-6-2011 130.13
1258 9-19-2011 TSO III
1259 10-3-2011 TSO III
1260 12-21-2011 TSO II
1261 12-5-2011 TSO V
1262 1-3-2012 130.05
1263 1-3-2012 71.002
1264 1-3-2012 72.105, 72.111
1265 1-3-2012 32.16
1267 6-18-2012 151.03
1269 10-15-2012 70.15, 70.99, Ch. 73 Sched. I
1270 10-15-2012 151.01, 153.017, 153.039 - 153.044, 153.056
- 153.059, 153.097, 153.100, 153.101,
153.226, 153.242, 153.243, 153.244, 153.299
1272 12-19-2012 52.075 - 52.087
1273 3-18-2013 110.002, 110.005, 110.009
1275 4-15-2013 92.23, 92.24, 92.99
1276 7-15-2013 90.01 - 90.99
1277 7-15-2013 151.01
1278 8-19-2013 130.11
1279 8-19-2013 71.032
1280 8-19-2013 72.111
1281 8-5-2013 TSO II
1283 12-2-2013 153.01 -153.99
1285 3-3-2014 153.01 – 153.99
1287 4-7-2014 TSO VII
1288 4-7-2014 110.001 – 110.999
1289 5-5-2014 35.015, 35.022, TSO VII
1291 10-2-2014 52.035 -- 52.060
1292 11-3-2014 90.05, App A
1294 10-20-2014 95.01 - 95.07
1296 12-1-2014 TSO II
1297 12-1-2014 TSO III
1298 1-5-2015 53.01, App A
1299 1-20-2015 TSO V
18 Tillamook - Parallel References
1300 3-2-2015 TSO V
1301 4-20-2015 99.99, 110.999
1302 6-1-2015 92.05(E), 110.003(2), 110.003(3)
1303 9-8-2015 93.01 – 93.10, 93.99, App A & B
1304 10-19-2015 34.20, App A & B
1305 10-19-2015 52.053
1306 1-13-2016 TSO II
1307 1-19-2016 TSO III
1308 3-7-2016 TSO V
1309 2-16-2016 30.01 - 30.06, 30.20 - 30.34,
30.45 - 30.50, Ch. 30 Apps. A,B, C
1310 8-1-2016 35.200 - 35.213, 35.099
1310A 3-7-2016 TSO III
1311 4-18-2016 130.021
1312 5-16-2016 TSO VII
1313 5-16-2016 TSO VII
1314 5-16-2016 35.015
1315 6-6-2016 35.999, 130.99
1316 7-5-2016 153,004, 153.031, 153.032, 153.035, 153.051,
153.053, 153.055, 153.070, 153.071, 153.073,
TSO VII
1318 9-6-2016 TSO VII
1319 9-19-2016 TSO II
1320 3-20-2017 153.001-153.079, 153.099
1321 11-21-2016 TSO II
1322 1-17-2017 TSO VII
1323 11-21-2016 TSO III
1324 12-5-2016 35.029
1325 12-5-2016 35.213
1325A 4-6-2017 35.201-35.202
1326 4-6-2017 91.30 – 91.90
1327 4-17-2017 93.003
1328 6-5-2017 TSO VI
1329 7-6-2017 32.01
1330 8-24-2017 TSO VII
1331 11-6-2017 TSO II
1332 12-18-2017 93.07, 93.10
1333 2-20-2018 35.015
1334 3-5-2018 50.99, 52.018, 52.019, 52.035, 52.036, 52.999
1335 7-2-2018 153.004, 153.010-153.019, 153.036, 153.037,
153.051, 153.053, 153.054, 153.055, 153.071,
153.073, 153.074, 153.076,
1336 10-15-2018 52.084
1337 10-5-2018 72.105
1338 10-1-2018 153.020, 153.037, 153.052, 153.072
1339 12-4-2018 110.002
Reference to Ordinances 19
1340 12-4-2018 11.01
1341 2-4-2019 130.08
1342 2-4-2019 72.111
1343 3-4-2019 70.14, 70.15, 70.99
1344 4-15-2019 35.022
1345 4-15-2019 72.109
1346 5-20-2019 52.020, 52.035, 52.036, 52.037, 52.038
1347 6-3-2019 130.08, 130.21
1348 7-1-2019 TSO VII
1349 8-19-2019 NOT YET CODIFIED
1350 9-5-2019 92.04, 92.05