THE CITY CHARTER & MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE CITY OF TUALATIN, OREGON 
____________ 
Published in 2019 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Tualatin, Oregon. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2019 Code, as supplemented through January 13, 2019, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2019 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	SA:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	SACT:1 
CODE 	TMC1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	TMCA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Tassy Spinks, Vice President, Supplement Department, and Erin Edwards, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Maya Benham for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Municipal Code which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Tualatin, Oregon. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Tualatin, Oregon. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Tualatin, Oregon.  
CHARTER 
To provide for the government of the City of Tualatin, Washington County, Oregon; and to repeal all Charter provisions of the City enacted to the time that this Charter takes effect. 
Be it enacted by the people of the City of Tualatin, Washington County, Oregon:  
CHAPTER I - Names and Boundaries 
 
Section 1. - Title of Enactment. 
This enactment may be referred to as the "City of Tualatin Charter of 1967."  
Section 2 - Name of City. 
The municipality of City of Tualatin, Washington County, Oregon, shall continue to be a municipal corporation with the name "City of Tualatin, Oregon."  
Section 3. - Boundaries. 
The City shall include all territory encompassed by its boundaries as they now exist or hereafter are modified by voters, by the Council, or by any other agency with legal power to modify them. The Recorder shall keep in the Recorder's Office at the City Hall at least two copies of this Charter and maintain in each copy an accurate, up-to-date description of the boundaries. The copies and descriptions shall be available for public inspection at any time during regular office hours of the Recorder. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
CHAPTER II - Powers 
 
Section 4. - Powers of the City. 
The City shall have all powers which the constitutions, statutes, and common law of the United States and of this State expressly or impliedly grant or allow municipalities as fully as though this Charter specifically enumerated each of those powers.  
Section 5. - Construction of Charter. 
In this Charter no mention of a particular power shall be constructed to be exclusive or to restrict the scope of the powers which the City would have if the particular power were not mentioned. The Charter shall be liberally construed to the end that the City may have all powers necessary or convenient for the conduct of its municipal affairs, including all powers that cities may assume pursuant to State laws and to the municipal home rule provisions of the state constitution. 
(Amended by Ord. 964-96, § 2, 6-24-96; Ord. 1026-99, § 2, 8-9-99; Ord. 1103-02, 03-25-02).  
CHAPTER III - Form of Government 
 
Section 6. - Where Powers Vested. 
Except as this charter provides otherwise, all powers of the city shall be vested in the council. 
(Charter amendment adopted at a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
Section 7. - Council. 
The Council shall be composed of a Mayor and six Councilors elected from the City at large. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
Section 8. - Councilors. 
The term of each Councilor in office when this Charter is adopted shall continue until January 1, 1969. At the 1968 biennial general election, six Councilors shall be elected. Of the six, the three receiving the three highest numbers of votes shall each hold office for four years, and the three receiving the next three highest votes shall each hold office for two years. At each subsequent biennial general election, three Councilors shall be elected, each for a term of four years, and at each biennial general election the number of Councilors to be elected to fill vacancies pursuant to Section 33 of this Charter shall be elected. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
Section 8a. - Assignment of Council Positions. 
Councilors shall be assigned numbered positions, one through six. A person seeking office on the Council shall specify which Council position they are seeking by number. A person may run for no more than a single Council position during any one election. The person receiving the highest number of votes for each position shall be elected. This amendment shall first apply during the general biennial election in 1990. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
Section 9. - Mayor. 
The present Mayor shall serve the remainder of the term and at the general election of the year 1990 and every four years thereafter a mayor shall be elected. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
Section 10. - Other Officers. 
Additional officers of the City shall be a Municipal Judge, a Recorder, and such other officer as the Council deems necessary. Each of these officers shall be appointed and may be removed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council. The Council may combine any two or more appointive City offices. The Council may designate any appointive officer to supervise any other appointive officer, except the Municipal Judge in the exercise of judicial functions. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
Section 11. - Salaries. 
The compensation for the services of each City officer and employee shall be the amount fixed by the Council.  
Section 12. - Qualifications of Officers. 
No person shall be eligible for an elective office of the City unless at the time of election that person is qualified elector within the meaning of the state constitution and has resided in the City during the 12 months immediately preceding the election. Such elected officer shall remain a resident of the City during the term of office. The Council shall be final judge of the qualifications and election of its own members, subject, however, to review by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a primary election held May 23, 1978, and a primary election held May 15, 1990)  
Section 12a. - City Council Term Limits. 
No person shall be eligible to serve on the City Council more than twelve (12) years in any twenty (20) year period, whether serving as Councilor, Mayor, a pro tem member, or a combination thereof. No person may be elected or appointed to an office on the City Council if completing that term of office would cause a violation of these term limits. The calculation of "years" shall include those preceding the passage of this Section, but shall not prevent any member of the City Council from completing a term of office that commenced prior to its passage. For the purposes of this Section, years of service on the City Council shall be calculated by first determining the aggregate number of days a person has served as a member of the City Council within an applicable window of twenty calendar years, and then attributing a year of service for every 365.25 days of service. This Section becomes effective immediately upon passage. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a general election held November 8, 2016).  
CHAPTER IV - Council 
 
Section 13. - Meetings. 
The Council shall hold a regular meeting at least once a month in the City at a time and a place which is designated. It shall adopt rules for the government of its members and proceedings. The Mayor upon his or her own motion may, or at the request of three members of the Council shall, by giving notice thereof to all members of the Council then in the City, call a special meeting of the Council in accordance with procedures prescribed by the State law and general ordinance. Special meetings of the Council may also be held by the common consent of all the members of the Council in accordance with procedures prescribed by State law and general ordinance. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a general election held November 4, 1986, and a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
Section 14. - Quorum. 
Three Councilors and the Mayor or Mayor pro tem shall constitute a quorum for its business, but a small number may meet and compel the attendance of absent members in a manner provided by ordinance. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
Section 15. - Journal. 
The Council shall cause a journal of its proceedings to be kept. Upon request of any of its members, the ayes and nays upon any question before it shall be taken and a record of the vote entered in the journal.  
Section 16. - Proceedings to be Public. 
No action by the Council shall have legal effect unless the motion for the action and the vote by which it is disposed of take place at proceedings open to the public.  
Section 17. - Mayor's Functions at Council Meetings. 
The Mayor shall be chair of the Council and preside over its deliberations. The Mayor shall have a vote on all questions before the Council and authority to preserve the order, enforce the rules of the Council, and determine the order of business under the rules of the Council. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
Section 18. - President of the Council. 
At its first meeting after this Charter takes effect and thereafter at its first meeting of each odd-numbered year, the Council by ballot shall elect a president from its membership. In the Mayor's absence from a Council meeting, the president shall preside over it as Mayor pro tem. Whenever the Mayor is unable to perform the functions of office, the president shall act as mayor. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a general election held November 4, 1986, and a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
Section 19. - Vote Required. 
Except as this Charter otherwise provides, the concurrence of a majority of the members of the Council present at a Council meeting shall be necessary to decide any question before the Council.  
CHAPTER V - Powers and Duties of Officers 
 
Section 20. - Mayor. 
The Mayor shall appoint the committees provided by the rules of the Council and sign all approved records of proceedings of the Council. The Mayor shall have no veto power and shall sign all ordinance passed by the Council within three days after their passing. After the Council approves a bond of a City officer or a bond for a license, contract, or proposal, the Mayor shall endorse the bond. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
Section 20a. - City Manager. 
(a)  Qualifications. The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the City. The Manager shall be chosen by the Council without regard to political considerations and solely with reference to executive and administrative qualifications. The Manager need not be a resident of the City or of the State at the time of the appointment, but shall promptly thereafter become and remain a resident of the City. 
(b)  Term. The Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term and may be removed at the pleasure of the Council. 
(c)  Powers and Duties. The Manager shall: 
(1)  Devote his or her entire time to the discharge of official duties, attend all meetings of the Council unless excused therefrom by the Council or the Mayor, keep Council advised at all times of the affairs and needs of the City, and make reports annually, or more frequently if requested by the Council, of all the affairs and departments of the City. 
(2)  See that all ordinances are enforced and that the provisions of all franchises, leases, contracts, permits, and privileges granted by the City are observed. 
(3)  Appoint and may remove appointive City officers and employees except as this Charter otherwise provides, and shall have general supervision and control over them and their work with power to transfer an employee from one department to another. The Manager shall supervise the departments to the end of obtaining the utmost efficiency in each of them but shall have no control over the judicial activities of the Municipal Judge. 
(4)  Be responsible for preparing and submitting to the Budget Committee the annual budget estimates and such reports as the body requests. 
(5)  Supervise the operation of all public utilities owned and operated by the City and shall have general supervision over all City property. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a general election held November 6, 1984; Charter Amendment adopted at a general election held November 4, 1986; and a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
Section 21. - Municipal Judge. 
The Municipal Judge shall be the judicial officer of the City and hold within the City a court known as the "municipal court of the City of Tualatin, Washington County, Oregon." The court shall be open for the transaction of judicial business at times specified by the Council. All area within the City shall be within the territorial jurisdiction of the court. The Municipal Judge shall exercise original and exclusive jurisdiction of all crimes and offenses defined and made punishable by ordinances of the City and of all actions brought to recover or enforce forfeitures or penalties defined or authorized by ordinances of the City. The Municipal Judge shall have authority to issue process for the arrest of any person accused of an offense against the ordinances of the City, to commit any such person to jail or to release on bail pending trial, to issue subpoenas, to compel obedience to such subpoenas, to issue any process necessary to carry into effect the judgments of the court, and to punish witnesses and others for contempt of court. When not governed by ordinance or this Charter, all proceedings in the municipal court for the violation of a City ordinance shall be governed by the applicable general laws of the state governing justices of the peace and justice courts. The Council may, in addition to appointing the Municipal Judge, appoint such pro tem judges as it considers necessary, to hold office at the pleasure of the Council. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a general election held November 4, 1986, and a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
Section 22. - Recorder. 
The Recorder shall serve ex officio as clerk of the Council, attend all its meetings unless excused therefrom by the Council, keep an accurate record of its proceedings in a book provided for that purpose, and sign all orders on the treasury. In the Recorder's absence from a Council meeting, the Mayor shall appoint a clerk of the Council pro tem who, while acting in that capacity, shall have the authority and duties of the Recorder.  
CHAPTER VI - Elections 
 
Section 23. - Elections. 
Except as this Charter provides otherwise, and the Council provides otherwise by ordinance, the general laws of the state of Oregon shall apply to the conduct of City elections. (Sections 23 through 28 repealed and replaced by Charter amendment adopted at general election held November 4, 1986).  
Section 29. - Commencement of Terms of Office. 
The term of office of a person elected at a regular City election shall commence the first of the year immediately following the election.  
Section 30. - Oath of Office. 
Before entering upon the duties of office, each officer shall take an oath or shall affirm support for the constitutions and laws of the United States and of Oregon and promise to faithfully perform the duties of office. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
Section 31. - Nominations. 
A qualified elector who shall have resided in the City during the 12 months immediately preceding the election may be nominated for an elective City position. Nomination shall be by petition specifying the position sought in a form prescribed by State law. Such petition shall be signed by not fewer than 10 electors. No elector shall sign more than one petition for each vacant position. If the elector does so, the signature shall be valid only on the first sufficient petition filed for the position. The signatures to a nomination petition need not all be appended to one paper, but to each separate paper of the petition shall be attached an affidavit of the circulator thereof, indicating the number of signers of the paper and stating that each signature appended thereto was made in the circulator's presence and is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. With each signature shall be stated the signer's place of residence, identified by its street and number or other sufficient description. All nomination papers comprising a petition shall be assembled and filed with the Recorder as one instrument not earlier than 120 nor later than 70 days before the election. The Recorder shall make a record of the exact time at which each petition is filed and shall take and preserve the name and address of the person by whom it is filed. If the petition is not signed by the required number of qualified electors, the Recorder shall notify the candidate and the person who filed the petition within five days after the filing. If the petition is insufficient in any other particular, the Recorder shall return it immediately to the person who filed it, certifying in writing wherein the petition is insufficient. Such deficient petition may be amended and filed again as a new petition, or a substitute petition for the same candidate may be filed, within the regular time for filing nomination petitions. The Recorder shall notify an eligible person of the nomination, and such person shall file with the Recorder the written acceptance of nomination within five days of notification of nomination. Upon receipt of such acceptance of nomination, the Recorder shall cause the nominee's name to be printed on the ballots. The petition of nomination for a successful candidate at an election shall be preserved in the office of the Recorder until the term of office for which the candidate is elected expires. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a primary election held May 23, 1978, and Charter amendment adopted at a general election held November 4, 1986, and a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
CHAPTER VII - Vacancies in Office 
 
Section 32. - What Creates Vacancy. 
An office shall be deemed vacant upon the incumbent's death; adjudicated incompetence; conviction of a felony, other offense pertaining to official duties or unlawful destruction of public records; resignation; recall from office; or ceasing to possess qualifications for the office; upon the failure of the person elected or appointed to the office to qualify therefore within 10 days after the term of office is to commence; or in the case of the mayor or councilor, upon absence from the City for 30 days without the consent of the Council or upon absence from meetings of the Council for 60 days without like consent, and upon a declaration by the Council of the vacancy. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
Section 33. - Filling of Vacancies. 
Vacancies in elective offices in the city shall be filled by appointment by a majority of the incumbent members of the Council. The appointee's term shall begin immediately upon appointment and shall continue until the beginning of the year following the next general biennial election and the successor for the unexpired term shall be chosen at the next general biennial election after said appointment. During the temporary disability of any officer or during the absence temporarily from the City for any cause, the office may be filled pro tem in any manner provided for filling vacancies in office permanently. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a general election held November 7, 1978, and a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
Section 34. - Enacting Clause. 
The enacting clause of all ordinances hereafter enacted shall be, "The City of Tualatin ordains as follows:"  
Section 35. - Mode of Enactment. 
(a)  Except as this section provides to the contrary, every ordinance of the Council shall, before being put upon its final passage, be read fully and distinctly in open Council meeting on two different days. 
(b)  Except s this section provides the contrary, an ordinance may be enacted at a single meeting of the Council by unanimous vote of all Council members present, upon being read first in full and then by title. 
(c)  Any of the readings may be by title only, 
(1)  if no Council member present at the meeting requests to have the ordinance read in full; or 
(2)  if a copy of the ordinance is provided for each Council member, and a copy is available for public inspection in the office of the City Recorder not later than five days before the first reading of the ordinance and notice of its availability is given forthwith upon the filing, by 
(i)  written notice posted at the City Center; or 
(ii)  advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. 
An ordinance enacted after being read by title alone may have no legal effect if it differs substantially from its terms as it was thus filed prior to such reading, unless each section incorporating such a difference is read fully and distinctly in open Council meeting as finally amended prior to being approved by the Council. 
(d)  Upon the final vote on an ordinance, the ayes and nays of the members shall be taken and recorded in the journal. 
(e)  Upon the enactment of any ordinance, the Recorder shall sign it with the date of its passage and his or her name and title of office, and within three days thereafter the Mayor shall sign it with the date of his or her signature, name, and the title of office. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a general election held November 4, 1986; Charter Amendment adopted at a primary election held May 15, 1990).  
Section 36. - When Ordinances Shall Take Effect. 
An ordinance enacted by the Council shall take effect on the thirtieth day after its enactment. When the Council deems it advisable, however, an ordinance may provide a later time for it to take effect, and in case of an emergency, it may take effect immediately.  
CHAPTER IX - Public Improvements 
 
Section 37. - Condemnation. 
Any necessity of taking property for the City by condemnation shall be determined by the Council and declared by a resolution of the Council describing the property and stating the uses to which it shall be devoted.  
Section 38. - Improvements. 
The procedure for making, altering, vacating or abandoning a public improvement shall be governed by general ordinance or, to the extent not so governed, by the applicable general laws of the state. Action on any proposed public improvement, except a sidewalk or except an improvement unanimously declared by the Council to be needed at once because of an emergency, shall be suspended for six months upon a remonstrance thereto by the owners of two-thirds of the property to be specifically assessed therefore. For the purpose of this section "owner" shall mean the record holder of legal title to the land, except that if there is a purchaser of the land according to a recorded land sale contract or according to a verified writing by the record holder of legal title to the land filed with the City Recorder, the said purchaser shall be deemed the "owner".  
Section 39. - Special Assessments. 
The procedure for levying, collecting, and enforcing the payment of special assessments for public improvements or other services to be charged against real property shall be governed by general ordinance.  
Section 40. - Public Contracts. 
Public contracts for materials, equipment and services shall be in accordance with requirements of applicable general laws of the state and to the extent not so governed in accordance with regulations adopted by the Council. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a general election held November 4, 1986).  
CHAPTER X - Miscellaneous Provisions 
 
Section 41. - Debt Limit. 
Except as authorized by State law, the City shall not issue and sell general obligation bonds unless authorized by consent of a majority of the voters at an election. All City officials and employees who create or officially approve any indebtedness contrary to this provision shall be jointly and severally liable for the excess. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a general election held November 4, 1986).  
Section 41a. - Amendments. 
(a)  The City Council of the City of Tualatin, Washington County, Oregon, is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to issue and sell general obligation bonds in the sum or sums not to exceed $200,000. Said bonds are to be issued for the purpose of providing funds with which to acquire, construct, reconstruct, alter, enlarge, renew, replace, operate and maintain the City water distribution and the City sewage collection system. Said bonds shall bear interest at the rate not to exceed six percent per annum and shall be issued in amounts and on such dates as the City Council may determine; provided, that no bonds issued hereunder shall bear a maturity date exceeding 25 years from the date of issuance. 
(b)  The debt limitations as contained in the Charter of the City of Tualatin shall not apply to the bonds hereby authorized, nor shall any other provisions and limitations in said Charter apply. 
(c)  The City Council of the City of Tualatin, Oregon, is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to issue and sell general obligation bonds in the sum or sums not to exceed $300,000 and to levy and ad valorem property tax to retire said bonded indebtedness. Said bonds are to be issued for the purpose of providing funds to acquire and construct a City water reservoir system. Said bonds shall bear interest not to exceed a net effective rate of seven percent per annum and shall be issued in amounts and on such dates as the City Council may determine; provided, that no bonds issued hereunder shall bear a maturity date exceeding 25 years from the date of issuance. 
(d)  The debt limitations as contained in the Chart of the City of Tualatin shall not apply to the bonds hereby authorized, nor shall any other provisions and limitations in said Charter apply. 
(e)  The authority of the City Council to issue and sell general obligation bonds under Subsection (c) above is subject to the City entering into a grant agreement with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for the receipt of a sum not less than $300,000 from said Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(f)  The City Council is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to purchase real estate by land sale contract to be used for park purposes and in connection with the City Community Center and incur indebtedness therefore in an amount not to exceed $47,500 in addition to interest thereon. The real property shall be paid for out of government and private matching funds and shall not be paid for by local property taxation. 
(g)  The City Council is hereby authorized and empowered by ordinance to impose and levy a tax not exceeding five percent on gross amounts of money, credit or other things of value paid to or received for lodging by the owner or operator of any hotel, motel, apartment or lodging house, mobile home or trailer park or court, or any other place in the City where space designed or intended for lodging occupancy is rented by any person or persons for any period less than monthly. This tax shall not apply to hospitals, convalescent or nursing homes or public institutions, or permanent occupancy as defined by ordinance. The tax imposed shall be collected by the owner or operator of the rental space, in addition to the rental charge at the time of payment of rent. City revenues from such taxes shall be credited to the general fund of the City and used for general City purposes, as the Council may find appropriate. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a special election held August 16, 1968; Charter Amendment adopted at a special election held September 11, 1973; Charter Amendment adopted at a special election held March 23, 1971)  
Section 42. - Torts. 
In no event shall the City be liable in damages for any injury to person, damage to property, or a death for an amount greater than that authorized by applicable State law. The claimant shall provide the City with notice as required by State law. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a general election held November 4, 1986).  
Section 43. - Existing Ordinances Continued. 
All ordinances of the City consistent with this Charter and in force when it takes effect shall remain in effect until amended or repealed.  
Section 44. - Repeal of Previously Enacted Provision. 
All Charter provisions of the City enacted prior to the time that this Charter takes effect are hereby repealed.  
Section 45. - Time of Effect of Charter. 
This Charter shall take effect July 1, 1967.  
Section 46. - Willamette Water - Vote Required. 
The City of Tualatin shall not use Willamette River water as a drinking water source for its citizens unless the following question is submitted to the voters and is approved by the affirmative majority (greater than 50%) of the total number of legal votes cast on such measure and entitled to be counted thereon. The question shall read: "Shall treated Willamette River water be used as drinking water by the citizens of Tualatin?" The vote shall take place after the effective date of this amendment. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a primary election held May 21, 2002).  
Section 47. - Voter Approval to Use City Resources for Public Rail Transit System. 
(a)  The Tualatin City Council may not authorize the use of city resources for the financing, design, construction or operation of any public rail transit system, including, but not limited to, the extension of an existing public rail transit system operating outside of the city limits, without first obtaining the approval of city voters at an election on an authorization ordinance. "City resources" shall include any public funds, staff time, lobbying agreements, property interests or other tangible or intangible city assets, and the right to direct or permit the use of such resources. This subsection does not apply to the use of city resources to respond to or prevent a public safety concern caused by the operation of a public rail transit system. 
(b)  Any authority extended to the Tualatin City Council by an election held under subsection (a), shall be strictly limited to the parameters of the authorization ordinance. An authorization ordinance submitted to voters under subsection (a) must provide sufficient public notice of the authority conveyed and shall not be effective unless the following parameters are specified: 
(1)  the types of city resources to be authorized; 
(2)  the permissible uses of such resources; 
(3)  the estimated cash value of any authorized resources and any associated personnel costs; and 
(4)  the duration of the authority extended. 
Sufficient public notice for an authorization ordinance under this subsection is provided to city voters if the certified ballot title accurately summarizes the authorized parameters and provides a link to a detailed description hosted on a city website. If sufficient public notice cannot be accomplished in the manner above, the city shall provide such information to voters by mail at least 21 days in advance of the election. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a special election held September 16, 2014).  
CHAPTER XI - Protection of City Owned Parks and Open Spaces 
 
Section 48. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter XI of the Charter is to prevent the transfer, sale, vacation or major change in use of city parks without first obtaining an approving vote of the legal voters of this city; to preserve the natural beauty, ecological integrity and recreational value of the city's parks form incompatible and non-park development; to protect the public park uses and purposes for which city parks are established, acquired or dedicated, and to prevent conversion or development of parks or parts thereof to non-park or incompatible uses. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a special election held March 8, 2011).  
Section 49. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this Chapter XI. 
(a)  The "city" means the City of Tualatin, its city council, city departments and city employees acting within their official capacities. 
(b)  A "major change" is a change in use of a park, or part thereof, from a recreation or preservation use to non-park use unrelated to public recreation or preservation. "Major change" includes the development of roads, bridges, utility facilities, parking lots and buildings in a city park that are unrelated to the park uses for which the park was established, acquired or dedicated. 
(c)  "Parks" are parcels of real property owned by or dedicated to the City of Tualatin for purposes of public recreation, preservation of open space, riparian greenway, natural wildlife or other habitat values, or the preservation of historic or cultural resources. The term "park" encompasses all such properties owned by or dedicated to the city whether held in fee or as an easement. 
(d)  To "vacate" park property, or a portion thereof, means to dispose of land owned by or dedicated to the city through the procedures of ORS chapter 271 or comparable procedures in city code or ordinance. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a special election held March 8, 2011).  
Section 50. - Approval by Voters. 
The city shall not do, or allow to be done by others, any of the following listed acts with regard to any city park or part thereof without first obtaining approval of the legal voters of the city: 
(a)  To sell, lease or otherwise transfer city park property, 
(b)  To vacate or otherwise change the ownership or legal status of any city park, or part thereof, except that the city may grant easements for underground utilities and uses that do not cause or constitute a major change in use of the park or some part thereof. 
(c)  To cause, undertake or allow any development or construction in a city park that causes a major change in the use of the park or some part thereof. 
(d)  To construct or allow to be constructed or expanded in a city park any street, road, parking lot or permanent above ground structure, including buildings, power lines, motor vehicle or utility bridges and power lines, other than streets, roads, parking lots or structures needed to serve primarily the purposes for which the park was established, including park maintenance and operations. In no event shall below ground structures or buried utilities be allowed in a city park without an approving vote of the legal voters if the below ground structure or buried utility affects or limits above-ground park uses. Any street, road, parking lot or above ground structures existing in a city park on the date of adoption of this Chapter that do not comply with its provisions, are excepted from its requirements, but any subsequent additions or alterations thereto must comply with this Section. 
This section is not intended to prevent or require an approving vote to allow temporary structures, tents, shelters and the like to be erected in a city park for commercial or non-recreational or preservation uses so long as these temporary structures are erected and used in conjunction with a community based event or park use of the park. Furthermore, this section is not intended to control or override adopted park management and operations that do not otherwise constitute or cause a major change in the use of the park or part thereof. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a special election held March 8, 2011).  
Section 51. - Parks Designated. 
The following city parks, natural areas and greenways, in their current configuration and size and as may be enlarged subsequently, are city parks as defined herein and are subject to the provisions of this Chapter XI. 
Parks: 
Atfalati Park 	6600 SW Sagert Street 
Brown's Ferry Park 	5855 SW Nyberg Lane 
Ibach Park 	10455 SW Ibach Street 
Jurgens Park 	17255 SW Jurgens Avenue 
Lafky Park 	9655 SW Siletz Drive 
Little Woodrose Nature Park 	21045 SW 90th Avenue 
Saarinen Wayside Park 	20535 SW 86th Avenue 
Stoneridge Park 	19489 SW 68th Avenue 
Sweek Pond Natural Area Park 	8700 SW Sweek Drive 
Tualatin Commons 	8325 SW Nyberg Street 
Tualatin Commons Park 	7880 SW Nyberg Street 
Tualatin Community Park 	8515 SW Tualatin Road 
 
Natural Areas: 
Johnnie and William Koller Wetland 
Victoria Woods Natural Area 
Sweek Woods Natural Area 
Sequoia Ridge Natural Area 
Hedges Creek Natural Area 
Greenways: 
Chieftain/Dakota Greenway 
Hedges Creek Greenway 
Hi-West Estates Greenway 
Indian Meadows Greenway 
Nyberg Creek Greenway 
Nyberg Creek (South) Greenway 
Saum Creek Greenway 
Shaniko Greenway 
Tualatin River Greenway 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a special election held March 8, 2011).  
Section 52. - Later Acquired and Expanded Parks. 
Existing parks may be expanded and additional parks may be created, acquired, dedicated or designated by the city for park purposes. Whenever any real property is designated as a city park, it shall be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter XI, except that the city's initial acquisition of a parcel of real estate may include portions of property and improvements that are not appropriate or intended for city park purposes. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent or require an approving vote to dispose of non-park portions of such a property that is acquired for park purposes, so long as the city disposes of the non-park portion(s) within two years of acquisition or dedication of the larger property. 
(Charter Amendment adopted at a special election held March 8, 2011).  
TITLE 1 - ADMINISTRATION 
Chapters:  
CHAPTER 1-01 - CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES 
Sections: 
 
TMC 1-1-005 - Official Code. 
The compilation known as the Tualatin Municipal Code, January 1999 Edition, with editorial and style changes included, which may be amended from time to time, is recognized as the official compilation of general city ordinances and shall be prima facie evidence of municipal law. Any such ordinance included in the Code may be amended or repealed by reference to its code number or ordinance number, or both. 
(Ord. 1015-99 § 1, 1-25-99)  
TMC 1-1-010 - Codification and Naming. 
The City Attorney may codify the ordinances passed by the City Council. The codification of the general ordinances of the City shall be the "Tualatin Municipal Code" ("TMC"). Ordinances related to development and planning shall be codified as the "Tualatin Development Code" ("TDC"). 
(Ord. 995-98 § 1, 3-9-98)  
TMC 1-1-020 - Codification Powers. 
During the codification process, the City Attorney may change the wording of captions; rearrange sections and change reference numbers to agree with renumbered chapters, sections or other parts; substitute the proper subsection, section, chapter or other division numbers; strike out figures or words that are merely repetitious; change capitalization and style for the purpose of uniformity; substitute a current title of an officer, department, committee or board in accordance with changes in titles or duties subsequently made by law; and correct manifest clerical or typographical errors. 
(Ord. 995-98 § 2, 3-9-98; Ord. 1311-10 § 1, 9-27-10)  
TMC 1-1-030 - Section Numbering. 
The City Attorney may renumber sections and parts of sections of the ordinances to conform with ordinance additions and style changes. The City Attorney may not alter the sense, meaning, effect, or substance of any ordinance. 
(Ord. 995-98 § 3, 3-9-98)  
TMC 1-1-040 - Gender. 
Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter, unless it is necessary for the purpose of the particular ordinance that a particular gender be expressed. 
(Ord. 995-98 § 4, 3-9-98)  
TMC 1-1-050 - Numbers. 
The singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular, unless it is necessary for the purpose of the particular ordinance that a particular number be expressed. 
(Ord. 995-98 § 5, 3-9-98)  
TMC 1-1-060. - Specific Provisions. 
In construing an ordinance the intention of the City Council shall control if possible, and when a general and a specific provision are inconsistent, the specific provision shall control. 
(Ord. 995-98 § 6, 3-9-98)  
TMC 1-1-070 - Titles. 
Title, chapter, division, section and subsection headings or titles, and explanatory notes and cross-references, in the Tualatin Municipal Code and Tualatin Development Code shall not constitute any part of the law. 
(Ord. 995-98 § 7, 3-9-98)  
TMC 1-1-080 - Repealed Ordinances. 
When an ordinance which repealed a former ordinance, either expressly or by implication, is repealed, the former ordinance shall not be revived unless it is expressly provided. 
(Ord. 995-98 § 8, 3-9-98)  
TMC 1-1-090 - Constitutional Challenges. 
It is the Council's intent, in the enactment of any ordinance, that if a part of the ordinance is held unconstitutional, the remaining parts will remain in force unless: 
(1)  The ordinance provides otherwise; 
(2)  The remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably connected with, and depending upon, the unconstitutional part that it is apparent that the remaining parts would not have been enacted without the unconstitutional part; or 
(3)  The remaining parts, standing alone, are incomplete and incapable of being executed in accordance with the legislative intent. 
(Ord. 995-98 § 9, 3-9-98)  
TMC 1-1-100 - Notice by Mail. 
When registered or certified mail, with or without return receipt, is authorized or required for the purpose of giving notice, it is sufficient to use any mailing method that provides for a return receipt. 
(Ord. 995-98 § 10, 3-9-98)  
TMC 1-1-110 - Notice by Personal Service. 
When an ordinance authorizes notice by mailing, personal service of a written notice which meets the requirements for service of a summons is equivalent. 
(Ord. 995-98 § 11, 3-9-98)  
TMC 1-1-120 - Special Ordinances. 
Special Ordinances of restricted application, such as those providing for bond issues, elections, annexations, street vacations and dedications, street and sidewalk improvements and repeal of other ordinances shall not be codified but shall be entered in a disposition list in numerical order. 
(Ord. 995-98 § 12, 3-9-98)  
CHAPTER 1-03 - DELEGATING AUTHORITY TO CITY MANAGER TO ACCEPT CERTAIN DOCUMENTS 
Sections: 
 
TMC 1-3-010 - Purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and expedite review and official acceptance and recording of documents submitted to the City as part of development-related obligations or conditions so that recording of documents which require public notice will occur in a timely manner, City Council meetings can be devoted to policy making and other City obligations without the interruption of routine administrative tasks, delays which relate to awaiting official City Council approval of routine items may be reduced and staff review of such documents will be thorough and systematized. 
(2)  This chapter is also designed to assure that those documents and contracts, submitted to the City to fulfill development-related obligations are in acceptable form and minimize the City's exposure to liability. 
(3)  Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to limit the City Council's authority to enter into or refuse agreements or accept or reject written instruments which do not strictly comply with the standards set forth in this chapter or which are not in the best interests of the City. Rather these standards are intended to guide the City Manager in exercising his or her authority to accept certain documents on behalf of the City without formal City Council action. 
(4)  This chapter shall not apply to dedications of right-of-way or other property interests as part of a preliminary plat or major partition which are otherwise required to be considered by the City Council. Documents which fulfill conditions and dedications placed on such development approvals may be approved under this chapter. 
(5)  This chapter is not intended to affect the rights of private individuals to enter into agreements with respect to real property. 
(Ord. 787-89 § 1, 11-14-89)  
TMC 1-3-020 - Definitions. 
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following definitions shall apply: 
City Engineer means the person appointed by the City Manager to perform the functions of the City Engineer as described in this chapter or the City Engineer's designee. 
City Manager means the person appointed by the City Council as City Manager or his designee. Designation by the City Manager shall be by express appointment of the City Manager or the City Council but need not be in writing. 
Conveyance means the transfer of land, or any estate or interest in land, made by deed or other instrument, signed by the person of lawful age from whom the estate or interest is intended to pass, or by the lawful agent or attorney of the person, and acknowledged or approved, and recorded without any other act or ceremony. 
Dedication means a grant made by the owner of real property or his or her agent and officially accepted by a governmental entity so that the public may use the real property, and where title to the property remains with the owner. For purposes of this chapter, a dedication shall be considered valid only if written and signed by the owner or their agent. 
Deed means a written instrument signed by a grantor and delivered to the grantee whereby a present interest in specific real property is conveyed to the City or dedicated to the public. 
Developer means a person who applies to the City and obtains a permit to construct a permanent building or structure or to divide property for purposes of disposition of separate parcels and either owns the affected property or acts as agent for the owner in the construction on or division of the property. "Developer" includes agents acting on behalf of the developer. 
Development means the act of applying for, obtaining and exercising a permit issued by the City to construct a permanent building or structure or to divide property. 
Document means an agreement between the City and a developer or a representation, acknowledgment, assurance or guarantee from a developer, or a deed or easement, submitted to the City in fulfillment of a development approval, by which a developer complies with a particular standard or condition imposed by the City pursuant to the Tualatin Development Code or an Ordinance which implements the Tualatin Development Code. For purposes of this chapter, documents include interim access agreements, agreements to dedicate right-of-way in the future, subdivision compliance agreements, escrow agreements in lieu of corporate surety bonds, surety bonds and performance bonds. 
Easement means a nonpossessory, irrevocable interest in the land of another which entitles the owner of the interest or the public to a limited use or enjoyment of the other's land and to protection from interference with this use. An easement may include; but is not limited to, the use of the property as right-of-way, greenway, slope or lateral or subjacent support or for utility purposes, and unless indicated as temporary will be treated as permanent. 
Signature means the original, handwritten name of a natural person, and not a photocopy, facsimile or stamp. For purposes of corporations, the signature shall be that of an official, authorized representative. 
Street Improvement Agreement means a written agreement, required by the City to be submitted as a condition of a development approval or permit, and signed by the developer under which the developer agrees to cause specified street improvements to be constructed, to contribute a share of the construction costs for such improvements if they are constructed by the City or another, and to impose like obligations on future owners of the property, which is the subject of the development approval or permit. 
Title Report means a written report prepared by a title insurance company, authorized to transact business in the State of Oregon, showing the fee ownership of the property which is the subject of the report and, subject to certain standard printed exceptions, giving detailed information concerning apparent encumbrances, judgments, liens and unpaid taxes on the property. 
(Ord. 787-89 § 2, 11-14-89)  
TMC 1-3-030 - City Manager Authority to Accept Documents. 
(1)  The City Manager is authorized to accept and, where necessary, record in the Recorder's office of the appropriate County, any documents, submitted to the City, which conform to the requirements of this chapter and, where relevant, to the particular development approval or condition. Where the City Manager has accepted a document which conforms to the requirements of this chapter, the City Manager shall cause his or her signature or initials to be affixed to the document along with a reference to his or her authority to accept such document on behalf of the City. The City Manager's acknowledgement and signature shall constitute official and final acceptance of such documents without further action by the City Council. 
(2)  Prior to the City Manager accepting documents submitted in accordance with this chapter, the document and any supplementary information shall be examined to determine whether it conforms with the requirements of this chapter, the Codes and Ordinances of the City and the general laws of the state. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (3) of this section, where it is determined that a document which has been submitted for official City acceptance does not conform with the requirements of this chapter, the Codes and Ordinances of the City, and the general laws of the State, it shall not be accepted by the City Manager. The reason for rejecting such document shall be communicated in writing to the person submitting it. 
(3)  Where the City has negotiated the acquisition of property or has taken action to acquire property by condemnation, the City Manager may determine the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied by the City or another person who is not the property owner, but prior to official acceptance of a conveyance on behalf of the City shall obtain City Council approval therefore. 
(Ord. 787-89 § 3, 11-14-89)  
TMC 1-3-040 - Document Submittal Requirements. 
Any person who submits a deed, easement, conveyance, street improvement agreement or other document which must be officially accepted by the City in order to be effective shall submit the document together with supplementary information required by this chapter to the City Engineer. Conveyances shall satisfy the requirements of ORS Chapter 93 as now or hereafter constituted. 
(1)  Whenever it is necessary by an Ordinance, resolution, agreement or determination of the City, that an interest in land be conveyed to the City or dedicated to the public, the person, firm or corporation conveying such interest shall cause a preliminary title report evidencing ownership, encroachments, encumbrances, security interests and other legal and equitable interests of record for the property to be filed with the City. The report shall be dated or supplemented to the date of the recordation of the required conveyance of land. 
(2)  Whenever a preliminary title report evidencing ownership of property, or any other information concerning such property, a portion or interest of which is sought to be conveyed, dedicated or encumbered by agreement to the City, shows that the property is subject to one or more encroachments, encumbrances, security interests or other legal or equitable interests, the owners of which could be expected to object to such conveyance, dedication or encumbrance, the person submitting such document for City acceptance shall obtain and submit to the City at the expense of the person submitting the document a release, subordination agreement or waiver of objection from the owner or owners of such other interests, prior to City acceptance. The form of release subordination agreement or waiver of objection shall be reviewed and accepted by the City Attorney. In addition to or in lieu of the foregoing, at the option of the City, the document shall include those warranties which apply in the case of a statutory warranty deed, ORS 93.850. 
(3)  Except as otherwise expressly agreed by the City Manager, the person submitting a document, which affects title to the property proposed for City acceptance shall submit a legal description of the property prepared by a surveyor licensed in the State of Oregon. In addition to the legal description such person shall submit a diagram drawn to scale on paper which is approximately eight inches by 11 inches, showing the property which is affected by such document, both before and after City acceptance. 
(4)  When a developer of property in the City is required under the development permit issued by the City to convey or dedicate property to the City or execute and deliver an agreement to the City which affects the property subject to the development approval, the developer shall submit an affidavit in a recordable form satisfactory to the City Manager, acknowledging the encumbrance or other interest which is subject to City acceptance and verifying that such developer has the express authority to execute and deliver such document on behalf of the owner thereof to the City. The affidavit may be attached to and made a part of the document which is the subject of City acceptance. This requirement shall be considered satisfied, where the owner of record title to the property executes and delivers the document. 
(Ord. 787-89 § 4, 11-14-89)  
TMC 1-3-050 - City Engineer Authority. 
(1)  The City Engineer shall review documents submitted by developers in fulfillment of conditions or other requirements of the City's development approval for conformance with this section and the terms and conditions of the development decision. Upon completion of review the City Engineer shall advise the City Manager whether the document submitted for City acceptance complies with this chapter and the applicable development decision. The City Engineer may request additional information be submitted in order to determine that the requirements of this chapter and the relevant development decision are satisfied. In addition, the City Engineer may require that prior to City acceptance of a document, the person submitting such document shall cause appropriate monumentation to be established and permanently set, where existing monumentation is determined by the City Engineer to be inadequate or not in compliance with applicable standards. Review by the City Engineer shall at a minimum include the following: 
(a)  Conveyances, deeds, easements and street improvement agreements shall be examined for errors in the legal description of the property and any other technical descriptions contained in the document; 
(b)  Title reports submitted in connection with conveyances and dedications shall be examined for encroachments, encumbrances, security interests and any other legal and equitable interests whose owners might be expected to object to the transaction which is the subject of City acceptance; 
(c)  The City Engineer may physically inspect the property and any other sources of information about the property to determine whether City acceptance of the property would expose the City to potential liability to parties who have not participated in the transaction; 
(d)  Before approving a document, the City Engineer shall determine whether the document which is submitted by a developer in order to comply with the requirements or conditions relating to a development permit granted by the City satisfy such requirements or conditions, and where real property or an interest in real property is intended to be conveyed or dedicated, that the location, dimensions and purpose of such conveyance or dedication are clearly shown on the document; and 
(e)  The City Engineer in consultation with the City Attorney shall determine whether encroachments and encumbrances listed in a title report are subject to the requirement of a release, subordination agreement or waiver of objection from the owner of the encroachment or encumbrance. 
(2)  The City Engineer may create standard forms to be used in connection with documents, subject to the review and approval of the City Attorney. 
(Ord. 787-89 § 5, 11-14-89)  
TMC 1-3-060 - Appeals. 
Any person who has been advised that a document which is subject to City Manager acceptance on behalf of the City, but has been refused such acceptance, may appeal such decision to the City Council. Appeals to the City Council shall be made only as provided in this section. 
(1)  An appeal shall be filed only by the person who offered the document and not less than ten days following notification by the City that the particular document has been rejected. 
(2)  An appeal shall be submitted in writing, together with the filing fee as established by City Council resolution, and shall explain how the document submitted for acceptance purports to comply with the requirements of this chapter and the decision which was the basis for submitting the document, if any. 
(3)  A developer or other person who wishes to appeal the requirements or conditions attached to a development decision shall appeal such matters only in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Tualatin Development Code or implementing Ordinance. 
(4)  Upon receipt of such appeal the City Council shall hold a hearing. Only the person submitting the appeal and the person's representative shall be permitted to testify; however, the City Council may inquire of the City Manager or staff as to any matter which is relevant to the decision. 
(5)  After the close of the hearing, the Council shall deliberate and decide whether to accept or reject the document which is the subject of the appeal. If the document that was submitted for acceptance is finally refused by the City Council, a tentative oral decision shall be given and the final written decision stating the reasons therefore shall be prepared and approved by the Council. 
(Ord. 787-89 § 6, 11-14-89)  
TMC 1-3-070 - Fees. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, any document which is submitted for acceptance under this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee established by City Council resolution to cover the cost of staff examination and recording. 
(2)  The City Manager may waive the requirement of this section in cases where the City is acquiring the interest, which is the subject of the document, either by purchase or condemnation. 
(Ord. 787-89 § 7, 11-14-89)  
TMC 1-3-080 - Recording Documents. 
When a developer or property owner executes a street improvement agreement or other development agreement in conjunction with development within the City of Tualatin, the City Recorder shall cause the agreement to be recorded with the appropriate county. 
(Ord. 1100-02, 2-25-02)  
CHAPTER 1-04 - PUBLIC MEETINGS NOTICE 
Sections: 
 
TMC 1-4-010 - Oregon Public Meetings Law. 
All public meetings of the City of Tualatin must comply with the Oregon Public Meetings laws. 
(Ord. No. 1433-20 , § 1, 4-13-20) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1433-20 , § 1, adopted April 13, 2020, repealed § TMC 1-4-010 and enacted a new § TMC 1-4-010 as set out herein. Former § TMC 1-4-010 pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. 228-73 § 1, adopted August 21, 1973.  
TMC 1-4-020 - Regular Meetings. 
Regular Meetings of the City Council will be held at 7:00 p.m. on the second and fourth Monday of each and every month, excluding the fourth Monday of December and provided; however, when a second or fourth Monday falls on a City-recognized holiday, the City Council will meet on the following business day. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Council may call special meetings, or cancel or reschedule any meeting, as determined and with appropriate notice. A work session of the City Council will be held from 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m., as needed, before each regular meeting. 
(Ord. 228-73 § 2, 8-21-73; Ord. 439-78 § 1, 5-8-78; Ord. 1365-13, 12-9-13)  
TMC 1-4-030 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1433-20 , § 1, adopted April 13, 2020, repealed § TMC 1-4-030. Former § TMC 1-4-030 pertained to special meetings and derived from Ord. 228-73 § 4, adopted August 21, 1973.  
CHAPTER 1-05 - RECORDS RETENTION 
Sections: 
 
TMC 1-5-010 - Adoption of Records Retention Schedule. 
The City Records Retention Schedule promulgated by the Oregon State Archivist is adopted and shall serve as the Records Retention Schedule for the City of Tualatin. 
(Ord. 901-93, 6-14-93)  
TMC 1-5-020 - Records Management. 
The City Recorder is authorized to manage the records of the City and make determinations regarding retention and destruction of records in accordance with the Records Retention Schedule. 
(Ord. 901-93, 6-14-93)  
CHAPTER 1-06 - PERSONNEL RULES[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1436-20 , § 1, adopted April 13, 2020, repealed ch. 1-06, §§ 1-6-010—1-6-070 and enacted a new ch. 1-06 as set out herein. Former ch. 1-06 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 324-76 §§ 1—4, adopted April 12, 1976; and Ord. No. 1271-08, §§ 1, 2, adopted October 27, 2008. 
 
TMC 1-6-010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters; to attract to municipal service and to retain the best and most competent persons available; to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness; and to provide a reasonable degree of job security for qualified employees. 
(Ord. No. 1436-20 , § 1, 4-13-20)  
TMC 1-6-020 - Delegation of Authority to City Manager. 
(1)  The City Manager is authorized to establish, maintain, and update the City's employment policies, rules, and procedures in accordance with the process established by this Chapter. 
(2)  The City Manager must administer this Chapter and the employment policies, rules, and procedures, consistent with the federal and state law. 
(3)  For purposes of this Chapter, the term "City Manager" means City Manager or the City Manager's designee. 
(Ord. No. 1436-20 , § 1, 4-13-20)  
TMC 1-6-030 - Employment Rules; Nondiscrimination. 
(1)  The City Manager must establish employment policies, rules, and procedures to provide the means to recruit, select, develop, and maintain an effective and responsive work force. The employment policies, rules, and procedures must include provisions for employee hiring and advancement, training and career development, job classification, salary administration, retirement, fringe benefits, discipline, discharge and other related activities. 
(2)  All appointments and promotions must be made without regard to race, color, national origin, disability, religion, age, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, marital status, veteran status, source of income, political affiliation, or any other basis prohibited by federal, state, or local law, sex All appointments and promotions must be based on demonstrated education, training, experience, performance, knowledge, skills, licenses, certifications, and abilities to perform the essential functions and meet the gualifications of a position. 
(Ord. No. 1436-20 , § 1, 4-13-20)  
TMC 1-6-040 - Compilation and Available to the Public. 
All adopted employment policies, rules, and procedures must be compiled and made available to employees and the public on the City's website and upon reguest. 
(Ord. No. 1436-20 , § 1, 4-13-20)  
TMC 1-6-070 - Council Action on Rules. 
No Council action is necessary to ratify an employment policy, rule, or procedures adopted by the City Manager. However, upon the Council's own motion, the Council may review and modify an existing employment policy, rule, or procedure, or adopt a new employment policy, rule, or procedure at any time. If the Council chooses to adopt, amend, or repeal an employment policy, rule, or procedure, it must do so by resolution of the Council. 
(Ord. No. 1436-20 , § 1, 4-13-20)  
TMC 1-6-080, 1-6-090 - Reserved.  
TMC 1-6-100 - Police Background Check Authorization; Procedure. 
(1)  The Tualatin Police Department is authorized to access Oregon State Police (OSP) criminal offender information through the Law Enforcement Data System (LEDS) for applicants seeking employment or volunteer work, and independent contractors operating within the City of Tualatin, in accordance with OAR 257-10-025(1)(a). 
(2)  All criminal background check proceedings must be conducted in accordance with ORS 181A.230 and OAR 257-10-025, which establish procedures for access to criminal record information possessed by the Oregon State Police (OSP) through the Law Enforcement Data System (LEDS), and as provided as follows 
(a)  All parties subject to a background check under this Chapter will be required to authorize the City of Tualatin to conduct a criminal offender information check through the OSP LEDS system. 
(b)  The City Manager shall maintain the criminal history authorization forms for those doing work on behalf of the City and request that a criminal history check be made if the City Manager determines that it will be in the best interest of the City in filling the position. 
(c)  The Tualatin Police Department shall conduct the check on the prospective employee, volunteer, or independent contractor doing business with the City and report to the City Manager that the person's record indicates "criminal and/or traffic infraction record meets standards set for the position" or "criminal and/or traffic record does not meet standards set for that the position." 
(d)  If the person's record is reported as "criminal record and/or traffic record does not meet standards set for that position," the City Manager may request a written criminal history report from the OSP Identification Services Section in accordance with OAR 257-10-025(1)(c) and pay the applicable fee for this service. The City Manager may make a written criminal and/or driving history record available to the selecting official for his/her consideration in making the hiring decision. 
(e)  The written criminal history record on persons that are not hired or appointed as a volunteer will be retained for the minimum reguired period as provided in the Secretary of State's records retentions schedule, and then appropriately destroyed in accordance with law. 
(f)  The criminal history record of applicants and volunteers with a criminal history that are hired or appointed will become a part of the confidential personnel file of that employee or volunteer. Only persons authorized by law or regulations may access confidential personnel files. 
(g)  Applicants for employment, ©f appointment as a volunteer, or selection as an independent contractor who have a felony criminal history or a history of conviction of a misdemeanor will be closely examined to determine if the person possesses the trustworthiness needed to meet the required degree of public trust and confidence. Each selection shall be made on an individual, case by case basis, taking into account the person's qualifications, the requirements of the particular job or volunteer post applied for, and the results of the criminal history check. Factors, such as the age of the offender at the time of the offense, the type of offense and subsequent rehabilitation, and the public sensitivity of the position under consideration shall be taken into account in evaluating a criminal history report. 
(h)  Hiring an applicant or appointing a volunteer or independent contractor with a criminal history record will require the approval of the City Manager, after full disclosure and consideration of the criminal history of the applicant and discussions with the Police department official conducting the background investigation. 
(Ord. No. 1436-20 , § 1, 4-13-20)  
CHAPTER 1-07 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN 
Sections: 
 
TMC 1-7-010 - Emergency Management Agency. 
Pursuant to ORS 401.305, an Emergency Management Agency for the City of Tualatin is established. Subject to the appointment by the City Manager, the Operations Director shall serve as the Emergency Program Manager who shall have responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the Emergency Management Agency during an emergency in accordance with the Emergency Management Plan. 
(Ord. 817-90 § 1, 12-10-90)  
TMC 1-7-020 - Emergency Operations Plan. 
The City Manager shall adopt and may from time to time amend an Emergency Operations Plan, consistent with the intent and provisions of this chapter. The Plan shall set out procedures for the City to use in responding to various types of emergencies. The Emergency Management Plan, together with all Hazard Specific Plans, Resource Lists and Call Lists and any changes and additions may be referred to as the "Plan." 
(Ord. 817-90 § 2, 12-10-90; Ord. 1044-00 § 1-2, 1-10-00)  
TMC 1-7-030 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 817-90, 12-10-90; Ord. 1044-00, 1-10-00)  
TMC 1-7-040 - Agreements. 
The Emergency Program Manager is authorized to negotiate, prepare and present for Council approval by resolution any necessary and appropriate agreements between the City and public agencies and private parties in furtherance of the policies set forth in the Emergency Management Plan. 
(Ord. 817-90 § 4, 12-10-90)  
TMC 1-7-050 - Declaration of Emergency. 
In the event of an emergency, a declaration of emergency shall be declared in accordance with the procedures and chain of command set forth in the Plan. 
(Ord. 817-90 § 5, 12-10-90)  
TMC 1-7-060 - Emergency Measures. 
When a state of emergency has been declared to exist within the City, the following measures may be taken in the interest of public health, safety of welfare: 
(1)  A curfew may be established for the area designated as an emergency area which fixes the hours during which all persons other than officially recognized personnel may not be upon the public streets or other public places; 
(2)  Areas may be designated an emergency area over which the City may exercise police jurisdiction; 
(3)  Streets and areas may be barricaded and vehicular and pedestrian traffic prohibited or regulated on streets leading to the area designated as an emergency area for such distance as deemed necessary under the circumstances; 
(4)  Persons may be evacuated from the emergency area; and 
(5)  Other measures may be taken as are imminently necessary for the protection of life or property including entering onto or upon private property to prevent or minimize danger to lives or property. 
(Ord. 817-90 § 6, 12-10-90)  
TMC 1-7-070 - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of the Plan or emergency measure or order taken pursuant to the Plan or this chapter commits a civil infraction and is subject to a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(Ord. 817-90 § 7, 12-10-90)  
CHAPTER 1-21 - PUBLIC CONTRACTING RULES 
Sections: 
In General 
Qualifications Based Selection Process  
IN GENERAL 
 
TMC 1-21-010 - Short Title. 
This chapter and all rules adopted under this chapter may be cited as the City of Tualatin's Public Contracting Rules. 
(Ord. 1179-05 § 1, 2-28-05)  
TMC 1-21-020 - Purpose. 
It is the policy of the City of Tualatin in adopting the Public Contracting Rules to use public contracting practices and methods that maximize the efficient use of public resources and the purchasing power of public funds by: 
(1)  Promoting impartial and open competition; 
(2)  Using solicitation materials that are complete and contain a clear statement of contract specifications and requirements; and 
(3)  Taking full advantage of evolving procurement methods that suit the contracting needs of the City as they emerge within various industries. 
(Ord. 1179-05 § 2, 2-28-05)  
TMC 1-21-030 - Interpretation. 
To further the purpose of the objectives set forth in TMC 1-21-020 of this chapter, it is the City's intent that these Public Contracting Rules be interpreted to authorize the full use of all contracting powers and authorities described in ORS Chapters 279A, 279B and 279C. 
(Ord. 1179-05 § 3, 2-28-05)  
TMC 1-21-040 - Application. 
The City's Public Contracting Rules apply to all public contracts of the City except for the classes of contracts that are declared exempt from the Oregon Public Contracting Code, which shall be set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1179-05 § 4, 2-28-05)  
TMC 1-21-050 - Council Authority. 
Except as expressly delegated under these rules, the City Council reserves to itself the exercise of all of the duties and authority of a contract review board and contracting agency under Oregon State law, including, but not limited to, the power and authority to: 
(1)  Solicitation Methods Applicable to Contracts. Approve the use of contracting methods and exemptions from contracting methods for a specific contract or certain classes of contracts; 
(2)  Brand Name Specifications. Exempt the use of brand name specifications for public improvement contracts; 
(3)  Waiver of Performance and Payment Bonds. Approve the partial or complete waiver of the requirement for the delivery of a performance or payment bond for construction of a public improvement other than in cases of emergencies; 
(4)  Electronic Advertisement of Public Improvement Contracts. Authorize the use of electronic advertisements for public improvement contracts in lieu of publication in a newspaper of general circulation; 
(5)  Appeals of Debarment and Prequalification Decisions. Hear properly filed appeals of the Purchasing Manager's determination of debarment, or concerning prequalification; 
(6)  Rulemaking. Adopt contracting rules under ORS 279A.065 and ORS 279A.070 including, without limitation, rules for the procurement, management, disposal and control of goods, services, personal services and public improvements; and 
(7)  Award. Award all contracts that exceed the authority of the Purchasing Manager. 
(Ord. 1179-05 § 5, 2-28-05)  
TMC 1-21-060 - Public Contracts—Model Rules. 
The Model Rules adopted by the Attorney General under ORS 279A.065 are adopted as supplemental to this chapter and the Public Contracting Rules adopted by the City and will apply only to the extent that they do not conflict with the contracting rules adopted by the City. 
(Ord. 1179-05 § 6, 2-28-05)  
TMC 1-21-070 - Public Contracts—Authority of Purchasing Manager. 
(1)  General Authority. The City Manager shall be the Purchasing Manager for the City and is authorized to issue all solicitations and to award all City contracts for which the contract price does not exceed $150,000.00. Subject to this chapter, the Purchasing Manager may adopt and amend all solicitation materials, contracts and forms required or permitted to be adopted by contracting agencies under the Oregon Public Contracting Code or otherwise convenient for the City's contracting needs. The Purchasing Manager shall hear all solicitation and award protests. 
(2)  Solicitation Preferences. When possible, the Purchasing Manager shall use solicitation documents and evaluation criteria that: 
(a)  Give preference to goods and services that have been manufactured or produced in the State of Oregon if price, fitness, availability and quality are otherwise equal; and 
(b)  Give preference to goods that are certified to be made from recycled products when such goods are available, can be substituted for non-recycled products without a loss in quality, and the cost of goods made from recycled products is not significantly more than the cost of goods made from non-recycled products. 
(3)  Delegation of Purchasing Manager's Authority. Any of the responsibilities or authorities of the Purchasing Manager under this chapter may be delegated and sub-delegated by the City Manager. 
(4)  Mandatory Review of Rules. Whenever the Oregon State Legislative Assembly enacts laws that cause the attorney general to modify its Model Rules, the Purchasing Manager shall cause the Public Contracting Rules to be reviewed, and recommend to the City Council any modifications required to ensure compliance with statutory changes. 
(Ord. 1179-05 § 7, 2-28-05; Ord. 1250-07, 11-26-07, Ord. 1281-09 § 1, 4-13-09)  
QUALIFICATIONS BASED SELECTION PROCESS 
 
TMC 1-21-080 - Public Contracts Definitions. 
The following terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
Award means the selection of a person to provide goods, services or public improvements under a public contract. The award of a contract is not binding on the City until the contract is executed and delivered by the City. 
Bid means a binding, sealed, written offer to provide goods, services or public improvements for a specified price or prices. 
Concession Agreement means a contract that authorizes and requires a private entity or individual to promote or sell, for its own business purposes, specified types of goods or services from real property owned or managed by the City, and under which the concessionaire makes payments to the City based, at least in part, on the concessionaire's revenues or sales. The term "concession agreement" does not include a mere rental agreement, license or lease for the use of premises. 
Contract Price means the total amount paid or to be paid under a contract, including any approved alternates, and any fully executed change orders or amendments. 
Contract Review Board or Local Contract Review Board means the Tualatin City Council. 
Cooperative Procurement means a procurement conducted by or on behalf of one or more contracting agencies. 
Debarment means a declaration by the City Council under ORS 279B.130 or ORS 279C.440 that prohibits a potential contractor from competing for the City's public contracts for a prescribed period of time. 
Disposal means any arrangement for the transfer of property by the City under which the City relinquishes ownership. 
Emergency means circumstances that create a substantial risk of loss, damage or interruption of services or a substantial threat to property, public health, welfare or safety; and require prompt execution of a contract to remedy the condition. 
Energy Savings Performance Contract means a contract with a qualified energy service company for the identification, evaluation, recommendation, design and construction of energy conservation measures that guarantee energy savings or performance. 
Findings are the statements of fact that provide justification for a determination. Findings may include, but are not limited to, information regarding operation, budget and financial data; public benefits; cost savings; competition in public contracts; quality and aesthetic considerations, value engineering; specialized expertise needed; public safety; market conditions; technical complexity; availability, performance and funding sources. 
Goods means any item or combination of supplies, equipment, materials or other personal property, including any tangible, intangible and intellectual property and rights and licenses related to the goods. 
Informal Solicitation means a solicitation made in accordance with the City's Public Contracting Rules to a limited number of potential contractors, in which the Solicitation Agent attempts to obtain at least three written quotes or proposals. 
Intermediate Procurement means a procurement of goods or services exceeding $5,000.00 but not exceeding $150,000.00. 
Invitation to Bid means a publicly advertised request for competitive sealed bids. 
Model Rules means the public contracting rules adopted by the Attorney General under ORS 279A.065. 
Offeror means a person who submits a bid, quote or proposal to enter into a public contract with the City. 
Oregon Public Contracting Code means ORS Chapters 279A, 279B and 279C. 
Person means a natural person or any other private or governmental entity, having the legal capacity to enter into a binding contract. 
Proposal means a binding offer to provide goods, services or public improvements with the understanding that acceptance will depend on the evaluation of factors other than, or in addition to, price. A proposal may be made in response to a request for proposals or under an informal solicitation. 
Personal Services Contract means a contract with an independent contractor predominantly for services that require special training or certification, skill, technical, creative, professional or communication skills or talents, unique and specialized knowledge, or the exercise of judgment skills, and for which the quality of the service depends on attributes that are unique to the service provider. Such services include, but are not limited to, the services of architects, engineers, land surveyors, attorneys, auditors and other licensed professionals, artists, designers, computer programmers, performers, consultants and property managers. The Purchasing Manager shall have discretion to determine whether additional types of services not specifically mentioned in this paragraph fit within the definition of personal services. 
Public Contract means a sale or other disposal, or a purchase, lease, rental or other acquisition, by the City of personal property, services, including personal services, public improvements, public works, minor alterations, or ordinary repair or maintenance necessary to preserve a public improvement. 
Public Improvement means a project for construction, reconstruction or major renovation on real property by or for the City. "Public improvement" does not include: (a) projects for which no funds of the City are directly or indirectly used, except for participation that is incidental or related primarily to project design or inspection; or (b) emergency work, minor alteration, ordinary repair or maintenance necessary to preserve a public improvement. 
Purchasing Manager means the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. 
Qualified Pool means a pool of vendors who are prequalified to compete for the award of contracts for certain types of contracts or to provide certain types of services. 
Quote means a price offer made in response to an informal or qualified pool solicitation to provide goods, services or public improvements. 
Request for Proposals means a publicly advertised request for sealed competitive proposals. 
Services means and includes all types of services (including construction labor) other than personal services. 
Solicitation means an invitation to one or more potential contractors to submit a bid, proposal, quote, statement of qualifications or letter of interest to the City with respect to a proposed project, procurement or other contracting opportunity. The word "solicitation" also refers to the process by which the City requests, receives and evaluates potential contractors and awards public contracts. 
Solicitation Agent means with respect to a particular solicitation, the City employee charged with responsibility for conducting the solicitation and making an award or making a recommendation on award to the City Council. 
Solicitation Documents means all informational materials issued by the City for a solicitation, including, but not limited to advertisements, instructions, submission requirements and schedules, award criteria, contract terms and specifications, and all laws, regulations and documents incorporated by reference. 
Standards of Responsibility means the qualifications of eligibility for award of a public contract. An offeror meets the standards of responsibility if the offeror has: (a) available the appropriate financial, material, equipment, facility and personnel resources and expertise, or ability to obtain the resources and expertise, necessary to indicate the capability of the offeror to meet all contractual responsibilities; (b) a satisfactory record of performance. The Solicitation Agent shall document the record of performance of an offeror if the Solicitation Agent finds the offeror to be not responsible under this paragraph; (c) a satisfactory record of integrity. The Solicitation Agent shall document the record of integrity of an offeror if the Solicitation Agent finds the offeror to be not responsible under this paragraph; (d) qualified legally to contract with the City; (e) supplied all necessary information in connection with the inquiry concerning responsibility. If an offeror fails to promptly supply information requested by the Solicitation Agent concerning responsibility, the Solicitation Agent shall base the determination of responsibility upon any available information or may find the offeror non-responsible; and (f) not been debarred by the City, and, in the case of public improvement contracts, has not been listed by the Construction Contractors Board as a contractor who is not qualified to hold a public improvement contract. 
Surplus Property means personal property owned by the City which is no longer needed for use by the department to which such property has been assigned. 
(Ord. 1179-05 § 8, 2-28-05; Ord. 1281-09 § 2, 4-13-09)  
TMC 1-21-090 - Public Contracts—Process for Approval of Special Solicitation Methods and Exemptions. 
(1)  Authority of City Council. In its capacity as contract review board for the City, the City Council, upon its own initiative, or upon request of the Purchasing Manager, may create special selection, evaluation and award procedures for, or may exempt from competition, the award of a specific contract or class of contracts as provided in this section. 
(2)  Basis for Approval. The approval of a special solicitation method or exemption from competition must be based upon a record before the City Council that contains the following: 
(a)  The nature of the contract or class of contracts for which the special solicitation or exemption is requested; 
(b)  The estimated contract price or cost of the project, if relevant; 
(c)  Findings to support the substantial cost savings, enhancement in quality or performance or other public benefit anticipated by the proposed selection method or exemption from competitive solicitation; 
(d)  Findings to support the reason that approval of the request would be unlikely to encourage favoritism or diminish competition for the public contract or class of public contracts, or would otherwise substantially promote the public interest in a manner that could not practicably be realized by complying with the solicitation requirements that would otherwise be applicable under these regulations; 
(e)  A description of the proposed alternative contracting methods to be employed; and 
(f)  The estimated date by which it would be necessary to let the contract(s). 
(3)  In making a determination regarding a special selection method, the City Council may consider the type, cost, amount of the contract or class of contracts, number of persons available to make offers, and such other factors as it may deem appropriate. 
(4)  Hearing. 
(a)  The City shall approve the special solicitation or exemption after a public hearing before the City Council following notice by publication in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the City area. 
(b)  At the public hearing, the City shall offer an opportunity for any interested party to appear and present comment. 
(c)  The City Council will consider the findings and may approve the exemption as proposed or as modified by the City Council after providing an opportunity for public comment. 
(5)  Special Requirements for Public Improvement Contracts. 
(a)  Notification of the public hearing for exemption of a public improvement contract, or class of public improvement contracts, shall be published in a trade newspaper of general statewide circulation at least 14 days prior to the hearing. 
(b)  The notice shall state that the public hearing is for the purpose of taking comments on the City's draft findings for an exemption from the standard solicitation method. At the time of the notice, copies of the draft findings shall be made available to the public. 
(6)  Commencement of Solicitation Prior to Approval. A solicitation may be issued prior to the approval of a special exemption under this section, provided that the closing of the solicitation may not be earlier than five days after the date of the hearing at which the City Council approves the exemption. If the City Council fails to approve a requested exemption, or requires the use of a solicitation procedure other than the procedures described in the issued solicitation documents, the issued solicitation may either be modified by addendum, or canceled. 
(Ord. 1179-05 § 9, 2-28-05)  
TMC 1-21-100 - Contracts up to $5,000.00. 
For contracts of any type for which the contract price does not exceed $5,000.00, the Solicitation Agent may use any method that the Solicitation Agent deems appropriate to the City's needs, including direct appointment or purchase, without a record of the method of award. 
(Ord. 1179-05 § 10, 2-28-05)  
TMC 1-21-110 - Solicitation Methods for Classes of Contracts. 
The following classes of public contracts and the methods that are approved for the award of each of the classes are hereby established by the City Council. 
(1)  Purchases from Nonprofit Agencies for Disabled through ORS 279.850. 
(2)  Public Improvement Contracts. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or approved for a special exemption, public improvement contracts in any amount may be issued only under an invitation to bid. 
(b)  Public improvement contracts for which the estimated contract price does not exceed $100,000.00 may be awarded using an informal solicitation for quotes. 
(c)  The City may contribute funding to a privately constructed public improvement project without subjecting the project to competitive solicitation requirements if all of the following conditions are met with respect to the entire public improvement project: 
(i)  The City's contribution to the project may not exceed 25 percent of the total cost of the project; 
(ii)  The City must comply with all applicable laws concerning the reporting of the project to the Bureau of Labor and Industries as a public works project; 
(iii)  The general contractor for the project must agree in writing to comply with all applicable laws concerning reporting and payment of prevailing wages for the project; 
(iv)  The funds contributed to the project may not provide a pecuniary benefit to the owner of the development for which the project is being constructed, other than benefits that are shared by all members of the community; 
(v)  The performance of the general contractor and the payment of labor for the project must be secured by performance and payment bonds or other cash-equivalent security that is acceptable to the Purchasing Manager to protect the City against defective performance and claims for payment; and 
(vi)  The contract for construction of the project must be amended, as necessary, to require the general contractor to maintain adequate workers compensation and liability insurance and to protect and provide indemnification to the City for all claims for payment, injury or property damage arising from or related to the construction of the project. 
(3)  Personal Services Contracts. Except as otherwise provided in these rules, personal services contracts may be awarded in the same manner as contracts for services under ORS 279B.050, and 279B.060 to 279B.085. 
(a)  Personal services contracts in any amount may be awarded under a publicly advertised request for competitive sealed proposals. 
(b)  Contracts for personal services for which the estimated contract price does not exceed $100,000.00 may be awarded using an informal solicitation for proposals. When informal solicitation is used under this subsection for personal services, the Solicitation Agent shall consider, but not be limited to, the person's (or persons'): 
(i)  Professional expertise; 
(ii)  Experience related to the particular type of work for that contract; 
(iii)  Experience in working with public entities; 
(iv)  History of completing such tasks in a timely manner; 
(v)  Ability to work with the employees and groups involved in the project; and 
(vi)  Price of services. 
(c)  Contracts for personal services for which the estimated contract price does not exceed $150,000.00 may be awarded by direct appointment without competition from a Qualified Pool. 
(d)  Contracts for which the Solicitation Agent estimates that payments will not exceed $20,000.00 in any fiscal year may be awarded under any method deemed in the City's best interest by the Solicitation Agent, including by direct appointment. 
(e)  Personal Service Contracts of not more than $100,000.00 for the continuation of work by a contractor who performed preliminary studies, analysis or planning for the work under a prior contract may be awarded without competition if the prior contract was awarded under a competitive process and the Purchasing Manager determines that use of the original contractor will significantly reduce the costs of, or risks associated with, the work. 
(4)  Hybrid Contracts. The following classes of contracts include elements of construction of public improvements as well as personal services and may be awarded under a request for proposals, unless exempt from competitive solicitation. 
(a)  Contracts for the construction of public improvements using a design/build or construction manager/general contractor construction method shall be awarded under a request for proposals. The determination to construct a project using a design/build or construction manager/general contractor construction method must be approved by the City Council, upon application of the Solicitation Agent, in which the Solicitation Agent submits facts that support a finding that the construction of the improvement under the proposed method is likely to result in cost savings, higher quality, reduced errors, or other benefits to the City. 
(b)  Energy Savings Performance Contracts. Unless the contract qualifies for award under another classification in this section, contractors for energy savings performance contracts shall be selected under a request for proposals in accordance with the City's Public Contracting Rules. 
(5)  Contracts for Goods and Services. 
(a)  The procurement of goods or services, or goods and services in any amount may be made under either an invitation to bid or a request for proposals. 
(b)  Intermediate Procurements up to $150,000.00. The procurement of goods or services, or goods and services, for which the estimated contract price does not exceed $150,000.00, may be made under an informal solicitation for either quotes or proposals A procurement may not be artificially divided or fragmented so as to constitute an intermediate procurement under this section. 
(6)  The following classes of contracts may be awarded in any manner that the Solicitation Agent deems appropriate to the City's needs, including by direct appointment or purchase. Except where otherwise provided, the Solicitation Agent shall make a record of the method of award. 
(a)  Contracts for the placing of notice or advertisements in any medium. 
(b)  Contract amendments shall not be considered to be separate contracts if made in accordance with the Public Contracting Rules. 
(c)  Contracts for the purchase of animals. 
(d)  Contracts of any type for which the contract price does not exceed $5,000.00 without a record of the method of award. 
(e)  Contracts for the acquisition of materials entitled to copyright, including, but not limited to works of art and design, literature and music, or materials even if not entitled to copyright, purchased for use as library lending materials. 
(f)  Contracts for equipment repair or overhauling, provided the service or parts required are unknown and the cost cannot be determined without extensive preliminary dismantling or testing. 
(g)  Contracts for the purchase of items for which prices or selection of suppliers are regulated by a governmental authority. 
(h)  Insurance and service contracts as provided for under ORS 414.115, 414.125, 414.135 and 414.145. 
(i)  Contracts or arrangements for the sale or other disposal of abandoned property or other personal property not owned by the City. 
(j)  Contracts for goods or services that are available from a single source may be awarded without competition. 
(k)  Contracts for the purchase of specialty goods by City for resale to consumers. 
(l)  Sponsorship agreements under which the City receives a gift or donation in exchange for recognition of the donor. 
(m)  Contracts for the disposal of structures located on City-owned property. 
(n)  Contracts that are being renewed in accordance with their terms are not considered to be newly issued Contracts and are not subject to competitive procurement procedures. 
(o)  Contracts for a single period of one year or less, for the temporary extension or renewal of an expiring and non-renewable, or recently expired, contract, other than a contract for public improvements. 
(p)  The City may negotiate and enter into a license, permit or other contract for the temporary use of City-owned property without using a competitive selection process if: 
(i)  The contract results from an unsolicited proposal to the City based on the unique attributes of the property or the unique needs of the proposer; 
(ii)  The proposed use of the property is consistent with the City's use of the property and the public interest; and 
(iii)  The City reserves the right to terminate the contract without penalty in the event that the City determines that the contract is no longer consistent with the City's present or planned use of the property or the public interest. 
(q)  A Solicitation Agent, for procurements up to $20,000.00, and the Purchasing Manager, for procurements in excess of $20,000.00 but not more than $50,000.00, may contract for the purchase of used property by negotiation if such property is suitable for the City's needs and can be purchased for a lower cost than substantially similar new property. For this purpose the cost of used property shall be based upon the life-cycle cost of the property over the period for which the property will be used by the City. The Purchasing Manager shall record the findings that support the purchase. 
(r)  Contracts for the purchase of steam, power, heat, water, telecommunications services, and other utilities. 
(7)  Contracts Required by Emergency Circumstances. 
(a)  When an official with authority to enter into a contract on behalf of the City determines that immediate execution of a contract within the official's authority is necessary to prevent substantial damage or injury to persons or property, the official may execute the contract without competitive selection and award or City Council approval, but, where time permits, the official shall attempt to use competitive price and quality evaluation before selecting an emergency contractor. 
(b)  An official who enters into an emergency contract shall, as soon as possible, in light of the emergency circumstances, (1) document the nature of the emergency; the method used for selection of the particular contractor and the reason why the selection method was deemed in the best interest of the City and the public, and (2) notify the City Council of the facts and circumstances surrounding the emergency execution of the contract. 
(c)  A public improvement contract may only be awarded under emergency circumstances if the City Manager or City Council has made a written declaration of emergency. Any public improvement contract award under emergency conditions must be awarded within 60 days following the declaration of an emergency unless the City Council grants an extension of the emergency period. Where the time delay needed to obtain a payment or performance bond for the contract could result in injury or substantial property damage, the City Manager or City Council may waive the requirement for all or a portion of required performance and payment bonds. 
(8)  Goods and services may be purchased without competitive procedures under a local government purchasing program administered by the United States General Services Administration ("GSA") as provided in this subsection. 
(a)  The procurement must be made in accordance with procedures established by GSA for procurements by local governments and under purchase orders or contracts submitted to and approved by the City Council. The Solicitation Agent shall provide the Purchasing Manager with a copy of the letter, memorandum or other documentation from GSA establishing permission to the City to purchase under the federal program. 
(b)  The price of the goods or services must be established under price agreements between the federally approved vendor and GSA. 
(c)  The price of the goods or services must be less than the price at which such goods or services are available under state or local cooperative purchasing programs that are available to the City. 
(d)  If a single purchase of goods or services exceeds $50,000.00, the Solicitation Agent must obtain informal written quotes or proposals from at least two additional vendors (if reasonably available) and find, in writing, that the goods or services offered by GSA represent the best value for the City. This paragraph does not apply to the purchase of equipment manufactured or sold solely for military or law enforcement purposes. 
(9)  Cooperative procurements may be made without competitive solicitation as provided in the Oregon Public Contracting Code. 
(10)  Surplus Property. 
(a)  Surplus property may be disposed of by any of the following methods upon a determination by the Solicitation Agent that the method of disposal is in the best interest of the City. Factors that may be considered by the Solicitation Agent include costs of sale, administrative costs, and public benefits to the City. The Solicitation Agent shall maintain a record of the reason for the disposal method selected, and the manner of disposal, including the name of the person to whom the surplus property was transferred. 
(i)  Without competition, by transfer or sale to another City department or public agency. 
(ii)  By publicly advertised auction to the highest bidder. 
(iii)  By public advertised invitation to bid. 
(iv)  By liquidation sale using a commercially recognized third-party liquidator selected in accordance with rules for the award of personal services contracts. 
(v)  The Solicitation Agent may establish a selling price based upon an independent appraisal or published schedule of values generally accepted by the insurance industry, schedule and advertise a sale date, and sell to the first buyer meeting the sales terms. 
(vi)  By trade-in, in conjunction with acquisition of other price-based items under a competitive solicitation. The solicitation shall require the offer to state the total value assigned to the surplus property to be traded. 
(vii)  By donation to any organization operating within or providing a service to residents of the City which is recognized by the Internal Revenue Service as an organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
(b)  Surplus property that has a value of less than $500.00, or for which the costs of sale are likely to exceed sale proceeds, may be disposed of by any means determined to be cost-effective, including by disposal as waste. The official making the disposal shall make a record of the value of the item and the manner of disposal. 
(c)  An item or indivisible set of specialized and personal use, other than police officer's handguns, with a current value of less than $100.00 may be sold to the employee or retired or terminated employee for whose use it was purchased. These items may be sold for fair market value without bid and by a process deemed most efficient by the Purchasing Manager. 
(d)  Upon honorable retirement from service with the City, a police officer may purchase the handgun that she or he was using at the time of retirement. The purchase price shall be the fair market value of the handgun as determined by an independent appraisal performed by a qualified weapons appraiser. An officer electing to exercise this option shall notify the City at least 30 days prior to his or her expected retirement date and request an appraisal of the handgun. Upon receipt of the appraisal fee from the officer the City shall arrange for the appraisal. A copy of the completed appraisal shall be provided to the officer, who shall have up to 30 days from the date of retirement to purchase the handgun for the appraised fair market value. 
(e)  City employees shall not be restricted from competing, as members of the public, for the purchase of publicly sold surplus property, but shall not be permitted to offer to purchase property to be sold to the first qualifying bidder until at least three days after the first date on which notice of the sale is first publicly advertised. 
(f)  Upon the consummation of a sale of surplus personal property, the City shall make, execute and deliver a bill of sale signed on behalf of the City conveying the property in question to the purchaser and delivering possession, or the right to take possession, of the property to the purchaser. 
(11)  Concession Agreements. 
(a)  No part of a Concession Agreement shall contain or constitute a waiver of any generally applicable rules, code provisions or requirements of the City concerning regulation, registration, licensing, inspection, or permit requirements for any construction, rental or business activity. 
(b)  The following concession agreements may be awarded by any method deemed appropriate by the Solicitation Agent, including without limitation, by direct appointment, private negotiation, from a qualified pool, or using a competitive process. 
(i)  Contracts under which the Solicitation Agent estimates that receipts by the City will not exceed $5,000.00 in any fiscal year and $50,000.00 in the aggregate. 
(ii)  Concessions to sell or promote food, beverages, merchandise or services at a single public event shall be awarded based on any method determined by the Purchasing Manager to provide a fair opportunity to all persons desiring to operate a concession, but in which the promotion of the public interest and success of the event shall be of predominant importance. 
(c)  Concession agreements solicited by the City for the use of designated public premises for a term greater than a single event shall be awarded as follows: 
(i)  For Concession Agreements for which the concessionaire's projected annual gross revenues are estimated to be $50,000.00 or less, the Purchasing Manager may use either an informal solicitation or formal request for proposals process applicable to contracts for personal services. If the proposals received indicate a probability that the concessionaire's annual gross revenues will exceed $50,000.00, the Solicitation Agent may, but shall not be required to, reissue the solicitation as a request for proposals. 
(ii)  Concession Agreements for which the concessionaire's projected annual gross revenues under the contract are estimated to exceed $50,000.00 annually shall be awarded using a request for proposals. 
(Ord. 1180-05 § 1, 3-14-05; Ord. 1281-09 § 3, 4-13-09)  
TMC 1-21-120 - Alternate Rules—Informal Solicitations. 
The City may use the following procedure for informal solicitations in lieu of the procedures set forth in the Model Rules. 
(1)  Informally Solicited Quotes and Proposals. 
(a)  When authorized by this chapter, an informal solicitation may be made by general or limited advertisement to a certain group of vendors, by direct inquiry to persons selected by the Solicitation Agent, or in any other manner which the Solicitation Agent deems suitable for obtaining competitive quotes or proposals. The Solicitation Agent shall deliver or otherwise make available to potential offerors a written scope of work, a description of how quotes or proposals are to be submitted and description of the criteria for award. 
(b)  The Solicitation Agent shall attempt to obtain a minimum of three written quotes or proposals before making an award. If the award is made solely on the basis of price, the Solicitation Agent shall award the contract to the responsible offeror that submits the lowest responsive quote. If the award is based on criteria other than, or in addition to, price, the Solicitation Agent shall award the contract to the responsible offeror that will best serve the interest of the City, based on the criteria for award. 
(c)  A written record of all persons solicited and offers received shall be maintained. If three offers cannot be obtained, a lesser number will suffice, provided that a written record is made of the effort to obtain the quotes. 
(2)  Qualified Pools. 
(a)  To create a qualified pool, the Purchasing Manager or City Council may invite prospective contractors to submit their qualifications to the City for inclusion as participants in a pool of contractors qualified to provide certain types of goods, services, or projects including personal services, and public improvements. 
(b)  The invitation to participate in a qualified pool shall be advertised in the manner provided for advertisements of invitations to bid and requests for proposals by publication in at least one newspaper of general statewide circulation. If qualification will be for a term that exceeds two years or allows open entry on a continuous basis, the invitation to participate in the pool must be re-published at least once every two years and shall be posted on the City's website. 
(c)  Requests for participation in a qualified pool shall describe the scope of goods or services or projects for which the pool will be maintained and the minimum qualifications for participation in the pool which may include, but shall not be limited to, qualifications related to financial stability, contracts with manufacturers or distributors, certification as an emerging small business, insurance, licensure, education, training, experience and demonstrated skills of key personnel, access to equipment, and other relevant qualifications that are important to the contracting needs of the City. 
(d)  The operation of each qualified pool may be governed by the provisions of a pool contract to which the City and all pool participants are parties. The Contract shall contain all terms required by the City including, without limitation, terms related to price, performance, business registration or licensure, continuing education, insurance, and requirements for the submission on an annual or other periodic basis of evidence of continuing qualification. The qualified pool contract shall describe the selection procedures that the City may use to issue contract job orders. The selection procedures shall be objective and open to all pool participants and afford all participants the opportunity to compete for or receive job awards. Unless expressly provided in the contract, participation in a qualified pool will not entitle a participant to the award of any City contract. 
(e)  Subject to this chapter concerning methods of solicitation for classes of contracts, the Solicitation Agent or City Council shall award all contracts for goods or services of the type for which a qualified pool is created from among the pool's participants, unless the Solicitation Agent or City Council determines that best interests of the City require solicitation by public advertisement, in which case pool participants shall be notified of the solicitation and invited to submit competitive proposals. 
(f)  The Purchasing Manager or City Council may discontinue a qualified pool at any time, or may change the requirements for eligibility as a participant in the pool at any time, by giving notice to all participants in the qualified pool. 
(g)  The Purchasing Manager shall notify any applicant who fails to qualify for participation in a pool that it may appeal a qualified pool decision to the City Council in the manner described in these rules. 
(Ord. 1180-05 § 2, 3-14-05; Ord. 1344-12, 5-14-12)  
TMC 1-21-130 - Use of Brand Name Specifications for Public Improvements. 
(1)  Specifications for contracts shall not expressly or implicitly require any product by one brand name or mark, nor the product of one particular manufacturer or seller, except for the following reasons: 
(a)  It is unlikely that such exemption will encourage favoritism in the awarding of public improvement contracts or substantially diminish competition for Public Improvement Contracts; or 
(b)  The specification of a product by brand name or mark, or the product of a particular manufacturer or seller, would result in substantial cost savings to the City; or 
(c)  There is only one manufacturer or seller of the product of the quality required; or 
(d)  The efficient utilization of existing equipment, systems or supplies requires the acquisition of compatible equipment or supplies. 
(2)  The City Council shall have authority to determine whether an exemption for the use of a specific brand name specification should be granted by recording findings that support the exemption based on subsection (a). 
(3)  Nothing in this section prohibits the City from using a "brand name or equivalent" specification, from specifying one or more comparable products as examples of the quality, performance, functionality or other characteristics of the product needed by the City, or from establishing a qualified product list. 
(Ord. 1180-05 § 3, 3-14-05)  
TMC 1-21-140 - Bid, Performance and Payment Bonds. 
(1)  Solicitation Agent May Require Bonds. The Solicitation Agent may require bid security and a good and sufficient performance and payment bond even though the contract is of a class that is exempt from the requirement. 
(2)  Bid Security. Except as otherwise exempted, the solicitations for all contracts that include the construction of a public improvement and for which the estimated contract price will exceed $50,000.00 shall require bid security. Bid security for a request for proposal may be based on the City's estimated contract price. 
(3)  Performance Bonds. 
(a)  Except as provided in these rules, all public contracts are exempt from the requirement for the furnishing of a performance bond. 
(b)  Contracts Involving Public Improvements. Prior to executing a contract for more than $50,000.00 that includes the construction of a public improvement, the contractor must deliver a performance bond in an amount equal to the full contract price conditioned on the faithful performance of the contract in accordance with the plans, specifications and conditions of the contract. The performance bond must be solely for the protection of the City and any public agency that is providing funding for the project for which the contract was awarded. 
(c)  Cash-in-Lieu. The Purchasing Manager may permit the successful offeror to submit a cashier's check or certified check in lieu of all or a portion of the required performance bond. 
(4)  Payment Bonds. 
(a)  General. Except as provided in these rules, all public contracts are exempt from the requirement for the furnishing of a payment bond. 
(b)  Contracts Involving Public Improvements. Prior to executing a contract for more than $50,000.00 that includes the construction of a public improvement, the contractor must deliver a payment bond equal to the full contract price, solely for the protection of claimants under ORS 279C.600. 
(5)  Design/Build Contracts. If the public improvement contract is with a single person to provide both design and construction of a public improvement, the obligation of the performance bond for the faithful performance of the contract must also be for the preparation and completion of the design and related services covered under the contract. 
(6)  Construction Manager/General Contractor Contracts. If the public improvement contract is with a single person to provide construction manager and general contractor services, in which a guaranteed maximum price may be established by an amendment authorizing construction period services following pre-construction period services, the contractor shall provide the bonds required by subsection (1) of this section upon execution of an amendment establishing the guaranteed maximum price. The City shall also require the contractor to provide bonds equal to the value of construction services authorized by any early work amendment in advance of the guaranteed maximum price amendment. Such bonds must be provided before construction starts. 
(7)  Surety; Obligation. Each performance bond and each payment bond must be executed solely by a surety company or companies holding a certificate of authority to transact surety business in Oregon. The bonds may not constitute the surety obligation of an individual or individuals. The performance and payment bonds must be payable to the City or to the public agency or agencies for whose benefit the bond is issued, as specified in the solicitation documents, and shall be in a form approved by the Purchasing Manager. 
(8)  Emergencies. In cases of emergency, or when the interest or property of the City probably would suffer material injury by delay or other cause, the requirement of furnishing a good and sufficient performance bond and a good and sufficient payment bond for the faithful performance of any public improvement contract may be excused, if a declaration of such emergency is made in accordance with TMC 1-21-110(7), unless the City Council requires otherwise. 
(Ord. 1180-05 § 4, 3-14-05)  
TMC 1-21-150 - Electronic Advertisement of Public Improvement Contracts. 
In lieu of publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City metropolitan area, the advertisement for an invitation to bid or request for proposals for a contract involving a public improvement may be published electronically by posting on the City's website, provided that the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The placement of the advertisement is on a location within the website that is maintained on a regular basis for the posting of information concerning solicitations for projects of the type for which the invitation to bid or request for proposals is issued; and 
(2)  The Solicitation Agent determines that the use of electronic publication will be at least as effective in encouraging meaningful competition as publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City metropolitan area and will provide costs savings for the City, or that the use of electronic publication will be more effective than publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City metropolitan area in encouraging meaningful competition. 
(Ord. 1180-05 § 5, 3-14-05)  
TMC 1-21-160 - Appeal of Debarment of Prequalification Decision. 
(1)  Right to Hearing. Any person who has been debarred from competing for City contracts or for whom prequalification has been denied, revoked or revised may appeal the City's decision to the City Council as provided in this section. 
(2)  Filing of Appeal. The person must file a written notice of appeal with the City's Purchasing Manager within three business days after the prospective contractor's receipt of notice of the determination of debarment or denial of prequalification. 
(3)  Notification of City Council. Immediately upon receipt of such notice of appeal, the Purchasing Manager shall notify the City Council of the appeal. 
(4)  Hearing. The procedure for appeal from a debarment or denial, revocation or revision of prequalification shall be as follows: 
(a)  Promptly upon receipt of notice of appeal, the City shall notify the appellant of the time and place of the hearing; 
(b)  The City Council shall conduct the hearing and decide the appeal within 30 days after receiving notice of the appeal from the Purchasing Manager; and 
(c)  At the hearing, the City Council shall consider de novo the notice of debarment, or the notice of denial, revocation or revision of prequalification, the standards of responsibility upon which the decision on prequalification was based, or the reasons listed for debarment, and any evidence provided by the parties. 
(5)  Decision. The City Council shall set forth in writing the reasons for the decision. 
(6)  Costs. The City Council may allocate the City Council's costs for the hearing between the appellant and the City. The allocation shall be based upon facts found by the City Council and stated in the City Council's decision that, in the City Council's opinion, warrant such allocation of costs. If the City Council does not allocate costs, the costs shall be paid by the appellant if the decision is upheld or by the City if the decision is overturned. 
(7)  Judicial Review. The decision of the City Council may be reviewed only upon a petition in the circuit court of Washington County filed within 15 days after the date of the City Council's decision. 
(Ord. 1180-05 § 6, 3-14-05)  
TMC 1-21-180 - Definitions. 
As used in TMC 1-21-180 through 1-21-260, the following definitions apply: 
Estimated Fee means the City's reasonably projected fee to be paid for a QBS Consultant's services under the anticipated contract, excluding all anticipated reimbursable or other non-professional fee expenses. The estimated fee is used solely to determine the applicable contract solicitation method and is distinct from the total amount payable under the contract. 
Price Agreement refers to an agreement that is related to the procurement of Architectural, Engineering, Photogrammetric Mapping, Transportation Planning or Land Surveying Services, or Related Services, under agreed-upon terms and conditions and possibly at a set price with: (a) no guarantee of a minimum or maximum purchase; or (b) an initial order or minimum purchase, combined with a continuing QBS Consultant obligation to provide Architectural, Engineering, Photogrammetric Mapping, Transportation Planning or Land Surveying Services or Related Services in which the City does not guarantee a minimum or maximum additional purchase. 
Project means all components of a City's planned undertaking that gives rise to the need for a QBS Consultant's Architectural, Engineering, Photogrammetric Mapping, Transportation Planning or Land Surveying Services, or Related Services, under a contract. 
QBS means Qualification Based Selection as required by ORS 279C.105. 
QBS Consultant means an Architect, Engineer, Photogrammetrist, Transportation Planner, Land Surveyor or provider of Related Services. A QBS Consultant includes a business entity that employs Architects, Engineers, Photogrammetrists, Transportation Planners, Land Surveyors or providers of Related Services, or any combination of the foregoing. 
QBS Services refers to Architectural, Engineering, Photogrammetric Mapping, Transportation Planning or Land Surveying Services, or Related Services. 
Related Services means personal services, other than architectural, engineering, photogrammetric, mapping, Transportation Planning or land surveying services, that are related to planning, designing, engineering or overseeing public improvement projects or components of public improvements, including, but not limited to, landscape architectural services, facilities planning services, energy planning services, space planning services, hazardous substances or hazardous waste or toxic substances testing services, cost estimating services, appraising services, material testing services, mechanical system balancing services, commissioning services, project management services, construction management services, and owner's representation services or land-use planning services. 
Transportation Planning Services include Project-specific transportation planning involved in categorical exclusions, environmental assessments, environmental impact statements and other documents required for compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act, 42 USC 4321 et. seq. Transportation Planning Services do not include transportation planning for corridor plans, transportation system plans, interchange area management plans, refinement plans and other transportation plans not associated with an individual Project which will require compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act, 42 USC 4321 et. seq. Transportation Planning Services also do not include transportation planning for Projects not subject to the National Environmental Policy Act, 42 USC 4321 et. seq. 
(Ord. 1342-12 § 1, 4-9-12)  
TMC 1-21-190 - Applicable. 
(1)  When selecting the most qualified QBS Consultant to perform Architectural, Engineering, Photogrammetric Mapping, Transportation Planning or Land Surveying Services, the City shall follow its ordinary procurement processes if the Estimated Fee will be $100,000.00 or less or the City may choose to follow the QBS selection process. If a QBS selection process is used or required, the City shall not solicit or use pricing policies and pricing proposals, or other pricing information; including the number of hours proposed for the services required, expenses, hourly rates and overhead to determine a QBS Consultant's compensation until after the City has selected the most qualified QBS Consultant in accordance with the applicable selection procedure. 
(2)  When selecting QBS Consultants to perform Related Services, the City shall use its standard selection processes or a QBS selection process, as determined in its sole discretion. 
(3)  The City may use electronic methods to screen and select a QBS Consultant in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(4)  For purposes of this chapter, a "mixed" contract is one requiring the QBS Consultant to perform QBS Services and other Services or other related goods under the contract. The City's classification of a procurement that will involve a "mixed" contract will be determined by the predominant purpose of the contract. 
(5)  Consistent with the requirements of ORS 279C.107 and the remaining requirements of ORS 279C.100, 279C.105 and 279C.110 through 279C.125, the following provisions apply to proposals received by the City for QBS or Related Services: 
(a)  "Competitive proposal," for purposes of ORS 279C.107 means proposals submitted according to the QBS selection process. 
(b)  In the limited circumstances permitted by ORS 279C.110, 279C.115 and 279C.120 where the City is conducting discussions or negotiations with proposers who submit proposals that the City has determined to be closely competitive or to have a reasonable chance of being selected for award, the City may open proposals so as to avoid disclosure of proposal contents to competing Proposers, consistent with the requirements of ORS 279C.107. Otherwise, City may open proposals in such a way as to avoid disclosure of the contents until after the City executes a contract with the selected QBS Consultant. If the City determines that it is in the best interest of the City to do so, the City may make proposals available for public inspection following the City's issuance of a notice of intent to award a contract to a QBS Consultant. 
(c)  Disclosure of proposals and proposal information is otherwise governed by ORS 279C.107. 
(6)  As required by ORS 279C.307, to ensure the objectivity and independence of providers of certain personal services that are procured under ORS 279C, the City may not: 
(a)  Procure services for the purpose of administering, managing, monitoring, inspecting, evaluating compliance with or otherwise overseeing a public contract from a contractor or an affiliate of a Contractor who is a party to the public contract that is subject to administration, management, monitoring, inspection, evaluation or oversight by means of the Services; or 
(b)  Procure services for the purpose of administering, managing, monitoring, inspecting, evaluating compliance with or otherwise overseeing a public contract through the public contract that is subject to administration, management, monitoring, inspection, evaluation or oversight by means of the Services. 
(7)  The requirements of ORS 279C.307 and subsection (6) apply in the following circumstances, except as provided in (8) of this section: 
(a)  The City requires the procurement of personal services for the purpose of administering, managing, monitoring, inspecting, evaluating compliance with or otherwise overseeing a public contract or performance under a public contract that is subject to ORS chapter 279C. 
(b)  The procurements of personal services subject to the restrictions of ORS 279C.307 includes but are not limited to, the following: 
(i)  Procurements for QBS Services, which involve overseeing or monitoring the performance of a construction contractor under a Public Contract for construction services subject to ORS Chapter 279C; 
(ii)  Procurements for commissioning services, which involve monitoring, inspecting, evaluating or otherwise overseeing the performance of a contractor providing QBS Services or the performance of a construction contractor under a public contract for construction services subject to ORS Chapter 279C; 
(iii)  Procurements for project management services, which involve administration, management, monitoring, inspecting, evaluating compliance with or otherwise overseeing the performance of a Contractor providing QBS Services, construction services subject to ORS Chapter 279C, commissioning services or other Related Services for a project; 
(iv)  Procurements for special inspections and testing services, which involve inspecting, testing or otherwise overseeing the performance of a construction contractor under a public contract for construction services subject to ORS Chapter 279C; and 
(v)  Procurements for other related services or personal services, which involve administering, managing, monitoring, inspecting, evaluating compliance with or otherwise overseeing the public contracts. 
(8)  The restrictions of ORS 279C.307 do not apply in the following circumstances, except as further specified below: 
(a)  To the City's procurement of both design services and construction services through a single "Design-Build" procurement. 
(b)  To the City's procurement of both pre-construction services and construction services through a single "Construction Manager/General Contractor" procurement. 
(Ord. 1342-12 § 2, 4-9-12)  
TMC 1-21-200 - Selection Procedures. 
(1)  The City may enter into a contract directly with a QBS Consultant without following QBS selection procedures if: 
(a)  The City finds that an emergency exists; or 
(b)  The Estimated Fee to be paid under the contract does not exceed $100,000.00; or 
(c)  The services consist of or are related to Architectural, Engineering, Photogrammetric Mapping, Transportation Planning or Land Surveying Services or Related Services that have been substantially described, planned or otherwise previously studied in an earlier contract with the same QBS Consultant and are rendered for the same project as the QBS Services rendered under the earlier contract; and 
(i)  The estimated fee to be made under the contract does not exceed $250,000.00; and 
(ii)  The City used the formal selection procedure at the time the QBS Consultant was selected for the earlier contract. 
(d)  When a project is being continued and the estimated fee is expected to exceed $250,000.00, the QBS Services to be performed under the Contract must meet the following requirements: 
(i)  The services consist of or are related to QBS Services that have been substantially described, planned or otherwise previously studied under an earlier contract with the same QBS Consultant and are rendered for the same project as the QBS Services rendered under the earlier contract; 
(ii)  The City used either the formal selection procedure or the formal selection procedure applicable to selection of the QBS Consultant at the time of original selection for the earlier contract; and 
(iii)  The City makes written findings that entering into a contract with the QBS Consultant, whether as an amendment to an existing contract or to a separate contract for the additional scope of services, will: 
(iv)  Promote efficient use of public funds and resources and result in substantial cost savings to the City; and, 
(v)  Protect the integrity of the public contracting process and the competitive nature of the procurement by not encouraging favoritism or substantially diminishing competition in the award of the contract. 
(2)  The City may select QBS Consultants for contracts under (1) of this section from any QBS Consultants offering the required Architectural, Engineering, Photogrammetric Mapping, Transportation Planning or Land Surveying Services or Related Services that the City reasonably can identify under the circumstances. 
(3)  The City shall direct negotiations with QBS Consultants selected under this section toward obtaining written agreement on: 
(a)  The QBS Consultant's performance obligations and performance schedule; 
(b)  Payment methodology and a maximum amount payable to the QBS Consultant for the Architectural, Engineering, Photogrammetric Mapping, Transportation Planning or Land Surveying Services or Related Services required under the Contract that is fair and reasonable to the City as determined solely by the City, taking into account the value, scope, complexity and nature of the QBS Services; and 
(c)  Any other provisions the City believes to be in the City's best interest to negotiate. 
(Ord. 1342-12 § 3, 4-9-12)  
TMC 1-21-210 - Formal Selection Procedure. 
(1)  The City shall use the formal selection procedure described in this section to select QBS Consultants if the Estimated Fee will exceed $100,000.00. The formal selection procedure may be used when the Estimated Fee will not exceed $100,000.00 at the City's discretion. 
(2)  When using the formal selection procedure the City shall obtain Contracts through public advertisement of Requests for Proposals, or Requests for Qualifications followed by Requests for Proposals. 
(a)  Except as provided in (b) of this section (electronic advertisements), the City shall advertise each RFP and RFQ at least once in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the Project is located and in as many other issues and publications as may be necessary or desirable to achieve adequate competition. Other issues and publications may include, but are not limited to, local newspapers, trade journals, and publications targeted to reach the minority, women and emerging small business enterprise audiences. 
(i)  The City shall publish the advertisement within a reasonable time before the deadline for the Proposal submission or response to the RFQ or RFP, but in any event no fewer than 14 calendar days before the closing date set forth in the RFQ or RFP. 
(ii)  The City shall include a brief description of the following items in the advertisement: 
(A)  The Project; 
(B)  A description of the Architectural, Engineering, Photogrammetric Mapping, Transportation Planning or Land Surveying Services or Related Services the City seeks; 
(C)  How and where QBS Consultant-applicants may obtain a copy of the RFQ or RFP; and 
(D)  The deadline for submitting a Proposal or response to the RFQ or RFP. 
(b)  In the alternative to advertising in a newspaper as described in (2) (a) of this section, the City shall publish each RFP and RFQ by one or more of electronic methods approved by the City. 
(3)  RFQ Requirements. The City may use the RFQ procedure to evaluate potential QBS Consultants and establish a short list of qualified QBS Consultants to whom the City may issue an RFP for some or all of the QBS Services described in the RFQ. 
(a)  The City shall include the following, at a minimum, in each RFQ: 
(i)  A brief description of the Project for which the City is seeking QBS Consultants; 
(ii)  A description of the Architectural, Engineering, Photogrammetric Mapping, Transportation Planning or Land Surveying Services or Related Services the City seeks for the Project; 
(iii)  Conditions or limitations, if any, that may constrain or prohibit the selected QBS Consultant's ability to provide additional services related to the Project, including but not limited to construction services; 
(iv)  The deadline for submitting a response to the RFQ; 
(v)  A description of required QBS Consultant qualifications for the QBS Services the City seeks; 
(vi)  The RFQ evaluation criteria, including weights, points or other classifications applicable to each criterion; 
(vii)  A statement whether or not the City will hold a pre-qualification meeting for all interested QBS Consultants, and, if a pre-qualification meeting will be held, the location of the meeting and whether or not attendance is mandatory; and 
(viii)  A Statement that QBS Consultant's responding to the RFQ do so solely at their expense and that the City is not responsible for any QBS expenses associated with the RFQ. 
(b)  The City may include a request for any or all of the following in each RFQ: 
(i)  A statement describing QBS Consultant's general qualifications and related performance information; 
(ii)  A description of QBS Consultants' specific qualifications to perform the QBS services described in the RFQ including QBS Consultants'' committed resources and recent, current and projected workloads; 
(iii)  A list of similar QBS services and references concerning past performance, and a copy of all records, if any, of QBS Consultants' performance under contracts with any other City; 
(iv)  The number of QBS Consultants' experienced staff available to perform the QBS services described in the RFQ, including such personnel's specific qualifications and experience and an estimate of the proportion of time that such personnel would spend on those services; 
(v)  QBS Consultants' approaches to QBS services described in the RFQ and design philosophy, if applicable; 
(vi)  QBS Consultants' geographic proximity to and familiarity with the physical location of the Project; 
(vii)  QBS Consultants' ownership status and employment practices regarding women, minorities and emerging small businesses or historically underutilized businesses; 
(viii)  If the City is selecting a QBS Consultant to provide related services, QBS Consultant's pricing policies and pricing proposals or other pricing information, including the number of hours proposed for the services required, expenses, hourly rates and overhead; 
(ix)  QBS Consultant's ability to assist the City in complying with the solar energy technology requirements of ORS 279C.527; and 
(x)  Any other information the City deems reasonably necessary to evaluate QBS Consultants' qualifications. 
(4)  The City may use any reasonable screening or evaluation method to establish a short list of qualified QBS Consultants. 
(5)  The City shall use the following procedures when issuing an RFP for a QBS Consultant: 
(a)  When using the formal selection procedure, the City shall include at least the following in each Request for Proposals, whether or not the RFP is preceded by an RFQ: 
(i)  General background information, including a description of the project and the specific QBS services sought for the project, the estimated project cost, the estimated time period during which the project is to be completed, and the estimated time period in which the specific QBS Services sought will be performed. 
(ii)  The RFP evaluation process and the criteria which will be used to select the most qualified proposer, including the weights, points or other classifications applicable to each criterion. If the City does not indicate the applicable number of points, weights or other classifications, then each criterion is of equal value. Evaluation criteria may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(A)  Proposers' availability and capability to perform the services described in the RFP; 
(B)  Experience of Proposers' key staff persons on comparable projects; 
(C)  The amount and type of resources, and number of experienced staff persons Proposers have committed to perform the QBS Services; 
(D)  The recent, current and projected workloads of the staff and resources; 
(E)  Proposers' demonstrated ability to complete successfully similar QBS Services on time and within budget, including whether or not there is a record of satisfactory performance; 
(F)  Reserved. 
(G)  References and recommendations from past clients; 
(H)  Proposers' performance history in meeting deadlines, submitting accurate estimates, producing high quality work, and meeting financial obligations; 
(I)  Status and quality of any required license or certification; 
(J)  Proposers' knowledge and understanding of the Project and Services and proposed solutions to any perceived design and constructability issues; 
(K)  Results from interviews, if conducted; 
(L)  Design philosophy, if applicable; 
(M)  If the City is selecting a QBS Consultant to provide Related Services, pricing policies and pricing proposals or other pricing information, including the number of hours proposed for the services required, expenses, hourly rates and overhead; and 
(N)  Any other criteria that the City seems relevant to the project. 
(O)  Conditions or limitations, if any, that may constrain or prohibit the selected QBS Consultant's ability to provide additional services related to the project; including but not limited to, construction services; 
(P)  Whether interviews are possible and; if so, the weight, points or other classifications applicable to the potential interview; 
(Q)  The date and time proposals are due, and the delivery location for proposals; 
(R)  Reservation of the right to seek clarifications of each proposal; 
(S)  Reservation of the right to negotiate a final contract that is in the best interest of the City; 
(T)  Reservation of the right to reject any or all proposals and reservation of the right to cancel the RFP at anytime if doing either would be in the public interest as determined by the City; 
(U)  A statement that proposers responding to the RFP do so solely at their expense, and the City is not responsible for any proposer expenses associated with the RFP; 
(V)  A statement directing proposers to the protest procedures set forth in the solicitation document. 
(W)  Special contract requirements, including but not limited to disadvantaged business enterprise ("DBE"), minority business enterprise ("MBE"), women business enterprise ("WBE"), and emerging small business enterprise ("ESB") participation goals or good faith efforts with respect to DBE, MBE, WBE and ESB participation, and federal requirements when federal funds are involved; 
(X)  A statement whether or not the City will hold a pre-proposal meeting for all interested QBS Consultants to discuss the project and the QBS Services and if a pre-proposal meeting will be held, the location of the meeting and whether or not attendance is mandatory; 
(Y)  A request for any information the City deems reasonably necessary to permit the City to evaluate, rank and select the most qualified proposer to perform the QBS Services described in the RFP; and 
(Z)  If the City does not cancel the RFP after it receives the results of the scoring and ranking for each Proposer, the City will begin negotiating a contract with the highest ranked proposer. 
(AA)  if the City and proposer are unable for any reason to reach agreement on a contract within a reasonable amount of time, as determined by the City, the City shall formally terminate negotiations with the highest ranked proposer and begin negotiations with the second ranked proposer. The City may repeat this process, if necessary, with the third ranked proposer and subsequent proposers, until negotiations result in a contract. If negotiations are unsuccessful, the City may end the particular formal solicitation and begin a new solicitation for the same QBS Services. 
(Ord. 1342-12 § 4, 4-9-12)  
TMC 1-21-220 - Ties Among Proposers. 
If the City is selecting a QBS Consultant on the basis of qualifications alone and determines after the ranking of proposers that two or more proposers are equally qualified, the City may select a candidate through any process that the City believes will result in the best value for the City taking into account the scope, complexity and nature of QBS Services. However, the tie-breaking process cannot be based on the QBS Consultant's pricing policies, pricing proposals or other pricing information. 
(Ord. 1342-12 § 5, 4-9-12)  
TMC 1-21-230 - Solicitation Cancelation, Delay or Suspension; Rejection of All Proposals. 
The City may cancel, delay or suspend a solicitation, RFQ or other preliminary procurement document, or reject all proposals, responses to RFQs, responses to other preliminary procurement documents, or any combination of the foregoing if the City believes it is in the public interest to do so. The City is not liable to any proposer for any loss or expense caused by or resulting from any such cancelation, delay, suspension or rejection. 
(Ord. 1342-12 § 6, 4-9-12)  
TMC 1-21-240 - Two-Tiered Selection Procedure—State Agency. 
(1)  If the City requires QBS Services for a public improvement owned and maintained by the City, and a state agency will serve as the lead contracting agency and will enter into contracts with QBS Consultants for that public Improvement, the City shall utilize the two-tiered selection process described below to obtain these contracts with Architects, Engineers, Photogrammetrists, Transportation Planners, or Land Surveyors. 
(2)  Tier One. The state contracting agency shall, when feasible, identify no fewer than the three most qualified proposers responding to an RFP pursuant to its own rules, or, if permitted by the State, by the City's rules, from among Architects, Engineers, Photogrammetrists, Transportation Planners, or Land Surveyors and shall notify the City of the consultants selected. 
(3)  Tier Two. In accordance with the qualifications-based selection requirements of ORS 279C.110, the City shall either: 
(a)  Select an Architect, Engineer, Photogrammetrist, Transportation Planner or Land Surveyor from the state list of proposers to perform the QBS Services for the City's public improvement from among the three candidates chosen by the State; or 
(b)  Select an Architect, Engineer, Photogrammetrist, Transportation Planner or Land Surveyor to perform the QBS Services for the City's public improvement through an alternative process adopted by the City, consistent with the provisions of the applicable RFP, if any, and these QBS rules. 
(4)  The City shall then begin contract negotiations with the selected QBS Consultant in accordance with these rules. 
(5)  Nothing in these rules should be construed to deny or limit the City's ability to enter into a contract directly with QBS consultants pursuant to ORS 279C.125(4), through a selection process established by the City. 
(Ord. 1342-12 § 7, 4-9-12)  
TMC 1-21-250 - Price Agreements. 
(1)  The City may establish price QBS Services, when the City cannot determine the precise quantities of those services which the City will require for a specified time period. 
(2)  Solicitation materials and the terms and conditions for a price agreement for QBS Services must: 
(a)  Include a scope of services, menu of services, a specification for services or a similar description of the nature, general scope, complexity and purpose of the procurement that will reasonably enable a prospective bidder or proposer to decide whether to submit a bid or proposal; 
(b)  Specify whether the City intends to award a price agreement to one QBS Consultant or to multiple QBS Consultants. If the City will award a price agreement to more than one QBS Consultant, the solicitation document and price agreement shall describe the criteria and procedures the City will use to select a QBS Consultant for each individual work order or task order; and 
(c)  Specify the maximum term for assigning QBS Services under the price agreement. 
(3)  All QBS services assigned under a price agreement require a written work order or task order issued by the City. Any work orders or task orders assigned under a price agreement must include, at a minimum, the following: 
(a)  A clearly defined statement of work and schedule for any deliverables; 
(b)  A maximum, not-to-exceed price or fixed price amount for the QBS Consultant specified and authorized under the work order or task order, and 
(c)  Language that incorporates all applicable terms and conditions of the price agreement into the task order. 
(Ord. 1342-12 § 8, 4-9-12)  
TMC 1-21-260 - Expired or Terminated Contracts; Reinstatement. 
(1)  If a City enters into a contract for QBS Services and that contract subsequently expires or is terminated, the City may proceed as follows, subject to the requirements of subsection (2) of this rule: 
(a)  Expired Contracts. If the contract has expired as the result of project delay caused by the City or caused by any other occurrence outside the reasonable control of the City or the QBS Consultant, and if no more than one year has passed since the contract expiration date, the City may amend the contract to extend the contract expiration date, revise the description of the QBS Services required to reflect any material alteration of the project made as a result of the delay, and revise the applicable performance schedule. Beginning on the effective date of the amendment, the City and the QBS Consultant shall continue performance under the contract as amended; or 
(b)  Terminated Contracts. If the City or both parties to the contract have terminated the contract for any reason and if no more than one year has passed since the contract termination date, then the City may enter into a new contract with the same QBS Consultant to perform the uncompleted QBS Services or to perform any remaining QBS services not completed under the contract as adjusted to reflect a material alteration of the project. 
(2)  The City may proceed under either subsection (1)(a) or subsection (1)(b) of this rule only after making written findings that amending the existing Contract or entering into a new Contract with the QBS Consultant will: 
(a)  Promote efficient use of public funds and resources and result in substantial cost savings to the City; 
(b)  Protect the integrity of the public contracting process and the competitive nature of the procurement process by not encouraging favoritism or substantially diminishing competition in the award of contracts; and 
(c)  Result in a contract that is still within the scope of the final form of the original procurement document. 
(Ord. 1342-12 § 9, 4-9-12)  
CHAPTER 1-23 - HERITAGE TREES 
Sections: 
 
TMC 1-23-010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to recognize, foster appreciation of, and protect Heritage Trees. It is furthermore the intention of this chapter to inspire awareness of the contribution of trees to the community and to encourage planting of trees. 
(Ord. 723-87 § 1, 6-22-87)  
TMC 1-23-020 - Definition. 
Heritage Tree means a tree or stand of trees that due to its age, size, species, quality or historic association, is of landmark importance, and its retention as such will not unreasonably interfere with the use of the property upon which it is located. 
(Ord. 723-87 § 2, 6-22-87)  
TMC 1-23-030 - Process of Determination of Heritage Trees. 
(1)  Nomination. The nomination of a tree as a Heritage Tree may be submitted by any person on a form provided by the City. No tree shall be designated as a Heritage Tree without the voluntary consent of the owner. No tree that is located in the areas designated in the Tualatin Development Code for road, water, sanitary sewer or storm sewer improvements, or construction shall be nominated. 
(2)  Review. 
(a)  The Tualatin Parks Advisory Committee (TPARK) shall be the designated Tree Committee of the City. 
(b)  TPARK shall annually review submitted applications for Heritage Tree designation based on all the following criteria being met: 
(i)  Conformance with the definition of a Heritage Tree; 
(ii)  Condition of the tree with respect to disease, or hazardous or unsafe conditions; 
(iii)  Voluntary agreement of the subject property owner to the tree's designation as a Heritage Tree; 
(iv)  Agreement of subject property owner to forfeit for the Heritage Tree any exemptions which might otherwise have been granted under TDC 34.200(2), (3) or (4). This forfeiture of exemption does not prohibit the property owner from applying for a permit to cut or otherwise remove the tree under the Tree Protection Ordinance; and 
(v)  The property owner shall further agree to record the tree's designation as a Heritage Tree, its site and its description on the land title. 
(vi)  The first year this chapter is in effect, a maximum of ten trees may be designated as Heritage Trees. Each subsequent year after the first year this chapter is in effect, a maximum of five trees may be designated as Heritage Trees. 
(3)  Designation of a Heritage Tree for Recognition and Protection. 
(a)  A plaque furnished by the City stating that an approved tree has been designated as a Heritage Tree of the City of Tualatin shall be placed in a visible location near each Heritage Tree. 
(b)  The Community Services Director is responsible for maintaining a listing of Heritage Trees. 
(c)  An annual listing/map of Heritage Trees shall be provided for Arbor Day activities. 
(4)  Removal of Designation of a Tree as a Heritage Tree. Should a Heritage Tree die, be cut, or in any other manner be removed from its location, it will be removed from the City's listing of Heritage Trees. When a tree is removed from the City's listing of Heritage Trees, then its designation as a Heritage Tree shall also be removed from the land title. 
(Ord. 723-87 § 3, 6-22-87)  
CHAPTER 1-24 - ELECTIONS, INITIATIVES, REFERENDUMS, AND REFERRALS 
Sections: 
 
TMC 1-24-010 - Initiative and Referendum. 
The initiative and referendum powers reserved to the legal voters of Tualatin by Article IV, section 1(5) and Article XI, section 2 of the Oregon Constitution must be exercised as provided by state law, except to the extent modified by the Charter and this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1381-15, 5-11-15)  
TMC 1-24-020 - Council Referral of Measures. 
(1)  The Council may submit a measure to amend the Charter or propose an ordinance to the legal voters of the City by resolution of the Council without an initiative petition. 
(2)  The Council may submit an advisory question or measure to the voters by resolution without an initiative petition. The vote on the advisory question or measure does not enact the matter into law and has no binding effect on the actions of the Council. 
(3)  A resolution of the Council to submit a measure to the voters must call for an election on the measure, state the specific date the election is to be held, and provide the full text of the measure to be considered by the voters. The date the election is held may be any general, primary, or special election as determined by the Council. 
(Ord. 1381-15, 5-11-15)  
TMC 1-24-030 - Proposal of Initiative and Referendums by Elector. 
Any elector qualified to vote in the City is authorized to propose an initiative or referendum. Initiatives or referendums proposed by persons who are not qualified to vote in the City will not be considered. 
(Ord. 1381-15, 5-11-15)  
TMC 1-24-040 - Number of Signatures Required. 
(1)  Initiative petitions to propose a new Charter, Charter amendment, or ordinance must be signed by not less than 15 percent of the registered voters of the City. 
(2)  Referendum petitions against any ordinance or measure must be signed by not less than ten percent of the registered voters of the City. 
(3)  Only registered voters of the City are qualified to sign a petition for initiative or referendum. 
(4)  All signatures gathered must be original signatures. 
(Ord. 1381-15, 5-11-15)  
TMC 1-24-050 - Filing Signatures. 
(1)  All signatures for an initiative must be filed with the City Recorder for signature verification within 180 days after the initiative petition is approved for circulation. 
(2)  All signatures for a referendum must be filed with the City Recorder for signature verification within 30 days after adoption of the ordinance sought to be referred. 
(3)  All signatures filed will be forwarded to the appropriate County elections official for verification of the number and authenticity of signatures. 
(Ord. 1381-15, 5-11-15)  
TMC 1-24-060 - Adoption of Measures; Conflicting Provisions. 
(1)  A measure is not adopted unless it receives the affirmative majority of the total number of legal votes cast. 
(2)  If, at the same election, voters approve two or more measures on the same subject matter, or where two or more measures contain conflicting provisions, the measure receiving the greater number of affirmative votes is the law adopted. 
(Ord. 1381-15, 5-11-15)  
TMC 1-24-070 - Election Dates for Initiatives and Referendums. 
(1)  An initiative measure that qualifies for the ballot will be placed on the ballot at the next available statewide general election. 
(2)  A referendum measure that qualifies for the ballot will be placed on the ballot at the next available statewide primary or general election, unless the Council finds that the public interest in a prompt resolution outweighs the costs associated with a special election. If the Council calls for a special election, the Council by resolution must specify the date upon which the special election is to be held. 
(Ord. 1381-15, 5-11-15)  
TMC 1-24-080 - Ballot Title and Explanatory Statement. 
The City Manager or City Attorney will prepare and submit the ballot title and explanatory statement for any municipal legislation referred by Council, or initiated by petition, consistent with this Chapter and state law. 
(Ord. 1343-12, 4-9-12; Ord. 1381-15, 5-11-15)  
TMC 1-24-090 - Separate Vote Requirement for Charter Amendment. 
Every amendment to the City Charter must be separately stated. Whenever two or more amendments are submitted to the electors at a single election, they must be separately voted upon, and the votes in favor and against must be cast separately. This requirement for a separate vote is to be interpreted to have the same meaning as the separate vote requirement set forth in the Oregon constitution, and cases interpreting it. 
(Ord. 1381-15, 5-11-15)  
TITLE 2 - PUBLIC WORKS AND FINANCING 
Chapters:  
CHAPTER 2-01 - LID Procedure 
Sections: 
 
TMC 2-1-010 - Short Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the Local Improvement Ordinance. 
(Ord. 798-90 §1, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
Local Improvement includes: (a) the grading, graveling, paving, or other surfacing or resurfacing of any street, or opening, laying out, widening, extending, altering, changing the grade of or constructing any street; (b) the construction or reconstruction of sidewalks; (c) the installation of street lights; (d) the installation of underground wiring, conduit, vaults or related equipment; (e) the reconstruction or repair of any street improvement; (f) the construction, reconstruction, alteration or repair of any sanitary or storm sewer, including transmission lines and pump stations; (g) the acquisition, establishment, construction or reconstruction of any off-street motor vehicle parking facility; (h) the construction, reconstruction, alteration, relocation or repair of any flood control dike, dam, floodway, conduit or drainage facility; (i) the construction, reconstruction, installation and equipping of a park, playground or neighborhood facility; (j) the construction, reconstruction, alteration or repair of any waterline, reservoir, pump station or related facility; (k) the acquisition of private property or easements which are needed or desirable either by negotiation or condemnation; (l) traffic signal and related equipment; (m) any combination of the foregoing; or (n) any other local improvement for which an assessment may be made on the property specially benefited. 
Local Improvement District means the property which is to be assessed for the cost or part of the cost of a local improvement and the property on which the local improvement is located. 
Lot means a lot, block or parcel of land. 
Owner means the owner of the title to real property or the contract purchaser of real property of record as shown on the last available complete assessment roll in the office of the County Assessor. 
Property Benefited means all real property specially benefited by the local improvement and assessable for the improvement. 
Survey means a description of real property according to the United States survey when coincident with the boundaries of the property, or by lots, blocks and addition names, or by metes and bounds, or by reference to the book and page of any public record of the county where the description may be found, or by designation of the tax lot number referring to the record kept by the assessor of descriptions of all real properties in the county or such other manner as to cause the description to be capable of being made certain. 
(Ord. 798-90 §2, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-030 - Initiating Improvements. 
(1)  When the City Council considers it necessary to make a local improvement and to pay for such local improvement in whole or in part by special assessment according to benefits conferred, the City Council shall by resolution declare its intention to make the local improvement and direct the City Engineer or other appropriate City employee to cause a survey and report to be made of the improvement and to file the survey and report with the City Recorder. 
(2)  When the owners of one-half of the property that will benefit by a local improvement request by written petition that the City Council initiate an improvement, the City Engineer shall determine the costs and expenses of the City in connection with preparing the report and survey and advise the City Council. If in response to a written petition the City Council considers it necessary or appropriate to make a local improvement and to pay for such improvement by special assessment, the City Council shall declare its intention to make the local improvement, and may require the petitioners to pay in advance a nonrefundable deposit to cover all or some portion of the costs and expenses of the City in connection with preparing the report and survey. The City Council shall direct the City Engineer or other appropriate City employee upon payment of the required deposit to cause a survey and report to be made of the improvement and to file the survey and report with the City Recorder. 
(Ord. 798-90 §3, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-040 - City Engineer's Report. 
(1)  Unless the City Council directs otherwise, the City Engineer's report shall contain the following: 
(a)  A plat or map showing the general nature, location and extent of the proposed improvements and the lands to be specially benefited assessed to pay all or any part of the cost; 
(b)  Preliminary plans and estimates of the work to be done; 
(c)  An estimate of the probably cost of the improvements including legal, administrative and engineering costs attributable to the improvements; 
(d)  A recommendation as to the method of assessment to be used to arrive at a fair apportionment of the whole or any portion of the cost of the improvement to the property specially benefited; 
(e)  An estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the specially benefited properties, using the recommended method of assessment; 
(f)  A description of the location and assessed value of each parcel or portion of a parcel of land, to be specially benefited by the improvement, with the names of the record owners; 
(g)  A recommendation of the payment schedule and rate of interest to be charged on assessments paid in installments; 
(h)  A statement showing outstanding assessments against property to be assessed; 
(i)  A statement showing whether the proposed improvements will have significant impact on present or future land uses, and if so, how the improvements comply with the Tualatin Community Plan; and 
(j)  Any other information required by the Council. 
(2)  Where the proposed improvement project is intended to be carried out in cooperation with any other governmental agency, the City Engineer may rely on the design, estimates and other information of such agency or agencies. 
(3)  Where any of the parcels proposed to be assessed has a current assessed value after deducting unpaid property taxes, deferred property taxes and other special assessments, which is less than 400 percent of the estimated amount of the proposed assessment, then a recommendation shall be made concerning additional security to cover the risk of future non-payment of the proposed assessment. The City Engineer shall evaluate any available relevant information concerning any parcel described in this section and may recommend conditioning participation by the owner of such a parcel on additional assurances, excluding the parcel from the district or not proceeding with the district. Assurances include but are not limited to cash, cash in escrow, irrevocable letters of credit and mortgage securities on other parcels where the property value exceeds prior encumbrances by 200 percent. 
(4)  If the proposed LID contains less than three separate parcels of property, the report must contain findings that indicate the benefit to the City for forming the LID. 
The benefit to the City may be in terms of new public infrastructure, correction of an existing infrastructure problem, enhancement of housing and employment opportunities, elimination of blighted areas or other factors determined by City Council. All or some of these items may be addressed by the LID. 
(5)  If the proposed LID contains properties under the ownership of less than three separate individuals then the engineer's report must contain findings that indicate the benefit to the City by forming the LID. 
The benefit to the City may be in terms of new public infrastructure, correction of an existing infrastructure problem, enhancement of housing and employment opportunities, elimination of blighted areas or other factors determined by City Council. All or some of these items may be addressed by the LID. 
(6)  If the proposed LID results in more than 40 percent of the assessment being levied against any one parcel in the LID, the engineer's report must contain recommendations that the property with more than 40 percent of the assessment provide financial guarantees acceptable to the City that assure the property owner's ability to make the assessment payments. 
(Ord. 798-90 §4, 2-26-90; Ord. 943-95 §1, 3-27-95)  
TMC 2-1-050 - Council's Action on the Report. 
After the City Engineer's report is filed with the City Recorder, the matter shall be referred to the City Council which may thereafter approve the report, modify the report and approve it as modified, require additional or different information for the improvement to be obtained, or abandon the improvement. 
(Ord. 798-90 §5, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-060 - Resolution and Notice of Hearing. 
(1)  After the Council has approved the report as submitted or as modified, the Council shall declare by resolution that it intends to make the improvement and direct the City Recorder to give notice of the Council's intent by publication, not less than ten calendar days prior to the public hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and by mailing copies of the notice by regular mail not less than 20 calendar days prior to the public hearing to the owner of any lots which would be property benefited by the proposed improvement. The notice shall contain the following: 
(a)  That the report of the City Engineer or other City employee is on file in the office of the City Recorder and is subject to public examination. 
(b)  That the Council will hold a public hearing on the proposed improvement on a specified date at which time objections and remonstrances to the improvement will be heard by the Council. 
(c)  A general description of the proposed improvement and a description of the benefited property sufficient for the average reader to determine the general location. 
(d)  The estimate of the total cost of the improvement, the portion to be paid by special assessment, the estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the property benefited, and that the City Council may adopt, correct, modify or revise the assessment against each lot according to special and peculiar benefits accruing to it from the improvement. 
(2)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (1) of this section where the proposed improvements will have a significant impact on present or future land uses, notice shall be provided to the owners of record of property on the most recent property tax assessment roll and within 100 feet of the property which is pro-posed to be benefited by the improvement. The notice provided under this subsection shall, in addition to the information required under subsection (1) of this section, state that failure of an issue to be raised in the hearing, in person or by letter, or failure to provide sufficient specificity to afford the decision maker an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals based on that issue. Persons entitled to notice under this section, but not under subsection (1) of this section, shall not be entitled to remonstrate against formation of the Local Improvement District. 
(3)  For purposes of this section, it shall be sufficient to describe the property to be benefited and proposed to be assessed by the tax account number assigned to the property and used by the County Department of Assessment and Taxation. 
(4)  For purposes of mailing notice to the parcel owner under this section, any mistake, error, omission or failure with respect to such mailing shall not be jurisdictional or invalidate the assessment proceedings. 
(Ord. 798-90 §6, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-070 - Remonstrance Against Formation of Local Improvement District. 
(1)  If written, signed objections to the establishment of a local improvement district are filed with the City Recorder no later than the end of the public hearing on the establishment of the district by the owners of lots which represent 67 percent of the property proposed to be assessed for the local improvement, the Council shall not make the proposed improvement nor shall the Council reinitiate formation of the district until at least six months after the date of the public hearing, unless the improvement consists of a sidewalk or unless the Council unanimously declares the improvement to be needed because of an emergency. 
(2)  If there is multiple ownership of a lot, each remonstrating multiple owner shall be counted as a fraction to the same extent as the owner's interest in the lot bears in relation to the other multiple owners. 
(3)  Any person acting as agent or attorney with power to act in signing a remonstrance shall, in addition to describing the property affected, file with the remonstrance a copy in writing of the authority to represent the owner of the property. 
(Ord. 798-90 §7, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-080 - Public Hearing. 
The Council shall hear and consider testimony, both oral and written, on the proposed improvement and may continue the hearing as it deems necessary. 
(Ord. 798-90 §8, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-090 - Creation of District. 
If written remonstrances are less than the amount required to defeat the proposed improvement, the Council may, by resolution, at the close of the hearing or within 60 days thereafter, based on the public testimony, declare the improvement district created in accordance with the engineer's report or abandon the improvement. 
(Ord. 798-90 §9, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-100 - Modification. 
After the public hearing, the Council may direct a modification of the proposed local improvement by revising the scope of the improvement, by reducing or enlarging the Local Improvement District which it deems will be benefited by the improvement or by making such other modifications in the proceedings as it finds reasonable. In such case, a revised report shall be made, notices mailed and published, and a second hearing held, all as set forth in TMC 2-1.040 through 2-1.090. 
(Ord. 798-90 §10, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-110 - Construction of Improvement. 
The Council may direct the City Engineer to proceed under applicable public improvement contract rules and procedures for such improvements or portions of the improvements as it has approved, or the City itself may proceed to make the improvement or any portion of the improvements. If the Council finds that the cost of the improvement would be ten percent in excess of the estimate, it may provide for holding a special hearing to consider objections to proceeding with a higher project cost. 
(Ord. 798-90 §11, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-120 - Costs of Improvement. 
The costs and expenses of a local improvement that may be assessed against the property benefited shall include; but not be limited to, costs of construction of the improvement, engineering and administrative costs of creating the district and letting the bids, design costs, inspection costs, construction financing costs including interest, costs of acquisition of any easements or other property, and attorney fees. 
(Ord. 798-90 §12, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-130 - Assessment Method and Alternative Methods of Financing. 
(1)  The Council, in adopting a method of assessing the cost of the improvement, may: 
(a)  Use any just and reasonable method to determine the boundaries of an improvement district consistent with the benefits derived. 
(b)  Use any just and reasonable method to apportion the sum to be assessed among the benefited properties. 
(c)  Authorize payment by the City of all or part of the cost of an improvement when, in the opinion of the Council, the topographical or physical conditions, unusual or excessive public travel, or other character of the work warrants only partial payment or no payment of the cost by owners of benefited properties. 
(2)  Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the Council from using other means of financing improvements, including federal and state grants-in-aid, revenue bonds, general obligation bonds, systems development charges or other legal means of finance. If other means of finance are used, the Council may levy special assessments according to benefits derived to cover any remaining cost. 
(3)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this ordinance, the Council authorizes the financing of local improvements by the issuance of general obligation improvement warrants in accordance with the procedures and with the same effect as such warrants are provided by State law. The Council may, as part of a resolution establishing a Local Improvement District, authorize the issuance of general obligation improvement warrants, and, if so authorized, such warrants shall constitute a limited general obligation of the City as consistent with State law. If warrants are authorized to be issued, the City Manager or the Manager's designee shall, on behalf of the City, seek competitive bids or quotes and negotiate the necessary terms of such warrants. "Warrants" includes but are not limited to refinancing warrants and other short term municipal promissory notes. 
(Ord. 798-90 §13, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-140 - Assessment Ordinance. 
(1)  When the estimated cost is determined on the basis of contract award or City Engineer's reported cost or after the work is completed and the cost has been actually determined, the Council shall decide whether the benefited property shall bear all or a portion of the cost. The City Engineer shall prepare the proposed assessment for each lot or portion of a lot within the Local Improvement District and file the proposed assessments in the City Recorder's Office. 
(2)  Notice of the proposed assessment shall be mailed by regular first class mail to the owner of each lot proposed to be assessed at the address shown on the last available complete assessment roll in the office of the County Assessor. The notice shall state the amount of assessment proposed on the property and fix a date by which time written objections shall be filed with the City Recorder. The date of filing such objections shall be any time within 30 days of the mailing of such notices. An objection shall be in writing, timely filed and shall state the grounds for the objection. The notice shall also specify the date of the Council meeting at which the Council will conduct a public hearing, consider the proposed assessments and objections, and if approved, adopt an ordinance levying assessments against benefited property. 
(3)  At the hearing the Council shall: 
(a)  Consider objections and may adopt, correct, modify or revise the assessment against each lot in the district according to special and peculiar benefits accruing to it from the improvement. 
(b)  By ordinance, declare and levy the assessment and direct the Recorder to enter a statement thereof in the docket of City liens as provided for in TMC 2-1.180. 
(Ord. 798-90 §14, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-150 - Notice of Assessment. 
(1)  Within ten (10) days after the ordinance levying assessments has been passed, the City Recorder shall cause a notice of assessment to be sent to each owner of assessed property by certified mail. The City Recorder shall also cause notice of the assessment to be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The first publication of notice shall be not later than 20 days after the date the assessment ordinance was enacted. 
(2)  The notice of assessment shall include the name of the property owner, a description of the assessed property, the amount of the assessment, and the date of the assessment ordinance, and shall state that interest will begin to run on the assessment and the property will be subject to foreclosure unless the owner either makes application to pay the assessment in installments within ten (10) days after the date of the first publication of notice or pays the assessment in full within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the assessment ordinance. 
(3)  Assessments shall be paid in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. 798-90 §15, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-160 - Validity of Assessments. 
No assessment made pursuant to this ordinance shall be invalid by reason of a failure to give, in any report, in the proposed assessment, in the ordinance making the assessment, in the lien docket or elsewhere in the proceedings, the name of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land or the name of any person having a lien upon or interest in the lot, tract or parcel, or by a mistake in the name of any such person or the entry of a name other than the name of such owner or other person having a lien upon or interest in such property, or by reason of any error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity, or other act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in any of the proceedings or steps specified, unless it appears that reasonable notice has not been given of the hearing upon the proposed assessment or that the assessment as made, insofar as it affects the person complaining, is unfair and unjust, and the Council shall have power and authority to remedy and correct all such matters by suitable action and proceedings. 
(Ord. 798-90 §16, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-170 - Interest Rates. 
(1)  Interest on funds expended by the City in connection with the construction or financing of a local improvement shall be charged. There is established for the purpose of computing interest the following distinct interest rate classifications: 
(a)  Construction Financing - Interest charged for construction financing begins the date the funds are first subject to and incur financing charges in connection with a project and ends on the day after substitute financing is secured. 
(b)  Bancroft Installment Financing - Interest charged to property owners choosing to pay the assessment in installments under the Bancroft Bonding Act procedures whose accounts are kept current. 
(c)  Delinquent Assessment Payment - Interest charged to property owners choosing to pay the assessment in installments under Bancroft Bonding procedures who fail to pay two consecutive installment payments. This interest rate will be assessed beginning the day after the due date of the second installment payment which comes due after an installment payment is unpaid. The interest due will be computed at this delinquent rate on the entire principal balance and this rate will continue to be charged until all outstanding billings are paid in full. This interest rate is also charged to those property owners not choosing to pay in installments that have not paid the assessment as required by TMC 2-1.150. For such accounts the rate begins on the 31st day after entry of the assessment in the lien docket and is computed from the original date of entry in the lien docket. 
(d)  System Development Charge Financing - Interest charged to persons financing a system development charge through the Bancroft Bonding Act procedures. 
(2)  The Council shall, by resolution, establish the interest rate applicable to the interest classifications identified in subsection (1)(b)(c) and (d) of this section. Such interest rate shall not exceed the maximum allowed by any applicable law. In the event that the rate established is found to exceed such legal maximum, then that maximum shall be used as the applicable rate until the resolution establishing rates is revised. 
(Ord. 798-90 §17, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-180 - Lien Record and Foreclosure Proceedings. 
(1)  After the assessment ordinance is adopted and becomes effective, the City Recorder shall enter into the docket of liens a statement of the amount assessed on each lot, a description of the improvement, names of property owners, and the date of the assessment ordinance. Upon entry into the lien docket, the amounts shall become liens on the lots that have been assessed for improvement. 
(2)  Assessment liens of the City together with accrued interest shall be superior and prior to all other liens or encumbrances on property insofar as State law permits. 
(3)  Thirty days after the effective date of the assessment ordinance, interest shall be charged at the rate set by the Council, and the City may foreclose or enforce collection of assessment liens in any manner provided by State law. 
(4)  The City may enter a bid on property being offered at a foreclosure sale. The City shall have priority over all bids except those made by persons who would be entitled under State law to redeem the property. 
(Ord. 798-90 §18, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-190 - Error in Assessment Calculation. 
Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the attention of the City Recorder, who shall determine whether there has been an error. If there has been an error, the City Recorder shall recommend to the Council an amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct the error. On enactment of the amendment, the City Recorder shall make the necessary correction in the docket of liens and send a corrected notice of assessment by certified mail. 
(Ord. 798-90 §19, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-200 - Supplemental Assessments. 
If an assessment is made before the total cost of the improvement is determined, and if the amount of the assessment is insufficient to defray expenses of the improvements, the Council may declare the insufficiency by resolution and prepare a proposed supplemental assessment. The Council shall set a time for hearing objections to the supplemental assessment, direct the City Recorder to provide notice of the hearing and hold a hearing and consider objections as in the case of an initial assessment, TMC 2-1.140. After the hearing, the Council shall make a just and equitable supplemental assessment by ordinance, which shall be entered in the docket of liens as provided by TMC 2-1.180. Notice of the supplemental assessment shall be mailed in accordance with TMC 2-1.150 and collection of the supplemental assessment shall be made in accordance with TMC 2-1.180. 
(Ord. 798-90 §20, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-210 - Rebates. 
On completion of the improvement project, if the assessment previously levied on any property is found to be more than sufficient to pay the cost of the improvement, the Council shall determine the excess and declare it by ordinance. When declared, the excess amounts must be entered in the lien docket as a credit on the appropriate assessment. If an assessment has been paid, the person who paid it or that person's legal representative shall be entitled to payment of the rebate credit. 
(Ord. 798-90 §21, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-220 - Abandonment of Proceedings. 
The Council may abandon proceedings for improvements at any time before final completion of the improvements. If liens have been placed on property under this procedure, they shall be canceled, and payments made on assessments shall be refunded to the person who paid them or to that person's legal representative. 
(Ord. 798-90 §22, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-230 - Reassessment. 
When an assessment, supplemental assessment, or reassessment for an improvement made by the City has been set aside, annulled, declared or rendered void, or its enforcement restrained by a court of this State or by a Federal Court having jurisdiction, or when the Council doubts the validity of the assessment, supplemental assessment, reassessment, or any part of it, the Council may make a reassessment in the manner provided by State law. 
(Ord. 798-90 §23, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-240 - Withholding Building Permit. 
If payments on assessments are delinquent, no building permit shall be issued for improvement of the benefited real property. 
(Ord. 798-90 §24, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-250 - Partition. 
When there has been an approved division of land or a parcel and that parcel has outstanding a special assessment remaining wholly or partially unpaid, and full payment or an installment payment is not due, then any owner, mortgagee, or lien holder of any property affected by this land division may apply for an apportionment of the special assessment, provided the property for which apportionment is to be made was assessed as a unit and entered accordingly in the docket of liens and provided further that portions of the property proposed to be dedicated for public use shall not be assessed. Apportionment of the special assessment shall be done by resolution of the Council, and that resolution shall be filed with the lien docket. Where the special assessment is being paid in installments, the installments remaining unpaid shall be prorated among those smaller parcels so that each parcel shall be charged with the percentage of the remaining installment payments equal to the percentage of the unpaid assessment charged to the parcel upon apportionment. Where apportionment would result in a parcel receiving an assessment of less than $1,000.00, then installment payment of such assessment shall not be permitted. A fee in an amount established by Council resolution shall be paid in advance of an application for apportionment, except in cases where property is being dedicated to the public and accepted by the City. 
(Ord. 798-90 §25, 2-26-90)  
TMC 2-1-270 - Repeal and Prior Assessments. 
Ord. 156-69, enacted June 9, 1969, as amended by Ord. 252-74, enacted April 22, 1974, Ord. 304A-75, enacted November 24, 1975, Ord. 379-77, enacted April 11, 1977, Ord. 499-80, enacted March 10, 1980, Ord. 503-80, enacted April 14, 1980, Ord. 547-81, enacted July 13, 1981, Ord. 572-82, enacted July 26, 1982, and Ord. 754-88, enacted July 25, 1988 is hereby repealed; provided, however, that the validity and enforceability of any special assessment made prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall continue in effect under the ordinances in place when such assessments were made. The procedures for establishment and collection of any special assessment shall be as provided in this ordinance and applicable State law. 
(Ord. 798-90 §27, 2-26-90)  
CHAPTER 2-02 - SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE 
Sections: 
 
TMC 2-2-010 - Definitions. 
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions apply: 
Person means a natural person, firm, corporation or other legal entity. 
Sidewalk means that part of the street right-of-way between the curb-lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, including tree grates, that is intended for the use of pedestrians. 
(Ord. 701-86 §1, 6-23-86; Ord. 1350-12 §1, 8-13-12)  
TMC 2-2-020 - Duty to Repair and Clear Sidewalks. 
It is the duty of an owner or occupant of land adjoining a street to maintain in good repair and remove obstructions from the adjacent sidewalk and right-of-way. 
(Ord. 701-86 §2, June 23, 1986; Ord. 1183-05, 3-28-05)  
TMC 2-2-025 - Interference with Streets or Sidewalks. 
(1)  No owner or person in charge of property that abuts a street or public sidewalk shall permit trees or shrubs on his or her property to interfere with street or sidewalk traffic. It shall be the duty of an owner or person in charge of property that abuts a street or public sidewalk to keep all trees and shrubs on his or her premises, including the adjoining parking strip, trimmed to a height of not less than eight feet above the sidewalk and not less than 12 feet above the roadway. 
(2)  No owner or person in charge of property shall allow a dead or decaying tree to stand that is a hazard to the public or to persons or property on or near the property. 
(3)  If an owner or person in charge of property removes a dead or dying tree, they shall replace it in accordance with the Tualatin Development Code. 
(Ord. 1183-05, 3-28-05; Ord. 1350-12 § 2, 8-13-12)  
TMC 2-2-030 - Liability for Sidewalk Injuries. 
(1)  The owner or occupant of real property responsible for maintaining the adjacent sidewalk shall be primarily liable to any person injured because of negligence of such owner or occupant in failing to maintain the sidewalk and tree grates/planter strips in good condition or to keep trees and shrubs trimmed in accordance with this chapter. 
(2)  If the City is required to pay damages for an injury to persons or property caused by the failure of a person to perform the duty which this ordinance imposes, the person shall compensate the City for the amount of the damages paid. The City may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce this section. 
(Ord. 701-86 §3, 6-23-86; Ord. 1183-05, 3-28-05)  
TMC 2-2-040 - Standards and Specifications. 
Sidewalks shall be repaired in accordance with the standards and specifications established by the City Council. 
(Ord. 701-86 §4, 6-23-86)  
TMC 2-2-050 - Required Sidewalk Repairs. 
(1)  When the Operations Director determines that trees or shrubs are encroaching upon or over a street, or encroaching on or over a public sidewalk more than ten percent of the width of the sidewalk or to any extent that violates the Americans with Disabilities Act, or that repair of a sidewalk is necessary, he or she shall issue a notice to the owner of property adjacent to the sidewalk or street that requires the owner of the property adjacent to the street or defective sidewalk to remove the encroachment or complete the repair of the sidewalk within 30 days after the service of notice. 
(2)  If the owner fails to remove the encroachment or repair the sidewalk within the 30 days, then the City may do the work and the cost of the work will be assessed against the property adjacent to the sidewalk or street. 
(3)  The Operations Director shall cause a copy of the notice to be served personally upon the owner of the property adjacent to the sidewalk or street, or the notice may be served by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. If, after diligent search the owner is not discovered, the Operations Director shall cause a copy of the notice to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property, and such posting shall have the same effect as service of notice by mail or by personal service upon the owner of the property. 
(4)  The person serving the notice shall file with the City Recorder a statement stating the time, place and manner of service of notice. 
(Ord. 701-86 §5, 6-23-86; Ord. 1089-01 §1, 8-27-01; Ord. 1089-01, 8-27-01; Ord. 1183-05, 3-28-05)  
TMC 2-2-060 - City May Do Work. 
If repair of the sidewalk is not completed, or the trees or shrubs have not been trimmed in accordance with this chapter, within 30 days after the service of notice, the Operations Director shall carry out the needed work on the sidewalk or trees and shrubs. Upon completion of the work, the Operations Director shall submit an itemized statement of the cost of the work to the Finance Director. 
The City may, at the discretion of the Operations Director, construct, repair or maintain sidewalks deemed to be in disrepair, or trim the trees or shrubs that are encroaching upon or over the public sidewalk or street, for the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City. 
(Ord. 701-86 §6, 6-23-86; Ord. 1077-01 §1, 7-9-01; Ord. 1089-01 §2, 8-27-01; Ord. 1077-01, 6-9-01; Ord. 1183-05, 3-28-05)  
TMC 2-2-070 - Assessment of Costs. 
Upon receipt of the report, the Finance Director shall assess the cost of the sidewalk or tree and shrub work against the property adjacent to the sidewalk or street. The assessment shall be a lien against the property and may be collected in the same manner as is provided for the collection of street improvement assessments. 
(Ord. 701-86 §7, 6-23-86; Ord. 1089-01 §3, 8-27-01; Ord. 1183-05, 3-28-05)  
CHAPTER 2-03 - PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION CODE[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1435-20 , § 1, adopted April 13, 2020, repealed ch. 2-03, §§ 2-3-010—2-3-030 and enacted a new ch. 2-03 as set out herein. Former ch. 2-03 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 444-78, §§ 1—3, adopted May 22, 1978. 
 
TMC 2-3-010 - Purpose of the Public Works Construction Code. 
The Purpose of this Chapter is to establish the Public Works Construction Code as the standards, specifications, and procedures to be used for all Public Works Construction within the City, and establish the process by which the Public Works Construction Code is to be adopted and changed. 
(Ord. No. 1435-20 , § 1, 4-13-20)  
TMC 2-3-020 - Delegation of Administrative Rulemaking Authority to City Manager. 
(1)  The City Manager is authorized to establish, maintain, and update the Public Works Construction Code, in accordance with the process established by this Chapter. The Public Works Construction Code may be adopted, amended, or changed in parts at any time consistent with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(2)  For purposes of this Chapter, the term "City Manager" means City Manager or the City Manager's designee. 
(Ord. No. 1435-20 , § 1, 4-13-20)  
TMC 2-3-030 - Notice of Administrative Rulemaking. 
(1)  Prior to the adoption, amendment, or repeal of a provision of the Public Works Construction Code, the City Manager must: 
(a)  Give public notice of the proposed rule by posting copies of the proposed rule in a conspicuous location on the City's website; and 
(b)  Provide copies of the proposed rule to interested persons. 
(2)  In addition to the draft language of the rule considered to be adopted, amended, or repealed, the notice must also: 
(a)  Generally state the subject matter and purpose of the rule; 
(b)  State the time, place, and manner for persons to submit data or written comments about the proposed rule; and 
(c)  The date upon which the rule will be adopted and effective. 
(3)  Any person may be added to the City's interested persons list, for purposes of receiving notice of the adoption, amendment, or repeal of a provision in the Public Works Construction Code, by providing the City with an address or email address for the person wishing to receiving notice. 
(Ord. No. 1435-20 , § 1, 4-13-20)  
TMC 2-3-040 - Opportunity for Comment; Consideration of Comments. 
(1)  The City must provide persons with not less than 15 calendar days to submit data or written comments in response to the proposed adoption, amendment, or repeal of a provision in the Public Works Construction Code. 
(2)  The City Manager must consider all data and comments received from persons during the 15-day comment period prior to adopting, amending, or repealing a provision in the Public Works Construction Code. 
(Ord. No. 1435-20 , § 1, 4-13-20)  
TMC 2-3-050 - Final Adoption; Filing with City Recorder; Available to Public. 
(1)  Unless the City Manager specifies another date in the adoption order, all Public Works Construct Code rules are effective upon adoption. 
(2)  Unless otherwise reguired by law, the adoption, amendment, or repeal of a provision in the Public Works Construction Code need not be based upon, or supported by, an evidentiary record. 
(3)  The adopted Public Works Construct Code rule must be filed with the City Recorder. The City Recorder must compile and publish all adopted rules, including any temporary or emergency rules. Copies of current administrative rules must be made available to the public on the City's website and upon reguest. 
(Ord. No. 1435-20 , § 1, 4-13-20)  
TMC 2-3-060 - Temporary and Emergency Rules; Effective Period. 
(1)  Temporary Rules. Temporary rules may be adopted without notice or opportunity to comment, if needed to implement the provisions of any new or amended ordinance upon the ordinance's effective date. 
(2)  Emergency Rules. Emergency rules may be adopted, amended, or suspended without prior notice or opportunity to comment, or upon abbreviated notice and opportunity to comment, if the City Manager adopts written findings that an emergency exists, and the failure to act promptly will result in prejudice to the public interest. 
(3)  Effective Period. Any temporary or emergency rule adopted, amended, or suspended is effective for a period of not more than 180 calendar days. 
(4)  No Preclusion of Permanent Rule. The adoption of a temporary or emergency rule does not preclude the subseguent adoption of an identical permanent rule. 
(Ord. No. 1435-20 , § 1, 4-13-20)  
TMC 2-3-070 - Council Review of Administrative Rules. 
(1)  The Council, upon its own motion, may review a proposed or adopted administrative rule at any time. 
(2)  After review of a proposed or adopted administrative rule, the Council may take no action, amend, or repeal an administrative rule. If the Council chooses to amend or repeal an administrative rule, the amendment or repeal must be by resolution of the Council. 
(Ord. No. 1435-20 , § 1, 4-13-20)  
TMC 2-3-080 - Violations; Penalties. 
(1)  In addition to other remedies provided in the Code, any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of the Public Works Construction Code commits a civil infraction and is subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00. Each violation, and each day that a violation continues, is a separate civil infraction. 
(2)  The civil infraction procedures in Tualatin Municipal Code Chapter 7-01 apply to the prosecution of any violation of the Public Works Construction Code. 
(Ord. No. 1435-20 , § 1, 4-13-20)  
CHAPTER 2-04 - STREET SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES FOR AREAS OF THE CITY WITHIN CLACKAMAS COUNTY 
Sections: 
 
TMC 2-4-005 - Findings. 
The City Council finds: 
(1)  The City of Tualatin is situated in both Washington and Clackamas Counties. 
(2)  All the citizens living within the City use the streets throughout the City. 
(3)  Development in the Washington County portion of the City must pay a Washington County Traffic Impact Fee (TIF) far in excess of the small amount imposed upon development in the Clackamas County portion of the City. 
(4)  Principles of fairness require that developers in Tualatin be subject to the same fees, regardless of where they develop in the City. 
(5)  Increasing the Street Systems Development Charges for developers who are not subject to the Washington County Traffic Impact Fee to the same level as the TIF equalizes the system for all developers and provides additional impact fees to mitigate the impacts of development on the City's street system. 
(Ord. 1127-03, 1-27-03)  
TMC 2-4-010 - Purpose. 
A systems development charge for street facilities is imposed on development and redevelopments that create a need for or increase the demands on street facilities for the purpose of creating a source of funds to pay for the installation, construction, reconstruction and extension of street facilities within the City of Tualatin. 
(Ord. 505-80 §1, 4-28-80; Ord. 1127-03, 1-27-03)  
TMC 2-4-020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following words and phrases mean: 
Applicant means the person seeking to obtain a building permit or to develop property within the City. 
Arterial means that term defined in the Tualatin Development Code. 
Building Permit means a permit issued by the building department for the construction, alteration, repair or placement of any building or structure under the City or state building code, except permits for the construction, repair or remodel of any building damaged or destroyed by fire or any natural disaster. 
Capital Improvements means the public facilities or assets used for transportation. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate which has the effect of generating additional weekday or weekend trips. 
Extra Capacity Facilities or Improvements means those transit, arterial and collector improvements that are necessary in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare to increase traffic capacity to address new development. Such improvements include, but are not limited to, signalization, channelization, widening, drainage work, pedestrian safety, lighting, acquisition of right-of-way and necessary easements, street extensions, railroad crossing protective devices, bridges and bike paths, and transit. 
Improvement Fee means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to this ordinance. 
Land Area means the area of a parcel of land as measure by projection of the parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane with the exception of a portion of the parcel within a recorded right-of-way or easement subject to a servitude for a public street or for a public scenic or preservation purpose. 
Occupancy Permit means the occupancy permit or temporary occupancy permit provided for in the Uniform Building Code or other ordinance of the applicable jurisdiction. If no Occupancy permit is provided for a particular use, the final inspection and approval shall serve as the occupancy permit. 
Owner means the owner or owners of record title or the purchaser or purchasers under a recorded land sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in the described real property. 
Parcel of Land means a lot, parcel, block or other tract of land in accordance with city regulations is occupied or may be occupied by a structure or structures or other use, and that includes the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning, subdivision, or other development ordinances. 
Permittee means the person to whom a building permit, development permit, a permit or plan approval to connect to the sewer or water system, or right-of-way access permit is issued. 
Public Institutions means the City of Tualatin, public schools, Washington County, the State of Oregon, and any department, agency, or subdivision of the State of Oregon, and the United States or department or agency of the federal government. 
Qualified Public Improvements means a capital improvement that is: 
(a)  Required as a condition of development approval; 
(b)  Identified in the plan adopted in TMC 2-4-055 in this ordinance; and either: 
(i)  Not located on or contiguous to a parcel of land that is the subject of the development approval; or 
(ii)  Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee is related. 
(iii)  For purposes of this definition, contiguous means in a public way which abuts the parcel. 
Reimbursement Fee means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to this ordinance. 
Road means a county road, city street, or state highway. 
Street Facilities means streets and bikepaths, including but not limited to sidewalks, traffic control signals, lighting, right-of-way acquisition, and other related items. 
Street System Development Charge or System Development Charge means a reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a combination of the fees assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of the capital improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit or building permit, or at the time of connection to the capital improvement. 
(Ord. 505-80 §2, 4-28-80; Ord. 1127-03, 1-27-03)  
TMC 2-4-025 - Street System Development Charge Established. 
(1)  A street system development charge is established and may be revised by resolution of the Council. The resolutions shall set the amount of the charge, the type of permit to which the charge applies, and if the charge applies to a geographic area smaller than the entire city, the geographic area subject to the charge. 
(2)  Unless otherwise exempted by this ordinance or other local or state law, a street system development charge is hereby imposed upon all development within the city. 
(Ord. 1127-03, 1-27-03)  
TMC 2-4-026 - Methodology. 
The methodology used for the street systems development charge is set forth in the document entitled "Transportation System Development Charge," dated November 25, 2002, which is attached as Exhibit B and incorporated into this ordinance. 
(Ord. 1127-03, 1-27-03)  
TMC 2-4-030 - Systems Development Charge. 
(1)  The systems development charge for street facilities shall be determined by multiplying the following applicable dollar amount, adjusted annually, by the number of average weekday trips generated by the new development in accordance with the basis for trip determination set forth in Appendix A, which is attached as Exhibit A and incorporated into this ordinance. 
(a)  Residential use: $239.00 per average weekday trip. 
(b)  Business and commercial use: $60.00 per average weekday trip. 
(c)  Office use: $220.00 per average week-day trip. 
(d)  Industrial use: $230.00 per average weekday trip. 
(e)  Institutional use: $99.00 per weighted average daily trip. 
The amount of the traffic impact fee for institutional uses shall be based on the weighted average daily calculated as follows: 
((average weekday trip rate x 5) + (average weekend trip x 2))/7 
(2)  If an identified use does not have a basis for trip determination stated in Appendix A, i.e., not available, the City Engineer shall either: 
(a)  Determine the trip generation based on the use listed in Appendix A most similar in traffic generation; or 
(b)  At the election and expense of the applicant, consider actual trip generation of a same or similar use verified by a registered traffic engineer. If actual trip generation is used, the City Engineer may make such adjustments as he or she deems applicable in consideration of the location, size and other appropriate factors in determining the average weekday trip. 
(3)  If a single structure includes more than one use, the City Engineer shall proportion the uses accordingly for establishing the street system development charge. 
(4)  At the time of application for a building permit, the applicant shall provide the City Engineer with necessary and applicable information, such as the type of use, number of employees or square footage of structures, necessary to calculate the charge. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any other provision, on May 1st of each year, the dollar amounts set forth in subsection (1) of this section shall be increased automatically by six percent unless the City Council first determines that the construction cost index is a more accurate estimate of the increase of decrease in construction costs. Upon such a determination, the amounts set forth subsection (1) of this section shall be increased or decreased by the average percentage fluctuation of the construction cost index over the previous ten years. In no event, however, shall there be an annual increase in excess of six percent. However, all calculations shall be carried out to the hundredths place. A final product ending in $0.49 or less shall be rounded down to the nearest dollar, $0.50 or more shall be rounded up to the next dollar. 
(6)  An Oregon registered professional engineer employed or retained by the City shall prepare the construction cost index. 
(7)  The decision of the City Council, including the accuracy of the construction cost index and its application, shall be reviewable solely under ORS 34.010 through 34.100, relating to writs of review in Circuit Court. 
(Ord. 505-80 §3, 4-28-80; Ord. 1127-03, 1-27-03)  
TMC 2-4-040 - Collection. 
(1)  Unless deferred, the systems development charge is due and payable at the time that the City issues the building permit. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no building permit shall be issued for a development subject to this charge unless the systems development charge is first paid in full. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, in cases in which the amount due for any one building permit exceeds $5,000.00, the applicant may request a payment deferral. The request must be made in writing to the City Engineer no later than the time of application for a building permit. The City Engineer shall grant deferral to the systems development charge, however, such systems development charge shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. The amount of systems development charge due on deferred obligations shall be the amount in effect at the time of the issuance of the occupancy permit. Selection of the credit or offset option must be made at the time of application for deferral. Failure to specify shall be deemed to be selection of the credit option. The selection is irrevocable. 
(Ord. 505-80 §4, 4-28-80; Ord. 1127-03, 1-27-03; Ord. 1313-10 §1, 11-22-10)  
TMC 2-4-050 - Exemptions. 
The following development is exempt from the systems development charge: 
(1)  Remodeling or replacement of any single family structure, including mobile homes; 
(2)  Multifamily structure remodeling or replacement if no additional dwelling units are added; 
(3)  Remodeling or replacement of office, business and commercial, industrial or institutional structures if such remodeling or replacement does not result in additional average weekday trips; 
(4)  Temporary uses that do not exceed 90 days in a calendar year; 
(5)  Temporary construction facilities as determined by the City Engineer. 
(6)  Development not subject to this chapter pursuant to TMC 2-4-080. 
(7)  A transit improvement that has the impact of removing vehicle trips or reducing vehicle miles of travel on the City's major street system, as approved by the City Engineer. 
(8)  Construction, remodeling or expansion of federal or state facilities otherwise exempt from taxation by cities. 
(9)  Any property within the City that pays the Washington County Traffic Impact Fee. 
(Ord. 505-80 §5, 4-28-80; Ord. 1127-03, 1-27-03)  
TMC 2-4-055 - Credit. 
An applicant for a building permit, or occupancy permit if deferral has been granted, shall be entitled to a credit against the street systems development charge for constructing eligible capital improvements. 
(1)  An extra capacity street or transit improvement is eligible for credit provided it meets all of the following: 
(a)  With the exception of eligible transit improvements, the improvement must be on a facility designated as an arterial or collector facility in the base report, which is attached as Exhibit C and incorporated into this ordinance. 
(b)  The improvement must be designed and constructed to provide additional capacity to meet projected future transportation needs. Improvements that address capacity deficiencies existing at the time of development are not eligible. In case of improvements addressing both, only that portion providing future capacity is eligible; and 
(c)  The City Engineer determines that the timing, location, design and scope of proposed improvement is consistent with and further the objectives of the capital improvements program of the City and either: 
(i)  The improvement is required to fulfill conditions of development approval issued by the City; or 
(ii)  The improvement is within the impact area of the development. For purposes of this section, "impact area" that is geographic area determined by the City Engineer in which the estimated traffic to be generated by the development exceeds ten percent of the existing average daily traffic. Existing traffic volumes shall be those observed within six months prior to filing the development application, adjusted for daily and seasonal traffic variations using factors provided by the City Engineer. 
(2)  A road or transit improvement constructed to address a safety hazard is eligible for credit if it meets the following: 
(a)  With the exception of eligible transit improvements, the improvement must be on a facility designated as an arterial or collector in this base report; and 
(b)  The improvement must have been mandated as a condition of development approval and be located within the impact area of development, as determined according to (1) (a)(i) of this section. 
(3)  The City Engineer shall determine credit eligibility. In addition to meeting the standards of subsections (1) and (2) of this section, the following shall control: 
(a)  There shall be no credit for improvements to the center 28 feet of an existing street, except safety improvements creditable under subsection (2) of this section. 
(b)  New streets are eligible projects if they meet the remaining project eligibility criteria. For new facilities, street systems development charge credits may be issued for the entire street width. 
(c)  Improvements that primarily function as access to a private street or driveway are not eligible. 
(d)  Improvements including travel lanes and bike lanes, must be at ultimate alignment, line and grade except that said improvements need not be at ultimate alignment, line and grade if the improvement is a safety improvement as provided in subsection (2) of this section. 
(e)  Bike lanes are eligible only if required pursuant to an adopted comprehensive plan. 
(f)  For intersection signals and related devices, only 50 percent of extra capacity or safety intersection improvements shall be eligible if the intersection involves one eligible and one non-eligible through street only. One-third shall be eligible in the case of a T-intersection involving a non-eligible through street. 
(g)  Transit extra capacity or safety capital improvements such as bus shelters, turnouts, park and ride lots may be eligible if approved by the appropriate transit authority. No transit credit shall exceed ten percent of the street system development charge due. 
(h)  No credits shall be issued for landscaping, street lighting, storm sewers, sidewalks, and erosion control; or sound walls, berms or other such mitigation devices. 
(i)  Street right-of-way required to be dedicated pursuant to the applicable comprehensive plan or development condition is not creditable. The reasonable market value of land purchased by the applicant from a third party to complete a required off-site improvement is creditable. 
(j)  No credit shall be granted for utility relocation except for that portion that otherwise would have been the legal obligation of the City under a franchise, easement or similar relationship 
(k)  No credit shall be granted for minor realignments not designated on the comprehensive plan. 
(l)  No more the 13.5 percent of the total eligible construction cost shall be creditable for survey, engineering, and inspection. 
(4)  All requests for credit vouchers must be in writing and filed with the City Engineer not more than 90 days after the City accepts the improvement. The amount of credit shall be determined by the City Engineer and based upon the subject improvement construction contract documents, or other appropriate information, provided by the applicant for the credit. Upon a finding by the City Engineer that the contract amounts exceed prevailing market rate for a similar project, the credit shall be based on market rates. The City Engineer shall provide the applicant with a credit voucher, on a form provided by the City Engineer. The original of the credit voucher shall be retained by the Building Department. The credit voucher shall state a dollar amount that may be applied against any street systems development charge imposed against the subject property. In no event shall a subject property be entitled to redeem credit vouchers in excess of the street systems development charge imposed. This paragraph applies only to issuance of credit vouchers and does not extend the deadline for credit redemption or otherwise modify the credit redemption deadline. 
(5)  Credits shall be apportioned against the property that was subject to the requirement to construct an improvement eligible for credit. Unless otherwise requested, apportionment against lots or parcels constituting the property shall be proportionate to anticipated average weekday trips generated by the respective lots or parcels except for institutional which shall be based on a full week. Upon written application to the City Engineer, however, credits shall be reapportioned from any lot or parcel to any other lot or parcel within the confines of the property originally eligible for the credit. Reapportionment shall be noted on the original credit voucher retained by the department. 
(6)  Credits as provided in this chapter are assignable, however, they shall apply only to that property subject to the original condition for land use approval upon which the credit is based or any partitioned or subdivided parcels or lots of such property to which the credit has been apportioned. Credits shall only apply to street systems development charges, are limited to the amount of the charge attributable to the development of the specific lot or parcel for which the credit is sought and shall not be a basis for any refund. 
(7)  Any credit must be redeemed not later than the issuance of the building permit or, if deferral was permitted under TMC 2-4-040, issuance of the occupancy permit. The applicant is responsible for presentation of any credit prior to issuance of the building or occupancy permit. Except as provided in TMC 2-4-058, under no circumstances shall any credit redemption be considered after issuance of a building permit or, if deferral was granted, issuance of an occupancy permit. 
(8)  Credit vouchers expire on the date ten years after the acceptance of the applicable improvement by the City. No extension of this deadline shall be granted. 
(9)  For purposes of this section, "constructing eligible capital improvements" means: 
(a)  The applicant for a building permit must construct the eligible improvements at its own expense; or 
(b)  The applicant for a building permit provides for the construction of eligible improvements by obtaining unanticipated funds for a unit of government, meeting all the criteria of this subsection, as determined by the City Engineer. The applicable criteria are: 
(i)  The funds are provided to a unit of government for the construction of a public improvement consistent with section TMC 2-4-060; and 
(ii)  The funds are not in the adopted or proposed fiscal year budget for the unit of government; and 
(iii)  Do not consist of street system development charges, local gas tax or property tax funds, are not in the normal program of federal aid or Oregon Department of Transportation/Metro funds programmed for city or county transportation projects; and 
(iv)  The funds are obtained solely through the efforts of the applicant for the building permit, as demonstrated by its preparation of a grant application and written acknowledgement thereof by the funding agency or grant recipient, or equivalent documentation; and 
(v)  The funds are actually received by the unit of government; or the state or federal government has issued a firm, written commitment to the unit of government to grant funds or fund the project; or a binding agreement exists between the local government and the provider of funds; and within 90 days of one of these events occurring, the applicant files a request for credit voucher. 
(vi)  Notwithstanding any other limits of street systems development credits, credits allowed under subsection (9)(b) may be issued in the full amount of the funds provided to the unit of government for eligible facilities as defined in the Base Report, and may be expended for any transportation improvement allowed under TMC 2-4-060. 
(Ord. 1127-03, 1-27-03)  
TMC 2-4-057 - Collection. 
(1)  Notwithstanding issuance of a building or occupancy permit without payment, the street systems development charge shall survive and be a personal obligation of the permittee. 
(2)  Intentional failure to pay the charge within 60 days of the due date shall result in a penalty equal to 50 percent of the charge. Interest shall accrue from the 60-day point at the legal rate established by statute. 
(3)  In addition to an action at law and any statutory rights, the City may: 
(a)  Refuse to issue any permits of any kind to the delinquent party for any development; 
(b)  Refuse to honor any credits held by the delinquent party for any development; 
(c)  Condition any development approval of the delinquent party on payment in full, including penalties and interest; 
(d)  Revoke any previous deferrals issued to the delinquent party, in which case the amount immediately shall be due and refuse to issue any new deferrals; 
(4)  For purposes of this section, "delinquent party" includes any person controlling a delinquent corporate permittee and any corporation controlled by a delinquent individual permittee. 
(Ord. 1127-03, 1-27-03)  
TMC 2-4-058 - Refunds. 
Refunds of street system development charges may be made upon initiation of the City Engineer or upon written application filed with the City Engineer. Refunds shall be allowed upon a finding by the City Engineer that there was a clerical error in the calculation of the charge. 
(Ord. 1127-03, 1-27-03)  
TMC 2-4-060 - Segregation and Use of Funds. 
All funds received from the street systems development charge shall be placed in a separate fund and shall be used for no other purpose than the construction, reconstruction and improvement of street facilities or repayment of bonded indebtedness for such improvements. 
(Ord. 505-80 §6, 4-28-80)  
TMC 2-4-070 - Scope. 
The street systems development charge provided for in this ordinance is separate from, and in addition to, any applicable tax, assessment, charge or fee otherwise provided by law or City ordinance. 
(Ord. 505-80 §7, 4-28-80)  
TMC 2-4-080 - Application of Ordinance. 
This ordinance shall not apply to those areas of the City of Tualatin located in Washington County. 
(Ord. 814-90 §2, 10-8-90)  
CHAPTER 2-05 - ZONE OF BENEFIT RECOVERY CHARGES 
Sections: 
 
TMC 2-5-010 - Legislative Findings. 
(1)  The City of Tualatin generally requires developers to construct and install necessary water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and street improvements as a condition of approval. The City and the Commission also construct water, sewer, and street improvements as part of their capital improvement projects. These improvements are generally constructed in accordance with City design and construction standards and later dedicated to the City as "public improvements." Most of these street, water, sewer and storm sewer improvements, particularly those constructed off-site, can and will be used by nearby property owners when they develop their property, and therefore represent a benefit to such nearby property owners. 
(2)  The City presently has three separate ordinances which offer some assistance to the developer who constructs necessary "public improvements" which benefit nearby property owners to the extent the latter are relieved of corresponding obligations when they develop. These ordinances generally require the person who installs improvements to request that a "refund agreement" be entered into with the City whereby those who are relieved of obligations to construct the same "public improvements" will be required by the City to pay a separate connection charge when they develop their property and thereby contribute toward the cost of installing improvements which benefit both properties. 
(3)  This ordinance is intended to provide a uniform mechanism whereby the developers, the City, and the Commission who install necessary water, sewer, street and storm sewer improvements which specially benefit other nearby property may request the City to formally examine and, if appropriate, require the owner of such benefited property to contribute some portion of the cost when the latter owner develops their property. 
(4)  The improvements which are constructed must be installed in accordance with City standards and inspected by or under the direction of City inspectors, or in accordance with the City's inspection policy before they are eligible for "acceptance" by the City. 
(5)  The process used to establish a recovery charge under this ordinance also offers property owners who would be required to pay a future recovery charge for such improvements the opportunity to examine and comment on the proposal during a City Council hearing. The decision by the Council to establish a recovery charge in a given case is not intended to be a land use decision. Rather it recognizes the "private" benefit that has been conferred by a developer on a neighboring property and offers a way of sharing those costs. 
(6)  The recovery charges that are ultimately established by the City are in addition to other charges which may be required of developers, such as system development charges, traffic impact fees, inspection fees, building permit fees, other improvement-related fees and connection charges and taxes. The recovery charges established under this ordinance represent a cost associated with development, which is specifically related to the impact created by new development and the costs of accommodating that impact. 
(7)  The recovery charge established under this ordinance is not an assessment against property and in fact does not become due and payable unless and until the subject property is connected to an improvement for purposes of development. 
(8)  The recovery charges established in this chapter are intended to be charged upon the act of development by whomever seeks the permit. Such charges are fees for service because they contemplate a development's receipt of essential municipal services based upon the nature of that development. The timing and extent of any development are within the control and discretion of the developer. Furthermore, the recovery charges imposed by this ordinance are not intended to be a tax on property or on a property owner as a direct consequence of ownership of property within the meaning of Section 11b, Article XI of the Oregon Constitution or the legislation implementing that section. 
(9)  Recovery charges established under this ordinance and paid to the developer who constructs improvements which benefit another property provide a method for more specifically adjusting the improvement requirements imposed on a developer according to the impact created by new development or assumed by the City or Commission in their capital projects. This also serves the purpose of providing reasonable compensation to the developer who constructs the beneficial improvements and thus assists in avoiding disputes over property rights. 
(Ord. 843-91 §1, 9-9-91; Ord. 1202-06, 1-9-06)  
TMC 2-5-020 - Short Title, Authority and Applicability. 
(1)  This ordinance shall be known as the "Recovery Charge Ordinance." 
(2)  The City of Tualatin adopts this ordinance pursuant to the Oregon Constitution, Article XI, Section 2, the City of Tualatin Charter of 1967, Section 4 and ORS 227.215. 
(3)  This ordinance shall apply throughout the City. 
(Ord. 843-91 §2, 9-9-91)  
TMC 2-5-030 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide a mechanism where property which has been benefited by the construction of certain improvements by another property owner or the City or the Commission will share in the cost of those improvements through payment of a recovery charge to the City at the time the benefited property is developed and the improvements are utilized. This ordinance will provide a mechanism for the City to examine the improvements which are constructed, their cost, the properties which are specially benefited by them and a reasonable method of apportioning the reimbursable costs among benefited properties. Property owners whose property would be subject to the recovery charge fee will be provided an opportunity to review and comment on pertinent information prior to the City establishing a recovery charge pursuant to this ordinance. The City will endeavor to collect recovery charges and upon receipt will forward such funds (less a fee for administration) to the person who constructed the improvements. 
(Ord. 843-91 §3, 9-9-91; Ord. 1202-06, 1-9-06)  
TMC 2-5-040 - Definitions. 
As used in this ordinance, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Tualatin. 
City Engineer or Engineer means the person appointed by the City Manager and performing the function of City Engineer or any officer or employee designated by that person to perform duties stated within this ordinance. 
City Manager means the person appointed by the City Council as the City Manager or the City employee or employees whom the City Manager may designate to carry out the administration of this ordinance. 
Commission means the Tualatin Development Commission, the urban renewal agency of the City of Tualatin. 
Development or Develop means conducting a building or mining operation, making a physical change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, dividing land into two or more parcels (including partitions and subdivisions), and creating, relocating, enlarging or terminating a right or location of access which increases the usage of any utility improvements or which creates the need for additional utility improvements. Development does not include the dedication or conveyance of right-of-way or a utility easement to the City. 
End on Connection means a physical extension of a water, sewer or storm drain utility main from its previous terminus, and not a service, lateral or other connection. 
Parcel of Land or Parcel means a lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that is occupied or may be occupied by a structure or structures or other legal use, and that includes the yards and other spaces required under the Tualatin Development Code, subdivision ordinance or related City ordinances or regulations. 
Person means a natural person, the person's heirs, executors, administrators or assigns; a firm, partnership corporation, association or legal entity, its or their successors or assigns; and any agent, employee or representative. 
Property Owner means the owner of the title to real property or the contract purchaser of real property of record as shown on the last available complete assessment roll in the Office of the County Assessor. 
Sanitary Sewer or Sewer Improvement means a pipe, conduit and where necessary, related pumping facilities or combination of them located within a public right-of-way or public utility easement, which are designed, constructed and installed in accordance with City design and construction standards, and which are intended to accommodate sanitary sewage from more than a single parcel of real property. 
Special Benefit means the value associated with a capital improvement which relates to a particular parcel of land to the extent the parcel is, or may be, partially relieved of a cost or expense associated with development, and which is different in degree from the value or benefit received by the general public. 
Storm Sewer Improvement means a pipe, conduit or artificial drainage way or improvement or combination of them, located within public right-of-way or public utility easement which is designed, constructed and installed in accordance with City design and construction standards to provide channeling, collection, filtration or discharge of storm and surface water or some combination or other water quality improvements of a size and location to serve more than a single parcel of real property. 
Street Improvement means a street or road within a public right-of-way which is designed and constructed in accordance with City design and construction standards and which includes but is not limited to: streets, storm drains, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, bike ways, traffic control devices, street trees, lights and signs and the cost of additional property for necessary or required right-of-way and slope easements and which provide a special benefit to more than a single parcel of real property. 
Utility Improvements means an off-site street, water, sanitary sewer or storm sewer improvements or a combination of improvements made by a private developer, which is transferred or dedicated to and accepted by the City and which may be the subject of one or more zone of benefit recovery charges. 
Water Improvement means a pipe, conduit and where necessary, related pumping facilities, or combination, located within a public right-of-way or public utility easement which is designed, constructed and installed in accordance with City standards, and which are intended to provide water for domestic use to more than a single parcel of real property. 
Zone of Benefit means the area or parcels of real property which are determined by the City Council to derive a special benefit from the design and construction of street, water, sewer or storm drain improvements, financed or constructed by a person, the City or the Tualatin Development Commission without the formation of a local improvement district, and which, but for such improvements being installed, the owner of the benefited property would in connection with the development of such property be required to construct all or a portion of such improvements. 
Zone of Benefit Recovery Charge or Recovery Charge means the fee required to be paid by a property owner within a previously delineated zone of benefit and determined by the City Council to be the amount which is necessary or appropriate to reimburse another person for financing or causing the construction of utility improvements. 
(Ord. 843-91 §4, 9-9-91; Ord. 1202-06, 1-9-06)  
TMC 2-5-050 - Formation of the Zone of Benefit. 
(1)  Any person who is required to finance or cause construction of street, sewer, water or storm drain improvements or some combination of improvements as a condition of development or does so as part of a City or Commission capital project, such that other nearby property upon its development will or may be relieved of the obligation or requirement to construct all or a portion of the same improvements, may request that the City establish a zone of benefit recovery charge. 
(2)  A request to establish a zone of benefit recovery charge shall be in writing and shall consist of the following information: 
(a)  Detailed or as built plans or drawings showing the actual location, nature and extent of all improvements for which a zone of benefit recovery charge is sought; 
(b)  The parcels of property identified by survey or tax lot number which are purportedly specially benefited by the improvements and from which a recovery charge is sought; 
(c)  The ownership of parcels identified in subsection (b) of this subsection, according to the current records of the County Department of Assessment and Taxation and the mailing address of such property owners; 
(d)  Detailed costs and invoices for labor, materials and actual permit and inspection fees devoted exclusively to the improvements and for which a recovery charge is sought to be established. Costs shall not include any amount of "profit" or "overhead" of the person making the application. Costs shall not include any amount of value which is or may be attributable to the real property of the applicant which has been dedicated or transferred to the City for public use, such as right-of-way or easements. The applicant shall certify the accuracy of the costs which are submitted to the City and that the applicant has actually paid or financed such costs. The amount of any recovery charge attributable to utility improvements may be based upon construction contract documents, together with construction invoices or other appropriate information, provided by the applicant. The applicant shall have the burden of establishing the cost of improvements. Should the City Engineer determine the contract amounts exceed prevailing market rates for a similar project, the recovery charge shall be based upon market rates. No more than 13.5 percent of the total eligible construction cost shall be creditable for survey, engineering and inspection; 
(e)  Any other relevant information required by the City Engineer; and 
(f)  A nonrefundable application fee, as established by the City Council by resolution, to cover the City's costs in providing notice of public hearing and the City Engineer's examination and report. 
(3)  The City Engineer shall review each application for the establishment of a zone of benefit recovery charge and prepare a report and recommendation to the City Council whether such a recovery charge should be established. The recommendation shall include and address the following factors: 
(a)  Whether the applicant has paid for some or all of the costs of a utility improvement; 
(b)  The extent to which the improvements referred to in subsection (a) of this subsection have relieved another person or persons of the future need or requirement to construct all or a portion of the same improvements; 
(c)  The area or parcels which are specially benefited by the improvement, and whether or not such parcels would, as a condition of future development be required to construct some or a portion of the same improvement for which a recovery charge is sought to be established; 
(d)  That portion of the cost of the improvement within the area of the proposed or probable zone of benefit which is appropriate for reimbursement by the owners of property identified in subsection (c) of this subsection; 
(e)  A rational formula for apportioning the cost of the improvement among properties within the proposed zone of benefit and where appropriate a unit or measure for applying the zone of benefit recovery charge to property which may with approval be developed at some future date; 
(f)  The results of applying the formula referred to in subsection (e) of this subsection to the parcels identified in subsection (c) of this subsection, which becomes the proposed recovery charge; 
(g)  The annual percentage rate applied to the proposed recovery charge over the following ten years, which represents the estimated annual return on investment of the reimbursable costs. 
(h)  Whether the applicant has complied with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(4)  The portion of the cost of the utility improvement subject to reimbursement by properties within the zone of benefit shall be determined by the City Council following a hearing, pursuant to TMC 2-5-070. 
(Ord. 843-91 §5, 9-9-91; Ord. 1202-06, 1-9-06)  
TMC 2-5-060 - Cost Recovery from Zone of Benefit. 
(1)  In addition to those more specific limitations set forth in Subsections (2) and (3) of this section, the amount of improvement costs which may be reimbursed to the person making such improvements through a zone of benefit recovery charge shall be limited as follows: 
(a)  No reimbursement shall be made or provided for the costs of that portion of the utility improvement which specially benefits the applicant's own property. 
(b)  No reimbursement shall be allowed for utility improvements which have not been dedicated to and accepted by the City as "public improvements". 
(c)  No reimbursement shall be allowed for the cost or value of real property which the applicant for reimbursement was required to dedicate or reserve for public use as a condition of development, unless such property was, prior to dedication or reservation, part of a separate parcel, owned by another where the cost of acquisition reflected an arms-length transaction or where the amount of value received represents the reasonable market value. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided, reimbursable costs and expenses shall be limited to the cost of construction, including the acquisition and condemnation costs of acquiring additional right-of-way or easements, the actual cost of permits, engineering and legal services as shown by invoice, and the estimated annual percentage increase in such costs over the ten years following completion and acceptance of the utility improvement. 
(e)  No reimbursement shall be allowed for utility improvements which have been constructed by the applicant, accepted by the City and for which no application for zone of benefit recovery charge under this ordinance has been received within six months from the date of City acceptance of such improvements. Zone of benefit recovery charges will not be imposed retroactively upon benefited properties which have applied for development or connection, or connected to or otherwise utilized utility improvements before an application for zone of benefit has been received and approved. 
(f)  No reimbursement shall be allowed where the applicant for zone of benefit recovery charge has received a credit against the traffic impact fees, systems development charges or other connection fees for the same type of utility improvement. 
(g)  The obligation to pay a zone of benefit recovery charge shall not arise unless and until an owner of property within the zone of benefit applies for or causes or permits an application to be submitted and receives approval from the City and utilizes such approval for any of the activities referred to in TMC 2-5-080(1). 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the obligation to pay a zone of benefit recovery charge for the cost of water, sewer or storm drain utility improvements shall not arise unless and until the property owner who otherwise would be subject to such a recovery charge makes a physical, lateral and not an "end-on" connection to such improvement with the intent of utilizing such utility improvement. A zone of benefit may be established and the owner of property within such zone may be required to pay a zone of benefit recovery charge in the case of an "end-on" connection for a share of the cost of oversized materials used and cost to install as part of the utility improvement where such oversized materials provided additional utility capacity for the benefit of property owners within the zone of benefit, and where the oversized materials exceed the size requirements set forth in subsection (2) of this section. 
(i)  Reimbursement shall be allowed only for those expenditures and in amounts which the City Council determines are based upon improvement construction contract documents or other appropriate information provided by the applicant, but not exceeding prevailing market rates for a similar project. 
(j)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (3) of this section, no reimbursement shall be allowed for that portion of the cost relating to extending utility improvements serving a development to the edge of such development. 
(k)  No reimbursement shall be allowed for electrical, telephone, cable television or natural gas utility relocation. 
(l)  Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed as requiring inclusion of City-owned or controlled property within a zone of benefit or payment of a zone of benefit recovery charge unless prior to City acquisition of such parcel the zone of benefit had previously been established over such property. Except as otherwise specifically provided by the City Council, the obligation to pay a recovery charge shall not apply to that portion of a parcel which is dedicated or conveyed to the City for right-of-way or public utility purposes. 
(2)  Reimbursement for utility improvements shall be further limited as follows: 
(a)  No reimbursement shall be allowed for that portion of the cost relating to over-sizing of water utility improvements. 
(b)  No reimbursement shall be allowed for that portion of the cost of sanitary sewer improvements which are eight inches or less in diameter. 
(c)  No reimbursement shall be allowed for that portion of the cost of storm sewer improvements which are 12 inches or less in diameter. 
(3)  Reimbursement for street improvements shall be further limited as follows: 
(a)  No reimbursement shall be allowed for that portion of the cost relating to minor realignment not designated in the Tualatin Development Code. 
(i)  Except for City of Tualatin Development Commission projects, no reimbursement shall be allowed for that portion of the cost of landscaping, street lighting, storm sewers, sidewalks (unless constructed on both sides of a street), erosion control measures, or sound walls, berms or other such mitigation devices. 
(ii)  The City may seek reimbursement on behalf of itself or the Tualatin Development Commissions for street improvements, which may include the portion of the cost of landscaping, street lighting, irrigation systems, storm sewers, sidewalks (unless constructed on both sides of a street), erosion control measures, or sould walls, berms or other such mitigation devises. 
(b)  Except for the cost of traffic control signals, reimbursement shall be recoverable only from those properties which lie adjacent or contiguous to a street improvement and which, but for such improvement, would otherwise be required upon development to construct all or a portion of such improvement. 
(c)  No reimbursement shall be allowed for those traffic safety improvement costs relating to mitigation of the impact of the applicant's project, which are required as a condition of development. 
(d)  A zone of benefit recovery charge may be established for street improvements which are installed to fulfill a requirement of TDC Chapter 75, relating to access management on arterial streets. 
(Ord. 843-91 §6, 9-9-91; Ord. 1202-06, 1-9-06; Ord. 1307-10 §1, 7-26-10)  
TMC 2-5-070 - Council Action on the Application. 
(1)  After the City Engineer's report on the zone of benefit application is complete, the matter shall be scheduled for hearing before the Council. The City Engineer shall provide notice of the hearing on the application for establishment of a Zone of Benefit Recovery Charge by publication, not less than 20 calendar days prior to the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation within the City and by mailing copies of the notice by regular mail not less than 30 calendar days prior to the hearing to the owners of any lot or parcels which are proposed to be subject to the recovery charge. The notice shall contain at least the following information: 
(a)  That an application for a zone of benefit recovery charge has been submitted to the City and the name of the applicant; 
(b)  That the City Engineer has prepared a report concerning the application which report is available for public inspection by contacting the City Engineer's Office; 
(c)  A general description of the improvement and the costs for which a zone of benefit recovery charge is sought; 
(d)  A general description of the improvement and the costs for which a zone of benefit recovery charge or the unit cost which will be recommended to the City Council; 
(e)  That the City Council will hold a hearing on the proposed recovery charge on a specified date at which time objections and comments regarding the proposed recovery charge will be heard by the Council; and 
(f)  That failure of the owner of property subject to the proposed recovery charge to object before the City Council either orally or in writing will be treated and relied upon by the Council as a waiver of objection to the zone of benefit recovery charge established by the Council. 
(2)  For purposes of mailing notice to the parcel owner under this section, any mistake, error, omission or failure with respect to such mailing shall not be jurisdictional or invalidate the proceedings with respect to the establishment of the recovery charge. 
(3)  The City Council shall conduct a hearing at the time and place for which notice is given or any continuance thereof and shall consider the application, the City Engineer's report and any testimony and evidence presented concerning the application. The Council shall determine the following: 
(a)  Whether the properties against which a recovery charge is proposed to be established under this ordinance are or will be specially benefited by the utility improvement. 
(b)  Whether the costs for which a zone of benefit recovery charge is sought pursuant to this ordinance are based upon improvement construction contract documents or other appropriate information provided by the applicant and the extent to which such costs exceed prevailing market rates for a similar project; 
(c)  Whether the method of apportioning the costs to benefited properties is reasonably calculated to reflect the special and peculiar benefits each lot or parcel of land receives from the improvements; 
(d)  Whether the annual percentage rate multiplier to be applied to the cost of construction reasonably reflects prevailing market rates; 
(4)  After the hearing, the City Council may modify the proposed zone of benefit or recovery charge or both by adjusting the area or the particular properties from which recovery charges will be collected, by adjusting the amount of reimbursable costs, by adjusting the formula used in apportioning reimbursable costs or by adjusting the amount of the annual percentage rate by which the recovery charge will be increased. The Council shall make a tentative oral decision on the application and thereafter adopt written findings in support of the decision. 
(5)  If the Council determines that a zone of benefit recovery charge should be established, it shall do so by resolution, specifying the properties within the zone of benefit, the method of apportioning improvement costs among properties within the zone of benefit and the annual percentage rate multiplier to be applied. 
(6)  Following adoption of a resolution establishing a zone of benefit recovery charge under this ordinance, the City Manager shall cause a copy of the resolution to be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder to provide public notice of the recovery charge applicable to these parcels described in such resolution. 
(7)  A copy of the resolution described in subsection (5) of this section shall be sent by regular mail to the owners of property subject to the recovery charge established and to any other persons who have requested a copy. Failure of the City to send the resolution to a person or property owner, or failure of a person or property owner to receive such resolution, shall not invalidate any proceeding in connection with the establishment of the recovery charge. 
(8)  Owners of any property against which a zone of benefit recovery charge is imposed may seek review under the provisions of state law for review of a municipal enactment. 
(Ord. 843-91 §7, 9-9-91; Ord. 1202-06, 1-9-06)  
TMC 2-5-080 - Obligation to Pay Zone of Benefit Recovery Charge. 
(1)  An owner of property within any zone of benefit shall pay to the City, in addition to any other applicable fees and charges, the zone of benefit recovery charge established by the City Council and adjusted to reflect the annual percentage rate multiplier, if within ten years from the date on which a zone of benefit recovery charge is established by the City, the property owner applies for or causes or permits an application to be submitted and receives approval from the City and utilizes such approval for the earliest of any of the following activities: 
(a)  A public works or other permit for connection to, or actual connection (not end on connection) to, or use of a particular utility improvement which is not a street improvement and for which a recovery charge has been established. 
(b)  Where the recovery charge relates to street improvements: 
(i)  A building permit for a new building, 
(ii)  A building permit for any addition, modification, repair or alteration of a building, which exceeds 25 percent of the value of the building within any 12 month period, or 
(iii)  Any alteration, modification or change in the use of real property, which increases the number of parking spaces required under the Tualatin Development Code in effect at the time of permit application, as determined by the Architectural Review process. For purposes of determining increases in the parking requirement, the number of required spaces for the use which existed at the time the zone of benefit recovery charge was established shall be compared with the number of required spaces for the altered, modified or changed use or uses of the property. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b)(ii) above, the value of the building shall be the amount shown on the current records of the County Department of Assessment and Taxation for such building's true cash value on the date when application is made for a building permit; however, building permits made necessary due to damage or destruction by fire or other casualty, over which the property owner had no control shall not result in application of the recovery charge. Where additions, modifications, repairs or alterations of a building occur in phases or under separate permits the cumulative value of such activities shall determine whether 25 percent of the value of the building is exceeded. 
(2)  Except as otherwise expressly provided, neither the City nor any officer or employee of the City, acting in his or her official capacity, shall be liable for payment of any recovery charge, accrued percentage rate or portion of either. Only those payments which the City has received from or on behalf of properties within the particular zone of benefit shall be payable to the applicant for the zone of benefit. The City's general fund or other revenue sources shall not be liable for or subject to payment of outstanding and unpaid recovery charges imposed on private property, notwithstanding the City's allowance of installment payments under TMC 2-5-090. 
(3)  The right to reimbursement under this ordinance is assignable and transferable after written notice is given by the applicant or the applicant's assignee to the City, advising the City to whom future payments are to be made. 
(4)  Upon receipt of a zone of benefit recovery charge or portion thereof, the City shall cause a record to be made of the property for which such payment is received and remit such funds to the person upon whose request the zone of benefit recovery charge was established or the person's assignee, less an amount equal to seven percent of the amount of payment, up to a maximum of $100.00, for the cost of administration of the program by the City. 
(5)  The owner of property subject to a zone of benefit recovery charge may apply for apportionment of the recovery charge in accordance with City procedures applicable in the case of apportionment of special assessments. A non-refundable fee in an amount established by Council resolution for apportionment of assessments shall be paid in advance. 
(6)  The City Building Official shall not issue a building or public works permit or allow water, sanitary or storm sewer connection until the charge has been paid in full or until provision for installment payments or other acceptable security has been made and approved. 
(Ord. 843-91 §8, 9-9-91; Ord. 949-95 §1, 8-14-95)  
TMC 2-5-090 - Installment Payment. 
(1)  When a recovery charge of $25.00 or more is due and collectible, the owner of the parcel of residential land subject to the recovery charge may apply for payment in 20 semi-annual installments, to include interest on the unpaid balance, in accordance with ORS 223.208. Applications shall be made on forms provided for such purpose and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee as established by the City Council by resolution. Upon acceptance by the City, the recovery charge, together with interest on the charge, shall be a lien against the property. 
(2)  The City Manager shall provide application and contract forms for installment payments, which shall include a waiver of all rights to contest the validity of the lien, except for the correction of computational errors. The interest to be charged on the unpaid balance of installments shall be established and may be amended by the City Council by resolution. 
(3)  An applicant for installment payments has the burden of demonstrating the applicant's authority to assent to the imposition of a lien on the parcel and that the property interest of the applicant is adequate to secure payment of the lien. Applications for installment payment shall be submitted no later than ten days after the recovery charge is due and payable. Prior to acceptance of any application for financing under subsection (2) of this section, the City Manager may require the subordination of any liens of record on the property. 
(4)  The City Manager shall cause a report to be made of the amount of the recovery charge, the dates on which the payments are due, the name of the owner, and the description of the parcel. 
(5)  The City Manager shall docket the zone of benefit recovery charge or portion of the charge which is financed on the City lien docket, together with a description of the property, the name of the owner and such other information as is required to keep a permanent and complete record in accordance with applicable state law. Except as otherwise expressly provided, from that time the City shall have a first lien upon the described parcel for the amount of the recovery charge, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the rate established by the City Council. Except as otherwise expressly provided by the City Council, interest rates which apply in the case of local improvement district installment financing under TMC 2-1-170 shall apply to installments payable under this ordinance. 
(6)  In lieu of such lien, or in addition to secondary lien status, upon application of the permittee the obligation to pay the unpaid recovery charge and interest may be secured by property, bond, deposits, letter of credit or other security acceptable to the City Manager. 
(7)  Payments of principal and interest shall be recorded as they are made. The lien shall be enforceable in any manner provided in ORS Chapter 223. 
(Ord. 843-91 §10, 9-9-91)  
TMC 2-5-100 - Prohibited Conduct. 
(1)  No person may cause, maintain or use a connection to a utility improvement for which a zone of benefit recovery charge has been established and which is due and payable, unless such recovery charge has first been paid, or in the case of Bancroft financing of such recovery charge where periodic payments are made on time. No person may occupy, maintain or use property or an improvement thereon for which a zone of benefit recovery charge has been imposed and which is due and payable, unless such recovery charge has first been paid. 
(2)  Violation of this section is a civil infraction, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day that a prohibited connection or use exists constitutes a separate violation. 
(3)  The remedies provided under this section are cumulative to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. 843-91 §10, 9-9-91)  
TMC 2-5-110 - Imposition of Lien for Collection of Charge. 
(1)  When for any reason the recovery charge has not been paid when it is required, the City Manager shall proceed to collect the charge in the manner provided by law. The City Manager shall cause a report and request for lien to be prepared and forward a copy by certified mail return receipt requested to the owner of record of the property. The property owner shall be notified that unless a hearing is requested to contest the City Manager's determination, the City will docket a lien against the property. Appeals shall be made and determined in accordance with this section. 
(2)  A person aggrieved by a decision of the City Manager to impose a lien on property may appeal such decision by filing a written request with the City Manager's Office describing with particularity the reason why the recovery charge has not been paid and shall comply with subsection (3) of this section. 
(3)  Appeals from the City Manager's decision shall be filed within ten days of the date the person is notified of the pending docketing of a lien or if not so notified, within ten days of the date on which the person first learned of the pending docketing of a lien. The appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee as established by the City Council by resolution and shall state: 
(a)  The name and address of the appellant; 
(b)  The nature of the determination being appealed; 
(c)  The reason the determination is incorrect; and 
(d)  What the correct determination of the appeal should be or how the correct determination should be derived. 
An appellant who fails to file such a statement within the time permitted waives his or her objections, and his or her appeal shall be dismissed. 
(4)  The City Council shall conduct a hearing on the matter after giving the appellant not less than ten days written notice by regular mail. The Council shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the appellant's written statement and any additional evidence he or she deems appropriate. At the hearing the appellant may present testimony and oral argument personally or by counsel. 
(5)  If no appeal is filed or if the City Council finds that a recovery charge is due, payable, unpaid and uncollected, the Council shall, by motion, direct the City Manager to docket the unpaid and uncollected recovery charge in the lien docket. Upon completion of the docketing, the City shall have a lien against the described land for the full amount of the unpaid charge and the City's actual cost of providing notice on the owner together with interest at the legal rate of ten percent from the date of docketing. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223. The docketing of a lien against the property by the City shall not preclude the City from pursuing other available remedies to collect such charges, interest, penalties and costs. 
(Ord. 843-91, 9-9-91)  
CHAPTER 2-06 - SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT CHARGES 
Sections: 
 
TMC 2-6-010 - Legislative Findings. 
The Council of the City of Tualatin finds, determines and declares that: 
(1)  Section 4 of the City Charter of 1967 as amended, grant the City authority to impose Systems Development Charges (SDC) to equitably spread the cost of essential capital improvements to new development. 
(2)  Given the mobility of the population and the geographic size of the City, most capital improvement projects benefit new development regardless of where in the City it occurs. The entire community's health may be affected if adequately sized water services, public parks and recreation areas and other capital improvements are not provided in all locations of the City and its environs. Development is occurring throughout the entire City and no single area of the City is experiencing such a high level of new development activity to require SDC revenue from development in one area be dedicated to that same area. It is more cost efficient to use SDC revenue from new development in the entire community to finance the growth related portion of capital improvements based upon a City-wide priority rather than to hold the SDC revenue generated in one area of the community for improvements just in that area. 
(3)  The imposition of connection fees is one of the preferred methods of ensuring that development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital facilities necessary to accommodate such development. This must be done in order to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(4)  The report entitled, "Report of Water Supply System Improvements Through a Systems Development Charge for the City of Tualatin," dated June 24, 1991, and prepared by the Engineering and Building Department of the City, ("Water SDC Methodology") sets forth a reasonable methodology and analysis for the determination of the impact of new development on the need and costs for additional water system improvements. 
(5)  The report entitled "Park System Development Charge Methodology," for the City of Tualatin, adopted December 10, 2018 as prepared by Community Attributes Inc. establishes the methodology and analysis for the determination of the impact of new development on the need and costs for additional parkland and related improvements. 
(6)  Whenever the City Council has authorized an intergovernmental agreement which requires the City to impose an SDC, the City Council may, by resolution, approve the methodology, impose the charge and thereafter the City may collect and expend the revenue as though the same were City capital improvements and funds as provided in this ordinance or any future amendment. 
(7)  The systems development charges established in this section are intended to be charges upon the act of development by whomever seeks the permit. Such charges are fees for service because they contemplate a development's receipt of essential municipal services based upon the nature of that development. The timing and extent of any development are within the control and discretion of the developer. 
(8)  The SDC imposed by this ordinance is not intended to be a tax on property or on a property owner as a direct consequence of ownership of property within the meaning of Section 11b, Article XI of the Oregon Constitution or the legislation implementing that section. 
(9)  Even if the SDC imposed is viewed under Section 11b, Article XI of the Oregon Constitution as a tax against property or against a property owner as a direct consequence of ownership of that property, it is an incurred charge within the meaning of that section and the statutes implementing it because: 
(a)  It allows the owner to control the quantity of the service by determining the extent of development to occur upon the property. 
(b)  It allows the owner to determine when the service is to be initiated or increased by controlling when the development occurs. 
(c)  State law and the ordinances of this City require the owner to provide certain basic utility and infrastructure services to the property when it is developed for human occupancy. The provision of these basic services are a routine obligation of the owner of the affected property and essential to the health and safety of the community. 
(10)  Among the basic services which the City is required to provide its residents are the capital improvements as defined in this ordinance. 
(11)  The SDC imposed by this ordinance is based upon the costs of providing existing or planned for capital improvements and does not impose charges on persons not receiving a service and imposing a burden upon the City's existing capital improvements. 
(12)  Where this ordinance or the methodology used to establish a SDC permits a credit to be given for the dedication to or for the benefit of the public of a portion of the permittee's property or the property of another which is obtained by the permittee, such credit provides reasonable compensation to the permittee and thus assists in avoiding disputes over the acquisition of such property. 
(13)  Because water system improvements contemplated as part of the City's capital improvement plan include a C level reservoir, and storage capacity within the system can be moved between and among the City's water service levels as needed, increased capacity at one service level improves the capacity of the system and, therefore, the systems development charge imposed under Ordinance 796-90 is intended to be collected as part of a systems development charge for water system improvements within the City. Those persons who have previously paid the charge imposed under Ordinance 796-90 and who would be subject to the payment of SDC's under this ordinance shall be eligible for credit against the water system development charge. 
(Ord. 833-91 §1, 6-24-91; Ord. 1415-18, § 2, 1-14-19)  
TMC 2-6-020 - Title, Authority and Applicability. 
(1)  This ordinance shall be known as the "Systems Development Charge Ordinance." 
(2)  The City of Tualatin has the authority to adopt this ordinance pursuant to the Oregon Constitution Article XI, Section 2, ORS 223.297 through 223.314 and the City of Tualatin Charter of 1967, Section 4. 
(3)  This ordinance shall apply throughout the City. 
(Ord. 833-91 §2, 6-24-91)  
TMC 2-6-030 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to impose an equitable share of the public cost of capital improvements upon those developments that create the need for or increase the demands for such capital improvements. 
(Ord. 833-91 §3,6-24-91)  
TMC 2-6-040 - Scope. 
The charge or charges imposed by this ordinance are separate from and in addition to any applicable taxes, assessments, permit fees, and charges, including but not limited to charges imposed under a "recovery agreement" as provided by City Ordinance, transportation impact fees, storm and surface water runoff or management fees, sanitary sewer system development charges, or fees otherwise provided by or imposed as a condition of development by the City or any other government agency. A systems development charge is to be considered in the nature of a charge for service rendered or to be rendered, a service hookup charge, or a charge for facilities provided or to be provided. 
(Ord. 833-91 §4, 6-24-91)  
TMC 2-6-050 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following definitions apply: 
Bike Path means a bikeway physically separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within the public street right-of-way or within an independent right-of-way or easement. 
City Manager means the person appointed by the City Council as the City Manager or the City employee or employees whom the City Manager may designate to carry out the administration of this ordinance. 
Capital Improvements means public facilities or assets used for any of the following: (a) water supply; including but not limited to, treatment, storage, pumping and distribution; (b) parks and recreation, including, but not limited to parks, natural areas, greenways, and facilities managed, operated, and/or maintained by the City; (c) sanitary sewers, including collection and transmission; (d) storm sewers, including drainage and flood control; and (e) transportation; including but not limited to streets, traffic control devices, illumination, sidewalks and associated landscaping improvements, and parking. 
Development means conducting a building or mining operation, making a physical change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, dividing land into two or more parcels, including partitions and subdivisions, and creating, relocating, enlarging or terminating a right or location of access, which increases the usage of capital improvements or which creates the need for additional capital improvements. 
Housing Unit means a habitable structure containing one or more rooms designed for occupancy by one individual or family and not having more than one cooking facility consisting of at least a sink, refrigerator, and range. 
Improvement Fee means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the date the fee established by this ordinance is adopted. This term shall have the same meaning as the term "improvement fee" as used in ORS 223.297 through 223.314. 
Land Area means the area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane to the edge of the existing right-of-way or easement subject to a servitude for a public street or greenway, public river bed or stream bed or other approved public scenic or preservation purpose. Measurement of land area shall be figured on gross acreage prior to dedication of property for public right-of-way or easements which may be required or may occur in connection with development. 
Owner means the owner or owners of record title or the purchaser or purchasers under a recorded sales agreement and other persons having an interest of record in the described real property. 
Parcel of Land means a lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that is occupied or may be occupied by a structure or structures or other legal use, and that includes the yards and other open spaces required under the Tualatin Development Code, subdivision ordinance, or related City ordinances or regulations. 
Qualified Public Improvements means a capital improvement that is required as a condition of development approval, identified in the plan and list adopted pursuant to ORS 223.309 and either: (a) not located on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval; or (b) located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee is related. 
Reimbursement Fee means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements constructed or under construction on the date the fee established by this ordinance becomes effective. This term shall have the same meaning as the term "reimbursement fee" as used in ORS 223.297 through 223.314. 
Systems Development Charge or SDC means an improvement fee, reimbursement fee or a combination assessed or collected at any of the times specified under TMC 2-6-100. It shall also include that portion of a connection charge that is greater than the amount necessary to reimburse the City for its average cost of inspecting and installing connections with water facilities. 
(Ord. 833-91 §5, 6-24-91; Ord. 840-91, §1; 7-22-91; Ord. 914-94, §§1 and 2, 2-28-94; Ord. 932-94, §1, 9-12-94; Ord. 1154-04, 1-12-04; Ord. 1415-18, § 3, 1-14-19)  
TMC 2-6-060 - System Development Charges Established. 
(1)  Unless otherwise exempted by this ordinance or other local or state law, a Park System Development Charge is established, based upon the Parks SDC Methodology adopted in TMC 2-6-010(5) and is imposed upon all new development within the City. The Parks SDC charge imposed will be the amount as established by resolution of the Council. 
(2)  Unless otherwise exempted by this ordinance or other local or state law, a Water System Development Charge in the amount of $2,758.00 per future meter equivalent (FME) is established, as more specifically set forth in the Water SDC Methodology approved on December 8, 2003, which is attached and incorporated into this ordinance, and is imposed upon all new development within the City. The charge may be revised by resolution of the Council. 
(3)  Systems development charges for each type of capital improvement provided by the City may be created and shall be established by resolution of the Council. When required by Council resolution or Council-authorized intergovernmental agreement to collect, a systems development charge for a capital improvement provided by another government shall be established and may be revised by resolution of the Council. 
(4)  On February 1, 2005 and each February 1 thereafter, the water SDC shall automatically increase. The amount of increase shall be the change in Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index for Seattle, Washington. This increase shall not require further action by the City Council. 
(Ord. 833-91 §6, 6-24-91; Ord. 1153-04, 1-12-04; Ord. 1415-18, § 4, 1-14-19)  
TMC 2-6-070 - Methodology. 
(1)  The methodology used to establish a reimbursement fee or reimbursement fee component of a system development charge shall consider all costs of then-existing facilities, prior contributions by then-existing users, the value of unused capacity, rate-making principles employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by the City Manager. The methodology shall promote the objective that future users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities. 
(2)  The methodology used to establish an improvement fee or the improvement fee component of a system development charge shall consider all costs of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the systems to which the fee is related and shall provide for a credit against the improvement fee for the construction of any qualified public improvement. 
(3)  The methodology may also provide for a credit as authorized in TMC 2-6-120. 
(4)  Except when authorized in the methodology adopted under TMC 2-6-060, the fees required by ordinances or other local laws, which are assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district, a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment, a recovery charge for connection to water, sewer or street improvements provided by another which directly benefit the new user, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision are separate from and in addition to the systems development charge and shall not be used as a credit against such charge. Nothing in this subsection shall prevent the collection of charges as part of a local improvement assessment, a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment, a recovery charge, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision. 
(5)  The methodologies used for establishing the systems development charge may be adopted and amended concurrent with the establishment or revision of the systems development charge. 
(Ord. 833-91 §7, 6-24-91)  
TMC 2-6-075 - Rate Changes. 
The City may, by resolution, modify system development charges rates to reflect changes in the factors used to establish the rates. Such a modification may either be a single adjustment to the cost of material, labor, and/or real property, or the application of one or more specific cost indices or periodic data sources. A specific cost index or periodic data source must be: 
(a)  A relevant measurement of the average change in prices or costs over an identified time period for materials, labor, real property or a combination of the three; 
(b)  Published by a recognized organization or agency that produces the index or data source for reasons that are independent of the system development charge methodology; and 
(c)  Incorporated as part of the established methodology or identified and adopted in a separate ordinance, resolution or order. 
(Ord. 1154-04, 1-12-2004)  
TMC 2-6-080 - Compliance with State Law. 
(1)  The revenues received from the systems development charges shall be budgeted and expended as provided by state law. The accounting of such revenues and expenditures required by State law shall be included in the City's Comprehensive Annual Financial Report required by ORS Chapter 294. 
(2)  The capital improvement plans required by State law as the basis for expending systems development charge revenues for capital improvements shall be those plans incorporated in the Water SDC Methodology and the Parks SDC Methodology or any changes to such plans or other plans adopted by the Council by resolution, or the capital improvement plan adopted by another governmental body which was used by the City Council in establishing the methodology for a systems development charge. 
(Ord. 833-91 §8, 6-24-91)  
TMC 2-6-085 - Indexing Fees. 
(1)  Annual Adjustment Factor. The annual adjustment factor for park system development charges shall be based on the change in average market value (AMV) of undeveloped residential land in the City's planning area according to the records of the Washington County Tax Assessor and the Clackamas County Tax Assessor for the prior tax year, and the change in construction costs according to the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index for Seattle, Washington for the prior calendar year; and will be determined as follows: 
Land Acquisition 
(Change in Washington County AMV X 0.90 + Change in Clackamas County AMV X 0.10) X .39 
+ Construction Costs 
(Change in Construction Cost Index X 0.61) 
= Parks System Development Charge Adjustment Factor 
(2)  On February 1, 2005 and each February 1st thereafter the Parks SDC fee shall automatically increase based on the annual adjustment factor without further action by the City Council. (Ord. 1154-04, 1-12-04)  
TMC 2-6-090 - Collection of Charge. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in TMC 2-6-100 and 2-6-120(12), after adoption of the applicable methodology or fee resolution, all system development charges are payable upon the issuance of a building permit for a new building, or in the event a building permit is not issued (for example in the case of an existing building), the particular system development charge for the corresponding service shall be payable upon issuance of a permit to connect to the water, sanitary sewer or storm sewer system or to enlarge or increase the demand on the particular system. Where a building permit is issued either for a new structure or an alteration, the applicant shall pay those systems development charges which have not been previously paid for the improvement, as determined by the City Engineer. 
(2)  If construction commences or connection is made without an appropriate permit, or without paying or making arrangement for payment of the applicable charge, the systems development charge is immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required. In addition, a penalty of 100 percent of the amount of the charge shall be payable. 
(3)  The City Manager shall collect the applicable systems development charge from the permittee or make suitable arrangements for payment of such charge with the permittee when a permit that allows building is issued or when a connection to the water or sewer system of the City is made. 
(4)  The City Building Official shall not issue a building or public works permit or allow water, sanitary or storm sewer connection until the charge has been paid in full, until provision for installment payments or other acceptable security has been made and approved, or unless an exemption is granted pursuant to TMC 2-6-110. 
(5)  When for any reason the systems development charge has not been paid, the City Manager shall proceed to collect the charge in the manner provided by law. The City Manager shall cause a report and request for lien to be prepared and forward a copy by certified mail return receipt requested to the owner of record of the property. The property owner shall be notified that unless a hearing is requested to contest the City Manager's determination, the City will docket a lien against the property. Requests for hearing shall be made and determined in accordance with TMC 2-6-130. 
At the hearing the City Council may accept, reject, or modify the determination of the City Manager as set forth in the report. If the City Council finds that a systems development charge is due, payable, unpaid and uncollected, it shall, by motion, direct the City Manager to docket the unpaid and uncollected systems development charge in the lien docket. Upon completion of the docketing, the City shall have a lien against the described land for the full amount of the unpaid charge, together with interest at the legal rate of ten percent and with the City's actual cost of providing notice on the owner. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223. The docketing of a lien against the property by the City shall not preclude the City from pursuing other available remedies to collect such charges, interest, penalties and costs. 
(6)  Nothing in this subsection is intended to relieve a person from paying the SDC for an existing development that should have been charged a SDC pursuant to this ordinance, but was not, regardless of the reason for that failure. Since the permittee is responsible for paying the SDC under TMC 2-6-090(1), if earlier development on the property did not pay a SDC, the current land owner shall pay the unpaid SDC on the existing use in addition to the SDC for the new development. 
(Ord. 833-91 §9, 6-24-91; Ord. 877-92, §2, 9-14-92)  
TMC 2-6-100 - Installment Payment. 
(1)  When a systems development charge of $25.00 or more is due and collectible, the owner or purchaser of a home or dwelling unit within a multi-family condominium project subject to the development charge may apply for payment in 20 semi-annual installments, to include interest on the unpaid balance, in accordance with ORS 223.208. 
(2)  The City Manager shall provide application and contract forms for installment payments, which shall include a waiver of all rights to contest the validity of the lien, except for the correction of computational errors. The interest to be charged for installment payments and for delinquent payment of such installments shall be established and may be amended by the City Council by resolution. 
(3)  An applicant for installment payments shall have the burden of demonstrating the applicant's authority to assent to the imposition of a lien on the parcel and that the property interest of the applicant is adequate to secure payment of the lien. 
(4)  The City Manager shall cause a report to be made of the amount of the systems development charge, the dates on which the payments are due, the name of the owner, and the description of the parcel. 
(5)  The City Manager shall docket the lien in the lien docket. From the time the lien is docketed, the City shall have a first lien upon the described parcel for the amount of the systems development charge, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the rate established by the City Council. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223.505 to 223.650 or any other method allowed by law. 
(Ord. 833-91 §10, 6-24-91; Ord. 914-94, §§3, 4, 5, 2-28-94; Ord. 1313-10 §2, 11-22-10)  
TMC 2-6-110 - Exemptions. 
(1)  Structures and uses established and existing and developments requiring a building or public works permit for which the City had received a complete application, together with all applicable fees or for which a public works or building permit was issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance as determined under TMC 2-6-180, are exempt from the systems development charge established under this ordinance, to the extent of the structure or use then existing and to the extent of the parcel of land as it is constituted on that date. 
(2)  Except for the initial connection to the sanitary sewer by an existing single family dwelling, any modification to an existing single-family dwelling on June 30, 1991, that does not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the State Uniform Building Code, is exempt from all portions of the systems development charge established under this ordinance. 
(3)  Any conducting of a building or mining operation, or making of a physical change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, which does not increase the parcel's or structure's usage of any capital improvement or which does not create the need for additional capital improvements shall be exempt from the systems development charge established under this ordinance. 
(4)  That portion of a project financed by City or urban renewal revenues is exempt from all portions of the systems development charge. That portion of a project financed by school district revenues is exempt from a Parks System Development Charge imposed by TMC 2-6-060(1). 
(Ord. 833-91 §11, 6-24-91)  
2-6-120 - Credits. 
(1)  As used in this section and in the definition of "qualified public improvements" in TMC 2-6-050 the word "contiguous" means: in a public way which abuts. 
(2)  When development occurs that must pay a system development charge under TMC 2-6-060, the system development charge for the existing use shall be calculated and if it is less than the system development charge for the proposed use, the difference between the system development charge for the existing use and the system development charge for the proposed use shall be the system development charge required under TMC 2-6-060. If the change in use results in the system development charge for the proposed use being less than the system development charge for the existing use, no system development charge shall be required; however, no refund or credit shall be given. 
(3)  The limitations on the use of credits contained in this subsection shall not apply when credits are provided under subsections (4) or (13) of this section. A credit shall be given for the cost of a qualified public improvement associated with a development. If a qualified public improvement is located partially on and partially off the parcel of land that is the subject of the approval, the credit shall be given only for the cost of the portion of the improvement not located on or wholly contiguous to the parcel of land. The credit provided for by this subsection shall be only for the improvement fee component of a systems development charge imposed for the type of improvement being constructed and shall not exceed such improvement fee even if the cost of the capital improvement exceeds the applicable improvement fee. 
(4)  When establishing or adopting the methodology, the City Council may provide for a credit against the public improvement charge, the reimbursement fee, or both, for a capital improvement constructed or provided as part of the development that reduces the development's demand upon existing capital improvements or the need for future capital improvements or that would otherwise have to be constructed at City expense under the then-existing Council policies. 
(5)  When a capital improvement for which a credit is applied is a part or a phase of a larger project, such as a subdivision or partition, credits against a systems development charge may be assigned to other parts of the larger project, provided they apply only to that property subject to the original condition for development approval upon which the credit is based. Credits shall not otherwise be transferable from one development to another. 
(6)  When development occurs which must pay a system development charge under TMC 2-6-060 constructs a qualified public improvement or other qualifying project, such that a credit against all or a portion of a system development charge is available, the developer shall be entitled to either the credit or to entering into a recovery agreement with the City to the effect that future property owners who directly benefit from the qualified public improvement must reimburse the developer who constructed such improvements a proportionate part of the construction cost. The developer shall not be entitled to both the credit and a recovery agreement. 
(7)  The amount of any credit attributable to improvements may be based upon construction contract documents, together with construction invoices or other appropriate information, provided by the applicant for the credit. The applicant shall have the burden of establishing the cost of improvements. Should the City Manager determine the contract amounts exceed prevailing market rates for a similar project, the credit shall be based upon market rates. No more than 13.5 percent of the total eligible construction cost shall be creditable for survey, engineering and inspection. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (11) of this section, the improvements shall be constructed in accordance with City standards and accepted by the City prior to the issuance of any credits. 
(8)  The amount of any credit shall be determined by the City Manager. A form shall be provided for acknowledging the amount of any credit with the original to be retained by the City Manager. The credit shall state a dollar amount that may be applied against a specific type of SDC imposed against the subject property. In no event shall a subject property be entitled to redeem credits in excess of the particular SDC imposed. Upon written application to the City Manager credits may be reapportioned from any lot or parcel to any other lot or parcel within the confines of the property originally eligible for the credit. Reapportionment shall be noted on the original credit form retained by the City. 
(9)  Credits shall only apply against the particular SDC for which they were allowed, are limited to the amount of the SDC attributable to the development of the specific lot or parcel for which the credit is sought, and shall not be a basis for any refund. Credit shall not be transferable from one type of capital improvement to another. 
(10)  Except as provided in subsection (11) of this section, any credit must be submitted not later than the issuance of the building permit. The applicant is responsible for presentation of any credit and no credit shall be considered after issuance of a building permit. Credits shall not be allowed more than seven years after the acceptance of the applicable improvement, dedication or grant by the appropriate party. No extension of this deadline shall be granted. 
(11)  An application for credit may be submitted before completion of a qualified public improvement or other activity for which a credit is allowed, subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  The applicant shall secure payment of the full amount of the particular SDC for which a credit is sought in accordance with TMC 2-6-100. 
(b)  Except for completion of the qualified public improvement in advance of the receipt of any credit or the payment of a particular SDC, the applicant shall otherwise comply with and be subject to the limitations of TMC 2-6-120. 
(c)  Any funds which are placed on deposit with the City, together with accrued interest, or any other security which is given to assure payment of the SDC, shall be eligible for return to the applicant or the applicant's assignee upon completion and acceptance of the qualified public improvement or other qualifying activity, subject to the terms of any agreement between the City and the applicant. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the allowance of credits for qualified public improvements constructed within the preceding seven years, the improvements for which credit is allowed under this subsection shall be completed and accepted within two years of application for credit. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed as limiting the authority of the City to enter into agreements or to receive and accept deposits or other security in connection with conditions placed on development approval. 
(12)  Those persons who have paid a fee to the City pursuant to Ordinance 796-90 or their assignees are eligible for a credit against the improvement fee component, but not the reimbursement fee component of the water system development charge established under TMC 2-6-060(2), up to the amount of the fee previously paid. 
(13)  In addition to the limitations on the availability of credits outlined in this section, a credit against the SDC established by TMC 2-6-060(1) shall be provided, subject to the following limitations and procedures: 
(a)  The amount of credit attributable to dedication of property to the City shall be based upon the fair market value of the land. A recent determination of market value, prepared by the County Assessor or the County Board of Equalization and adjusted for the portion being dedicated, may be considered competent evidence of market value. In addition to or in lieu of other evidence of market value, the City may require an independent appraisal of the property, based on the highest and best use, by a qualified appraiser, who shall be paid for by the applicant. The City Manager may consider other relevant evidence of market value. The method of determining the amount of credit available for structures eligible for credit under subsection (c) shall be as provided in TMC 2-6-120(7). 
(b)  As used in this subsection only, "dedication" means the conveyance of title or substantially all interests in property to the City for the benefit of the public and shall be distinguished from the grant of an easement or other limited possessory interest in property. No credit shall be allowed unless the City approves the form of and accepts the dedication. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as requiring the City to accept a dedication which is not in the City's best interest. 
(c)  The City may grant a credit against the Parks System Development Charge imposed pursuant to TMC 2-6-060(1) for either or both: 
(i)  The transfer of land to the City for any qualified public improvement; or 
(ii)  The construction of any qualified public improvement. 
The transfer of land, as provided in this subsection, includes the conveyance of all, or portions, of an interest in land, including easements. The value of the credit provided cannot exceed the fair market value of the interest in land, or portion thereof, conveyed. 
(Ord. 833-91 §12, 6-24-91; Ord. 903-93 §§1, 2, 3, 8-23-93; Ord. 914-94 §6, 2-28-94; Ord. 946-95 §§1, 2, 3, 7-10-95; Ord. 1415-18, § 5, 1-14-19)  
TMC 2-6-130 - Appeal Procedure. 
(1)  A person aggrieved by a decision required or permitted to be made by the City Manager or any particular City official referred to under this ordinance or a person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of systems development charge revenues may appeal the decision or the expenditure to the City Council by filing a written request with the City Manager's office describing with particularity the decision or the expenditure from which the person appeals and shall comply with subsection (3) of this section. 
(2)  An appeal of an expenditure must be filed within two years from the date of the alleged improper expenditure. Appeals of any other decision must be filed within ten days of the date of the decision. The appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee as established by Council resolution. 
(3)  The appeal shall state: 
(a)  The name and address of the appellant; 
(b)  The nature of the determination being appealed; 
(c)  The reason the determination is incorrect; and 
(d)  What the correct determination of the appeal should be or how the correct determination should be derived. 
An appellant who fails to file such a statement within the time permitted waives his or her objections, and his or her appeal shall be dismissed. 
(4)  The City Council shall conduct a hearing on the matter after giving the appellant not less than ten days written notice by regular mail. The Council shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the appellant's written statement and any additional evidence he or she deems appropriate. At the hearing the appellant may present testimony and oral argument personally or by counsel. 
The rules of evidence as used by courts of law do not apply. The appellant shall carry the burden of proving that the determination being appealed is incorrect and what the correct determination should be or how a correct determination should be derived. 
(5)  The Council shall determine whether the decision or the expenditure is in accordance with this ordinance and the provisions of applicable State law and may affirm, modify or overrule the decision. If the Council determines that there has been an improper expenditure of revenues collected under this ordinance, the Council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent. 
(6)  A legal action challenging the methodology adopted or amended by the Council pursuant to TMC 2-6-060 shall not be filed later than 60 days after the adoption or amendment. 
(Ord. 833-91 §13, 6-24-91)  
TMC 2-6-140 - Prohibited Connection. 
(1)  No person may cause, maintain or use a connection to the water, sanitary or storm sewer systems or connect a driveway to a City street of the City unless the appropriate systems development charge has been paid or the lien or installment payment method has been applied for and approved. 
(2)  Violation of this section is a civil infraction, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day that a prohibited connection exists constitutes a separate violation. 
(Ord. 833-91 §14, 6-24-91)  
TMC 2-6-150 - Construction. 
The rules of statutory construction contained in ORS Chapter 174 are adopted, and by this reference, made a part of this ordinance. 
(Ord. 833-91 §15, 6-24-91)  
CHAPTER 2-07 - BANCROFT BONDING 
Sections: 
 
TMC 2-7-010 - Bancroft Bonding; Additional Charges. 
When the owner or agent of the owner of property which is subject to a development or connection charge as defined by ORS 223.208 makes application to the City to pay the development or connection charge by installments under ORS 223.205, 223.210 to 223.295 (the Bancroft Bonding Act), the following costs and expenses shall be added to and become a part of the charge and assessment of the charge against the benefited property. 
(1)  An amount equal to the estimated cost to the City for the following items: 
(a)  Legal fees incurred for the issuance and sale of the Bancroft bond or bonds of the applicant, including legal fees incurred by the City in connection with the issuance of the bonds and legal fees incurred by the City for obtaining a legal approving opinion from bond counsel selected by the City; 
(b)  Publication costs incurred to advertise the notice of sale of the Bancroft bond or bonds; 
(c)  Printing costs incurred for the printing of the bond or bonds and coupon or coupons; and 
(d)  For the purpose of paying the general administrative and overhead expenses of the City to process a Bancroft bond application, the rate shall be a percentage of the amount of development or connection charge prior to the inclusion of (a) through (c) above, as follows: 
(i)  Fifteen percent up to $50,000.00 and ten years. 
(ii)  Ten percent between $50,001.00 and $100,000.00 and up to ten years. 
(iii)  Five percent over $100,000.00 and over ten years. 
(iv)  Add 0.5 percent for each year after ten years. 
(Ord. 465-79 §1, 2-26-79; Ord. 1294-09 §1, 11-23-09)  
TMC 2-7-020 - Determination of Costs. 
The City Manager is authorized to make and determine the estimated costs under TMC 2-7.010 above. The determination of the City Manager shall be final and conclusive of any such costs. 
(Ord. 465-79 §2, 2-26-79)  
CHAPTER 2-08 - TRANSPORTATION DEVELOPMENT TAX 
Sections: 
 
TMC 2-8-010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the City of Tualatin Transportation Development Tax (TDT) ordinance. 
(Ord. 1301-10 §1, 5-10-10)  
TMC 2-8-020 - Purpose and Scope. 
(1)  This tax is adopted to ensure that new development contributes to extra capacity transportation improvements needed to accommodate additional vehicle traffic and demand for transit facilities generated by such development. 
(2)  This tax shall provide funds for extra capacity improvements to city arterials, certain collectors, certain state facilities, and transit facilities, as listed in the Capital Improvements Project List as listed in the Washington County Transportation Development Tax Manual, which is attached as Appendix C. This tax applies to those properties within the City of Tualatin that are not subject to the Washington County transportation development tax. 
(3)  This chapter is intended to comply with . Any reference to System Development Charges in this ordinance, its exhibits or appendices, shall be deemed to refer to both this ordinance, and to the equivalent provision under the above-cited statutes, unless the context requires otherwise. 
(Ord. 1301-10 §2, 5-10-10)  
TMC 2-8-030 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter unless the context requires otherwise: 
Applicant means the person seeking to obtain a building permit. 
Application means an application for a building permit. 
Arterial means a roadway or street that has the functional classification of "arterial" in a city or county comprehensive plan or transportation plan. 
Building Official means the person or designee, licensed by the State and designated by the City to administer the State Structural Specialty Code for the City. 
Building Permit means the permit issued by the Building Official pursuant to the International Building Code. In addition, "building permit" means the mobile home placement permit issued by the City. For those uses for which no building permit is provided, the final approval granted by the jurisdiction approving the use shall be deemed a building permit for purposes of this chapter. 
City means the City of Tualatin. 
Collector means a roadway or street that has the functional classification of "collector" in a city or county comprehensive plan or transportation plan. 
Comprehensive Plan means the comprehensive plan, transportation plan, capital improvements plan, public facilities plan or equivalent plan adopted by ordinance by the City. 
Condition of Development Approval means a requirement imposed on an applicant by a county or city land use or limited land use decision, or site plan approval. 
Construction Cost Index means the adjustment to the TDT calculated as set forth in Washington County Code section 3.17.050F and Appendix D of the Washington County TDT. 
Contiguous means that a property and an improvement, or portion of an improvement, share a common boundary line. Determination of what is contiguous shall include the area of all property subject to the development approval. The boundary lines and area of an improvement shall be determined by the right of way and easement areas for the improvement. In addition, multiple properties under common ownership separated by one or more of the following: common area, non-motorized vehicle or pedestrian way, creek, wetland, park, or similar areas; shall be deemed to include the boundary of such additional area in their boundary line, up to 100 feet between the properties at the boundary with the improvement. Any portion of an improvement that is located beyond the frontage of a property, as determined by the extension of boundary lines perpendicular to the frontage of the property, shall not be contiguous to that property. An intersection improvement shall be deemed contiguous to all property with frontage on the intersection, or that touches the intersection at a point. 
Credit means the amount by which an applicant may be able to reduce the TDT as provided in this Ordinance. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including a building or other land construction, or making a physical change in the use of a structure or land in a manner that increases the usage of transportation capital improvements or which may contribute to the need for additional or enlarged transportation capital facilities as determined in this chapter. "Development" includes "New Development." 
Extra Capacity Facilities or Improvements mean those transit, arterial and collector improvements that are necessary in the interest of public health, safety and welfare to increase traffic capacity to address new development. Such improvements include, but are not limited to, signalization, channelization, widening, drainage work, pedestrian safety, lighting, acquisition of right-of-way and necessary easements, street extensions, railroad crossing protective devices, bridges and bike paths, and transit. 
Improvement Fee means an SDC for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the effective date of this Ordinance. 
ITE Trip Generation Manual means that publication entitled "Trip Generation, 7th Edition" (2001) published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
Minimum Standard Facility for Roads means facilities to meet the adopted standards for a local public street or road applicable in the location of the subject development. For transit, "minimum standard facility" means the capital facilities necessary to provide standard transit service. 
New Development means development for which a building permit is required and which occurs on or after the effective date of this Ordinance. 
Occupancy Permit means the occupancy permit provided for in the International Building Code or other ordinance of the City. If no occupancy permit is provided for a particular use, the final inspection and approval shall serve as the occupancy permit. 
Over-Capacity means that portion of an improvement that is built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary to serve the applicant's new development or mitigate for transportation system impacts attributable to the applicant's new development. 
Permit means a building permit. 
Previous Use means the most intensive lawful, permitted use existing at a particular property within the past 36 months prior to the date of application for a building permit. Where the site was used simultaneously for several different uses (mixed use) then, for the purposes of this Chapter, all of the specific use categories shall be considered. Where the previous use is composed of a primary use with one or more ancillary uses that support the primary use and are owned and operated in common, that primary use shall be deemed to be the sole use of the property. 
Proposed Use means the use proposed by the applicant for the new development. Where the applicant proposes several different uses (mixed use) for the new development then, for purposes of this Chapter, all of the specific use categories shall be considered. Where the proposed use is composed of a primary use with one or more ancillary uses that support the primary proposed use and are owned and operated in common, that primary use shall be deemed to be the sole proposed use of the property. 
Qualified Public Improvement means any transportation system capital facility or conveyance of an interest in real property that increases the capacity of the county or city transportation system, and is: 
(a)  Required as a condition of development approval; 
(b)  Identified in the Washington County Transportation Development Capital Improvement Projects List and the additional projects identified in the City of Tualatin's Appendix D, which is attached and incorporated into this ordinance by this reference; and 
(c)(i)  Not located on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval, or 
(ii)  Located on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval and, in the opinion of the City Engineer, is required to be built larger or with greater capacity (overcapacity) than is necessary for the applicant's new development or to mitigate for transportation system impacts attributable to the applicant's new development. 
Reimbursement Charge means an SDC for costs associated with capital facilities that have already been constructed which have been determined to have capacity available to serve new development. 
Road means a county road, city street, or state highway. 
Transportation Development Tax Capital Improvement Projects List or Project List means the program set forth in the Appendix C, which is attached to this ordinance, that identifies facility improvements projected to be funded with transportation TDT revenues, and includes the estimated cost, timing, and percentage of costs eligible for funding from TDT revenues for each project. 
TDT Methodology Report means the report entitled "Washington County Transportation Development Tax Methodology Report", dated August 2008, which is attached as Appendix A. 
Temporary Construction Facility means those facilities needed on an interim basis for construction of specific uses, structures or road improvements, and which are intended to be discontinued when construction is complete. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, accessory construction structures, staging areas, parking, and park-and-ride lots in conjunction with construction of a facility. 
Temporary Use means a use or structure on improved or unimproved real estate that is of impermanent nature, and is used for less than 90 days in a calendar year. 
Tualatin Transportation Development Tax or TTDT means a reimbursement charge, an improvement charge or a combination of those assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of transportation capital facilities or issuance of a development permit or building permit. "TTDT" also means the tax imposed under this chapter. 
(Ord. 1301-10 §3, 5-10-10)  
TMC 2-8-040 - Imposition and Exceptions. 
(1)  A Tualatin Transportation Development Tax (TTDT) is imposed on all development in the City that is not subject to the Washing-ton County Transportation Development Tax. The amount of the tax shall be calculated consistent with and according to Washington County Code section 3.17.050. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, a TDT shall be imposed upon all development for which an application is filed, or was required to be filed, after the effective date of this ordinance, and for which a building permit is issued and for which the applicant is not subject to the Washington County TDT. 
(b)  The applicant shall at the time of application provide the information requested on a TTDT application form regarding the proposed uses and the previous use, if any, of the property, including the following: 
(i)  A description of each of the previous and proposed uses for the property for which the Permit is being sought with sufficient detail to allow calculation of trip generation for the entire property under the previous use and for the proposed uses of the Development. 
(ii)  For residential uses, the number of residential dwellings, including type (i.e., single family, multi-family, manufactured housing, etc.). 
(iii)  For non-residential uses, the number of units (i.e., number of square feet, students, movie screens, vehicle fueling positions, beds, etc.) for the land use as listed in Appendix B (i.e., office, shopping center, etc.) included in the Development. 
(2)  The uses listed and described in this subsection are exempt, either partially or fully, from payment of the TTDT. Any applicant seeking an exemption under this section shall request that exemption, in writing, no later than the time of application for the building permit. Where development consists of only part of one or more of the uses described in this section, only that/those portion(s) of the development that qualify under this section are eligible for an exemption. The balance of the development that does not qualify for any exemption under this section shall be subject to the full TTDT. 
(a)  Remodeling or replacement of existing structures, including mobile homes, except to the extent that the remodeling or replacement creates demands on the transportation system greater than those of the existing use of the property; 
(b)  Temporary uses which do not exceed 90 days in a calendar year; 
(c)  Temporary construction facilities as determined by the City Engineer; 
(d)  Development not subject to this chapter pursuant to TMC 2-8-060 (Transition); 
(e)  A transit improvement that has the impact of removing vehicle trips or reducing vehicle miles of travel on the City's or County's major roadway system, as approved by the City Engineer; 
(f)  Construction, remodeling or expansion of federal or state facilities and uses otherwise exempt from taxation by counties; 
(g)  Relocation due to government acquisition of the entire previous use as part of a project listed in Appendix C to the extent the use at the new site does not exceed the size or impact of the previous use. Any additional size or impact shall be subject to the tax. 
(Ord. 1301-10 §4, 5-10-10)  
TMC 2-8-050 - Amount. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the amount of the TTDT due shall be calculated in the same manner as provided in Washington County Code section 3.17.050. 
(2)  For new development for which a previous use existed on the property, the amount of the TTDT due shall be determined by calculating the TTDT of the previous use(s) on the property and subtracting that sum from the TTDT for all of the proposed use(s) as provided in subsection (1) of this section. Except as provided for in subsection (3) of this section, the proposed use and the previous use shall be determined based on the rates listed in Appendix B. 
(3)  If the City Engineer determines that a particular use does not have a basis for TTDT calculation stated in Appendix B, the City Engineer shall either: 
(a)  Determine the TTDT based on the use listed in Appendix B most similar in trip generation; or 
(b)  At the election and expense of the applicant, consider an alternate TDT based on a traffic study to estimate the weekday average person trip generation of a same or similar use verified by a registered traffic engineer. If an alternate TDT is utilized, the City Engineer may make such adjustments as deemed applicable in consideration of location, size and other appropriate factors. 
(i)  The applicant's traffic study methodology must be consistent with Appendix A and follow standard professional traffic engineering practice. 
(ii)  The applicant's study must provide complete and detailed documentation, including verifiable data. Supporting documentation must rely upon generally accepted sampling methods, sources of information, demographics, growth projections, and techniques of analysis. 
(iii)  The TTDT shall be determined according to the methodology set forth in Appendix A, applied to the trip generation determined by the traffic study. 
(c)  If all of the above criteria are not met, the City Engineer shall provide the Applicant a written decision explaining the basis for rejecting the proposed study and shall determine the TTDT according to subsection (3) of this section. 
(4)  When a single structure includes more than one use, the City Engineer for purposes of establishing the TTDT shall proportion the uses accordingly. 
(5)  TTDT rates are set forth in Appendix B for the period from July 1, 2009, through June 30, 2013, unless the transition provisions (Washington County Code Section 3.17.160) apply to the development. If an alternate TDT, calculated consistent with subsection 3 of this Section, is applied prior to July 1, 2013, the TDT shall be calculated consistent with the phase-in methodology in Appendix A. 
(6)  Beginning July 1, 2013 and notwithstanding any other provision, the tax rates per unit for each land use set forth in Appendix B for the period from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2013 shall, on July 1 of each succeeding year, be adjusted automatically based on a five-year moving average of the TTDT index described in Appendix D. A final product ending in $0.49 or less shall be rounded down to the nearest dollar; $0.50 or more up to the next dollar. The TTDT index shall be calculated based on a combination of the following indices: 
(a)  The Oregon Composite Construction Cost Index reflecting the cost of materials (weighted 50 percent), 
(b)  The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Employment Cost Index for Private Industry Workers, by Occupational Group and Industry, Construction Group reflecting the cost of labor (weighted 30 percent), and; 
(c)  The average annual change in total real market value of Washington County real property, as estimated from data published by the Washington County Department of Assessment and Taxation reflecting the cost of right-of-way (weighted 20 percent). 
If the above index factors use a different base year (i.e., calendar year or fiscal year), the most recent year with complete data shall be used. 
(7)  The City Council shall implement the adjustment annually by resolution and order adopted by May 1 of each year, to take effect on July 1 of that year, including a revised rate table showing adjusted rates for all land uses. In no event shall there be an increase of over ten percent per year. 
(Ord. 1301-10 §5, 5-10-10)  
TMC 2-8-060 - Payment. 
(1)  Unless deferred, the tax imposed is due and payable at the time of issuance of a building permit by the city. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no building permit shall be issued for a development subject to this tax unless the tax is first paid in full. 
(2)  In those cases where the amount due exceeds the amount of TTDT on a single family detached residence (ITE Code 210), the applicant may request a payment deferral. The request must be made in writing to the City Engineer no later than the time of application for a building permit. The City Engineer shall grant deferral of the transportation development tax, however, any deferred charge shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. The amount of TTDT due on deferred obligations shall be the amount in effect at the time of issuance of the occupancy permit. Deferred TTDT obligations shall not be eligible for internal financing unless so requested at the time of application for deferral. 
(Ord. 1301-10 §6, 5-10-10)  
TMC 2-8-070 - Credit. 
An applicant for a building permit, or occupancy permit if deferral has been granted, shall be entitled to a credit against the tax for constructing eligible capital improvements as defined in this section. The City Engineer shall determine credit eligibility. 
(1)  A transportation capital improvement constructed on a public road or transit facility, and accepted by the jurisdiction operating the facility, is eligible for credit provided it meets all the following criteria, and the requirements of either subsections (b) or (c) below: 
(a)  The City Engineer determines that the timing, location, design and scope of the improvement is consistent with and furthers the objectives of the capital improvement program of the jurisdiction issuing the credit. 
(b)  The improvement is required to fulfill a condition of development approval issued by the jurisdiction with land use decision-making authority. 
(c)  The improvement must provide additional capacity to meet future transportation needs, or be constructed to address an existing safety hazard. Improvements to mitigate a safety hazard created primarily by the development are not eligible. 
(d)  Improvements that primarily function as access to a private street, driveway or development parcel are not eligible. 
(e)  The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating in its application for credit that a particular improvement qualifies for credit. 
(f)  Improvements, including travel lanes and bike lanes, must be at ultimate alignment, line and grade. 
(g)  New roads are eligible projects as long as they meet the remaining project eligibility criteria. An existing dirt or gravel road is deemed new if its daily traffic volume is below 200 vehicles per day. 
(h)  Bike lanes are eligible if required pursuant to applicable street or road standards. 
(i)  No credit shall be granted for utility relocation except for that portion which otherwise would have been the legal obligation of the jurisdiction pursuant to a franchise, easement or similar relationship. 
(j)  No credit shall be granted for minor realignments not designated on the comprehensive plan. 
(k)  No more than 13.5 percent of the total eligible construction cost shall be creditable for survey, engineering, and inspection. 
(l)  No credits shall be granted for storm sewer improvements that are also eligible for stormwater SDC credits. 
(2)  The City Engineer shall provide credit for the documented, reasonable cost of construction of all or part of a qualified public improvement listed in Appendix C, based on the following criteria: 
(a)  Transportation improvements located neither on nor contiguous to the property that is the subject of development approval shall be eligible for full credit. 
(b)  Transportation improvements located on or contiguous to the property that is the subject of development approval, and required to be built larger, or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project shall be eligible. Credit for these improvements may be granted only for the cost of that portion of the improvement that a) exceeds the city's minimum standard facility size or b) exceeds the capacity needed to serve the particular development project or property. 
(c)  Road right-of-way required to be dedicated pursuant to the applicable comprehensive plan or development conditions is eligible as follows: 
(i)  To the extent an improvement is located neither on nor contiguous to the property that is the subject of development approval, the reasonable market value of land purchased by the applicant from a third party and necessary to complete that improvement is creditable. 
(ii)  Road right-of-way located on or contiguous to the property that is the subject of development approval shall be eligible for credit to the extent necessary to construct the facility in excess of the local government's minimum standard facility needed to serve the particular development project or property. Credit for such right of way shall be allowed based on market value as determined by the county tax records. 
(3)  The City Engineer shall provide credit for a transportation capital improvement to a facility that is not a qualified public improvement. Such improvements shall be eligible for credit for a portion of the cost of the improvement as follows: 
(a)  The improvement was made to a roadway designated as an arterial or collector in the adopted transportation plan of the county or city issuing the credit. 
(b)  Transportation improvements neither located on nor contiguous to the property that is the subject of development approval shall be eligible for 75 percent credit for arterials and 50 percent for collectors. 
(c)  Transportation improvements located on or contiguous to the property that is the subject of development approval, and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project, shall be eligible for 75 percent credit for arterials and 50 percent for collectors. Such credit may be granted only for the cost of that portion of the improvement that exceeds the city's minimum standard facility size or capacity needed to serve the particular development project or property. 
(d)  Road right-of-way required to be dedicated pursuant to the applicable comprehensive plan or development conditions is not creditable. The reasonable market value of land purchased by the applicant from a third party and necessary to complete an improvement under subsection (3)(b) of this section is creditable. Credit for right-of-way acquired from a third party shall be for the portion of the improvement for which credit is allowed and for the percent of costs eligible for credit. 
(Ord. 1301-10 §7, 5-10-10)  
TMC 2-8-080 - Credit Application and Administration. 
(1)  All requests for credit vouchers must be in writing and filed with the City Engineer not more than 90 days after acceptance of the improvement. The amount of any credit shall be determined by the City Engineer and based upon the subject improvement contract documents, and other appropriate information, provided by the applicant for the credit. In the request, the Applicant must identify the improvement(s) for which credit is sought and explain how the improvement(s) meet the requirements of this section. The Applicant shall also document, with credible evidence, the value of the improvement(s) for which credit is sought. If, in the City Engineer's opinion, the improvement(s) meets the requirements of this section and the City Engineer concurs with the proposed value of the improvement(s), a TTDT Credit shall be granted for the eligible amount. The value of the TTDT Credits under this section shall be determined by the City Engineer based on the actual cost of construction and right-of-way, as applicable, as verified by receipts and other credible evidence submitted by the Applicant. Upon a finding by the City Engineer that the contract amounts, including payments for right-of-way, exceed prevailing market rates for a similar project, the credit shall be based upon market rates. 
(2)  The City Engineer shall respond to the applicant's request in writing within 30 days of receipt of a technically complete request. The City Engineer shall provide a written explanation of the decision on the TTDT credit request. 
(3)  Upon approval, the City Engineer shall provide the applicant with a credit voucher on a form provided by the department. The department shall retain the original credit voucher. The credit voucher shall state a dollar amount that may be applied against any TTDT imposed against the subject property. In no event shall a subject property be entitled to redeem credit vouchers in excess of the TTDT imposed. Credits are limited to the amount of the charge attributable to the development of the specific lot or parcel for which the credit is sought and shall not be a basis for any refund. 
(4)  A credit shall have no cash or monetary value. A credit shall only apply against the TTDT and its only value is to be used to reduce the TTDT otherwise due subject to all conditions, limitations, and requirements of this chapter. 
(5)  When issued by the City Engineer, a credit shall be the personal property of the applicant. Credits shall remain the personal property of the applicant unless transferred by the applicant or its authorized agent as transferor. Any person claiming the right to redeem a credit shall have the burden of demonstrating that any credit issued to another person has been transferred to him or her. 
(6)  Credits shall be apportioned against the property that was subject to the requirement to construct an improvement eligible for credit. Unless otherwise requested by the applicant, apportionment against lots or parcels constituting the property shall be proportional to anticipated average weekday trips generated by the respective lots or parcels. Upon written application to the City Engineer, however, credits shall be reapportioned from any lot or parcel to any other lot or parcel within the confines of the property originally eligible for the credit. In the case of multiphase development, excess credit generated in one phase may be applied to reduce the TTDT in subsequent phases of the original development project. Reapportionment shall be noted on the original credit voucher retained by the department. 
(7)  Credits may be reassigned from a property to another property if all the following conditions are met: 
(a)  A request for reassignment of a credit voucher must be made in writing to the City Engineer signed by the person who owns the credit. The request for reassignment of a credit voucher shall contain all the information necessary to establish that such a reassignment is allowable under this subsection. The burden of proof that a reassignment is allowable is on the applicant. The City Engineer shall respond in writing to the applicant's request for reassignment within 30 days of receipt of the request. 
(b)  A credit voucher may not be reassigned to a property outside the City. 
(c)  Credits may be reassigned within the City if the City Engineer determines that either: 
(i)  the lot or parcel that is to receive the credit is adjacent to and served by the transportation improvements that generated the credits, or 
(ii)  the development on property receiving the credit would have impacts and traffic patterns affecting substantially the same facilities as the property that generated the credit. 
(d)  When a credit voucher or portion of a credit voucher is reassigned. a notation shall be placed on the initial credit voucher that a reassignment has been made. The amount reassigned shall be deducted from the credit voucher. 
(e)  When a reassignment occurs, a new credit voucher shall be issued for the reassigned credit amount. 
(i)  The new credit voucher shall note the property to which the initial credit was assigned; subsequent reassignments shall also note the property to which the initial credit was assigned. 
(ii)  The new credit voucher shall note the credit voucher number from which it was reassigned. If multiple reassignments occur, each credit voucher number shall be noted. 
(iii)  The new credit voucher shall have the same expiration date as the initial credit voucher. 
(iv)  Apportionment against lots or parcels constituting the property to which a reassignment has been made is allowed as described in subsection (6) of this section. 
(f)  A reassigned credit voucher shall follow all rules regarding redemption of credits. 
(g)  The City may charge a fee for administering the reassignment of credits. 
(8)  Any credit must be redeemed not later than the issuance of the building permit or, if deferral was permitted, issuance of the occupancy permit. The applicant is responsible for presentation of any credit prior to issuance of the building or occupancy permit. Except as provided in TMC 2-8-110, under no circumstances shall any credit redemption be considered after issuance of a building permit or, if deferral was granted, issuance of an occupancy permit. 
(9)  Credit vouchers shall expire on the date ten years after the acceptance of the applicable improvement by the appropriate jurisdiction. No extension of this deadline shall be granted. 
(Ord. 1301-10 §8, 5-10-10)  
TMC 2-8-090 - Funds. 
All moneys derived from this tax shall be placed in the same fund as the Washington County TDT revenue, including interest on the fund, and shall be used for those purpose other than those activities described as, or for the benefit of, extra capacity facilities as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1301-10 §9, 5-10-10)  
TMC 2-8-100 - Use of Transportation Development Tax Revenues. 
(1)  Any capital improvement being funded wholly or in part with revenues from this Transportation Development Tax shall be included in the TTDT Capital Improvement Projects List, adopted as Appendix C to this Ordinance and shall include, for each project, the estimated cost, timing and percentage of costs eligible to be funded with revenues from the TTDT. The TTDT Capital Improvement Projects List may be modified at any time by resolution of the City Council. 
(2)  TTDT revenues may be used for purposes that include, but are not limited to, the following for any project on the Projects List: 
(a)  Design and construction plan preparation; 
(b)  Permitting; 
(c)  Land and materials acquisition, including any costs of acquisition or condemnation; 
(d)  Construction of transportation capital improvements; 
(e)  Design and construction of new streets, transit facilities, sanitary sewers, drainage facilities, or other public improvements required by the construction of transportation capital improvements; 
(f)  Relocating utilities required by the construction of improvements, for which the city is legally obligated to pay under easement, franchise or law; 
(g)  Landscaping required or designed as part of the project; 
(h)  Construction management and inspection; 
(i)  Surveying, soils and material testing; 
(j)  Acquisition of capital equipment that is an intrinsic part of a facility; 
(k)  Demolition that is part of the construction of any of the improvements on this list; 
(l)  Payment of principal and interest, necessary reserves and costs of issuance under any bonds or other indebtedness issued by the City to provide money to construct or acquire transportation facilities. 
(3)  TTDT revenue may be spent for direct costs of complying with ORS 223.297 to 223.314, including the consulting, legal, and administrative costs required for developing and updating the system development charges methodologies and capital improvement project list, and the costs of collecting and accounting for system development charges expenditures. 
(4)  Money on deposit in the TTDT fund shall not be used for: 
(a)  Any expenditure that would be classified as a maintenance or repair expense; or 
(b)  Costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements. 
(5)  TTDT revenues shall be spent on improvements within the boundaries of the City and for improvements outside the boundaries but which directly benefit the City. 
(Ord. 1301-10 §10, 5-10-10)  
TMC 2-8-110 - Refunds. 
Refunds of the TTDT may be made upon initiation of the City Engineer or upon written application filed with the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall allow refunds upon a finding that there was clerical error in the calculation of the TTDT. Refunds shall be allowed for failure to redeem a credit voucher or offset provided the claim for refund is in writing and actually received by the City within 30 days of the date of issuance of the building permit or occupancy permit if deferral was granted. No refund shall be granted for any reason other than those expressly provided for in this section. 
(Ord. 1301-10 §11, 5-10-10)  
TMC 2-8-120 - Administration. 
Proof of payment of the TTDT to the City shall be required prior to issuance of a building permit or occupancy permit if deferred. 
(Ord. 1301-10 §12, 5-10-10)  
TMC 2-8-130 - Collection. 
(1)  Notwithstanding issuance of a building or occupancy permit without payment, the TTDT tax liability shall survive and be a personal obligation of the permittee. 
(2)  Intentional failure to pay the tax within 60 days of the due date shall result in a penalty equal to 50 percent of the tax. Interest shall accrue from the 60-day point at the legal rate established by statute. 
(3)  In addition to an action at law and any statutory rights, the City may: 
(a)  Refuse to issue any permits of any kind to the delinquent party for any development; 
(b)  Refuse to honor any credits held by the delinquent party for any development; 
(c)  Condition any development approval of the delinquent party on payment in full, including penalties and interest; 
(d)  Revoke any previous deferrals issued to the delinquent party, in which case the amount immediately shall be due, and refuse to issue any new deferrals; 
(e)  Withdraw the amount due, including penalties and interest, from any offset account held by the City for the delinquent party. 
(4)  For purposes of this section, "delinquent party" includes any person controlling a delinquent corporate permittee, including but not limited to any partnership, limited liability company or joint venture and, conversely, any corporation or entity controlled by a delinquent individual permittee. 
(Ord. 1301-10 §13, 5-10-10)  
TMC 2-8-140 - Annual Review. 
(1)  The City Engineer shall provide an annual accounting and review of the TTDT. This annual report shall be completed by January 1 of each year, and account for the previous fiscal year. The annual accounting shall include: 
(a)  A list of the amount spent on each project funded, in whole or in part, with TTDT revenues; 
(b)  The amount of revenue collected; 
(c)  The costs of complying with the System Development Charge provisions (ORS 223.297 to 223.314, as described in ORS 223.307) and/or other administrative expenses; and 
(d)  The annual accounting for fiscal years 2009 and beyond shall also include the amount of Traffic Impact Fee revenue collected, and Traffic Impact Fee revenue spent. Traffic Impact Fee funds shall be accounted for separately from the Transportation Development Tax funds. 
(2)  The City Engineer shall deliver a copy of the annual accounting report to the City Council. 
(3)  After reviewing the report, the City Council shall consider whether to amend the ordinance, including adjustment to the tax imposed, as necessary to address changing conditions. 
(Ord. 1301-10 §14, 5-10-10)  
TMC 2-8-150 - Review of Decision; Appeals. 
(1)  Review of Expenditures. 
(a)  Any citizen or other interested person may challenge an expenditure of TTDT revenues as being in violation of this chapter provided a written petition for review is filed with the City Council within two years of the expenditure. The petition shall identify with reasonable certainty the expenditure, the relevant facts and the specific provision alleged to have been violated. 
(b)  The City Council shall order an investigation and direct that within 60 days of receipt of the petition a written report be filed recommending appropriate action. Within 30 days of receipt of the report, the City Council shall conduct a hearing to determine whether the expenditure was proper. At least a ten-day notice of the hearing, including a copy of the report, shall be mailed to the petitioner. Petitioner shall have a reasonable opportunity to present his or her position at the hearing. 
(c)  The City Council may adopt rules of procedure governing the hearing including that the hearing may be continued if necessary to further address the issues. 
(d)  The petitioner shall have the burden of proof. Evidence and argument shall be limited to grounds specified in the petition. The City Council shall issue a written decision stating the basis for its conclusion and directing appropriate action be taken. 
(e)  Review of the City Council's decision shall be as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100. 
(2)  Review of Decisions of the City Engineer: 
(a)  The City Engineer's decisions under this section shall be in writing and mailed by regular mail to the last known address of the applicant. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by a discretionary decision of the City Engineer may appeal the decision to the City Council. The appeal shall be in writing and must be filed with the City Engineer within 14 days of the date the City Engineer's decision was mailed. 
(c)  The appeal shall state the relevant facts, applicable ordinance provisions and relief sought. The City Council shall hear the appeal in the same manner as provided for development permit applications. The City may, by resolution, establish a reasonable appeal fee. 
(d)  The appellant shall have the burden of proving that an error was committed resulting in substantial prejudice. 
(e)  In an appeal of a decision to deny a credit, the applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that the particular improvement qualified for the credit under TMC 2-8-070. The City Engineer may deny the credit requested, in whole or in part, if it is determined that the credit application does not meet the requirements of TMC 2-8-070 or that the improvement for which the credit is requested is not on the Project List in Appendix C, for credits allowed under Section 3.17.070B. An appeal from the City Engineer's decision shall be heard by the City Council in the manner provided in this section. 
(Ord. 1301-10 §15, 5-10-10)  
TMC 2-8-160 - Transition. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, this chapter shall apply to issuance of building permits for all development for which a building permit application is received by the City, on or after the effective date. This shall not include resubmittal of building permit applications previously deemed incomplete if the requested information is submitted within 180 days of the date the application was first submitted. 
(2)  The prior provisions of TMC Chapter 2-4, the Traffic Impact Fee shall continue to be fully applicable and shall govern all building permit applications received by the City prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. This shall include building permit applications deemed incomplete if the requested information is submitted within 180 days of the date the application was first submitted. 
(3)  The existing provisions of TMC Chapter 2-4, the Traffic Impact Fee shall continue to apply to proposed developments under this subsection provided they have received final permits or a final limited land use decision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, such that the applicant would be entitled to apply for and receive a building permit, except for: 
(a)  Residential developments; 
(b)  A change in use of an existing structure; and 
(c)  Minor additions to an existing use not requiring discretionary approval. 
To be subject to the Traffic Impact Fee, any building permits issued pursuant to such approvals must be issued by July 1, 2012. Any building permits issued after that date shall be subject to the applicable TDT, regardless of the date of the final land use permit. For purposes of this subsection, "permits" shall have the meaning set forth in ORS 227.160 for cities. Limited land use decision shall have the meaning set forth in ORS 197.015(12). Any person claiming to be eligible to pay TIF rather than the TDT under this subsection shall provide sufficient written evidence to the City Engineer demonstrating all facts required to determine eligibility. 
(4)  Notwithstanding these amendments, the prior provisions of TMC 2-4, the Traffic Impact Fee shall continue to be fully applicable and shall govern use of revenues collected prior to the effective date of these amendments. 
(5)  All deferrals, credits, and Bancroft payment agreements shall continue and be administered under the terms in existence when issued except that all credits which have not previously expired shall be valid for a period of ten years from the original date of acceptance of the improvement by the jurisdiction for credits. Only credits issued after the effective date of this ordinance shall be permitted to transfer from the property to which they were originally issued. Enactment of this ordinance shall in no way impact any budget or appropriations, contracts, permits, condemnation proceedings any systems development charge, fee, or tax imposed by the City. 
(Ord. 1301-10 §16, 5-10-10)  
TITLE 3 - UTILITIES AND WATER QUALITY  
CHAPTER 3-02 - SEWER REGULATIONS; RATES 
Sections: 
 
TMC 3-2-010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean: 
BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under a standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees C. expressed in parts per million or milligram per liter by weight. 
Building means any structure used for human habitation, employment, or place of business, recreation or other purpose containing sanitary facilities. 
Cleanout means a sealed aperture permitting access to a sewer pipe for cleaning purposes. 
City means the City of Tualatin. 
Connection Charge means an amount of money charged for connecting to the public sanitary sewer system. 
Garbage means all animal and vegetable wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food or the commercial or industrial processing thereof. 
Industrial Wastes means any liquid, gaseous, radioactive or solid waste substance or a combination resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business, or from the development or recovery of natural resources. 
Inspector means the person designated by the City to inspect house service connections and sewer installations. 
Person means a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation. 
pH means a logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Public Works Director means the Public Works Director of the City or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Sanitary Sewer System means the system of interceptors, trunks, mains, laterals, outfall lines, and pumping stations in the City for the collection of normal sanitary sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means the water-carried human or animal waste from residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other places, together with such ground water infiltration and surface water as may be present. The admixture with sewage of industrial wastes or water shall also be considered sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Building Sewer means that part of the piping of a drainage system which begins at a point two feet outside the established line of the building or structure and which receives discharges from the building drain or drains and conveys such discharge into a public sewer, septic tank, cesspool or to other point of disposal. 
Combined Sewer means a sewer which receives and carries storm water and sewage. 
Main Sewer means a public sewer designed to accommodate more than one building sewer. 
Private Sewer means a sewer serving an independent sewage disposal system not connected with a public sewer and which accommodates one or more buildings or industries. 
Public Sewer means a sewer which is controlled by or under the jurisdiction of the City. 
Sanitary Sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
Lateral or Side Sewer means the sewer line beginning at the property line of any building and terminating at the main sewer and connecting the building sewer to the main sewer. 
Storm Sewer means a sewer which carries only such drainage as storm water, surface water, street wash water and ground water. 
Trunk Sewer means a major sewer line which collects sewage from sewer mains and conveys it to an interceptor, influent out-fall, pump station or treatment facility. 
Sewer Main Extension means an extension or addition to the sanitary sewer system other than a side sewer. Sewer main extensions in all cases shall become the property of the City upon completion and acceptance by the City. 
Sewer Service Charge means a regular charge to property owner or occupant of designated premises for the use of the public sanitary sewer system. 
Suspended Solids means solids that either float on the surface or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids; and which are removable by filtering. 
USA means the Unified Sewerage Agency of Washington County. 
(Ord. 496-80 §1, 1-14-80)  
TMC 3-2-020 - Application, Permit and Inspection Procedure. 
(1)  No person shall connect to any part of the sanitary sewer system without first making an application and securing a permit from the City for such connection, nor may any person substantially increase the flow, or alter the character of sewage, without first obtaining an additional permit and paying such charges therefore as may be fixed by the City, including such charges as inspection charges, connection charges and monthly service charges. 
(2)  Upon approval of the application and payment of all charges, the City will issue a sewer connection permit for the premises covered in the application. The application and permit shall be on forms provided by the City. 
(3)  After approval of the application, evidenced by the issuance of a permit, no change shall be made in the location of the sewer, the grade, materials, or other details from those described in the permit or as shown on the plans and specifications for which the permit was issued except with written permission from the City. The applicant's signature on an application for any permit as set forth shall constitute an agreement to comply with all of the provisions, terms and requirements of this and other City of Tualatin ordinances, rules and regulations, laws of the State of Oregon, and with the plans and specifications filed with the application, if any, together with such corrections or modifications as may be made or permitted by the City, if any. Such agreement shall be binding upon the applicant and may be altered only by the City upon the written request for the alteration from the applicant. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by permit to notify the City that said work is ready for inspection. 
(5)  All sewer construction work shall be inspected by an inspector acting for the City to insure compliance with all requirements of the City. No sewer shall be covered at any point until it has been inspected and passed for acceptance. No sewer shall be connected to the City's public sewer until the work covered by the permit has been completed, inspected, and approved by the inspector. All sewers shall be tested for leakage in the presence of the inspector and shall be cleaned of all debris accumulated from construction operations. 
(6)  When any work has been inspected and the test results are not satisfactory, a written notice to that effect shall be given instructing the owner of the premises, or the agent of such owner, to repair the sewer or other work authorized by the permit in accordance with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City. 
(7)  All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of any sewer or other work for which a permit has been issued shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the work. 
(Ord. 496-80 §2, 1-14-80)  
TMC 3-2-030 - Materials and Manner of Construction. 
(1)  All building sewers, side sewers and connections to the main sewer shall be so constructed as to conform to the requirements of the Oregon State Plumbing Laws and rules and regulations and specifications for sewerage construction of the City. 
(2)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon examination and test by the City Inspector, to meet all requirements of the City. 
(3)  A public works permit must be secured from the City and other agency having jurisdiction by owners or contractors intending to excavate in a public street for the purpose of installing sewers or making sewer connections. 
(4)  The City and its officers, agents or employees shall not be answerable for any liability or injury or death to any person or damage to any property arising during or growing out of the performance of any work by any such applicant. The applicant shall be answerable for and shall save the City and its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability imposed by law upon the City or its officers, agents or employees, including all costs, expenses, fees and interest incurred in defending same. 
(Ord. 496-80 §3, 1-14-80)  
TMC 3-2-040 - Restrictions As to Use of Sanitary Sewer System. 
(1)  Neither temporary nor permanent drainage of excavations into the sanitary sewerage system shall be permitted. Drainage from roofs, foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water, surface or ground water drains shall not be permitted into the sanitary sewerage system. Overflows or drains from private or public swimming pools shall not be permitted without written consent of the City. 
(2)  The City reserves the right to reject the application for service for any property owner upon whose property industrial or commercial activities create a waste of unusual strength, character or volume. All applications for the discharge of industrial waste shall be reviewed on an individual basis by the City. Certain restricted wastes may require pretreatment facilities prior to discharge to the sewerage system. Where pretreatment facilities are required, they shall be installed and maintained continuously by the owner at his expense in satisfactory and effective operation. An inspection and sampling manhole shall be constructed and made available to the City for examination and testing at any time. 
(3)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any substances, materials, waters, or wastes, if it appears likely to the City that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance, or will violate standards established by the Department of Environmental Quality. In determining the acceptability of these wastes, the City will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials used in construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. 
(4)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(a)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(b)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process; or which constitute a hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant including but not limited to cyanides. 
(c)  Any waters having a pH lower than six and one-half or higher than eight and one-half, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(d)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(e)  Oil-component wastes, except where separators are employed, the effluent from which contains no more than 20 Mg/L of oil. 
(f)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150º F. (65º C.) 
(g)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 Mg/L or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32º and 150º F. (0º and 65º C.) 
(h)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of ¾ horsepower or greater shall be subject to review and approval of the City. 
(i)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron, pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(j)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, [chromium], copper, zinc, lead, fluorides, and similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established for such materials. 
(k)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the USA as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(l)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the USA in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(m)  Materials which exert or cause: 
(i)  Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodiumchloride and sodium sulfate). 
(ii)  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
(iii)  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
(n)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of discharge to the receiving waters. 
(o)  Industrial plants may be required to have separate collection systems; one system to be installed for customary sanitary sewerage connected directly to the City system; a second system to be installed to collect processing wastes from shop sinks, floor drains, wash stations, plating or cleaning works, and all other industrial waste sources. The second system is to discharge into an exterior concrete sump of sufficient capacity to hold at least one day's discharge from these sources and be connected to the City system only by a valved overflow. The sump shall be readily accessible for inspection and analysis by the City and the USA, and only properly treated or neutralized wastes will be allowed to flow into the City system. The City reserves the right to require that City approval be secured for each incident of discharge. 
(5)  The interpretation of technical provisions of this ordinance, review of plans and specifications required thereby, determination of the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction and the development of rules and regulations covering unusual conditions not inconsistent with the requirements of this ordinance shall be made by the City and, where necessary, in consultation with the USA. 
(Ord. 496-80 §4, 1-14-80)  
TMC 3-2-050 - Industrial Wastes. 
(1)  The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having (a) five-day Biochemical Oxygen Demand greater than 250 milligrams per liter; or (b) containing more than 300 milligrams per liter of suspended solids, shall be subject to the review and approval of the City. Where it is deemed necessary by the City, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: (a) reduce the Biochemical Oxygen Demand to 250 milligrams per liter; (b) reduce objectional characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for; or (c) control the quality, quantities, and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. 
(2)  Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the City. No construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing. 
(3)  Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense and available for inspection at any time by the City. 
(4)  When required by the City, any owner of any property served by a side sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable sampling station in the side sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the City. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(5)  All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made shall be determined in accordance with standard methods and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the side sewer is connected. 
(6)  No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City and USA and any industrial concern whereby industrial wastes of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City and USA for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern and subject to such terms and conditions as might be required by either agency. 
(Ord. 496-80 §5, 1-14-80)  
TMC 3-2-060 - Use of Public Sewers Required. 
(1)  No person shall discharge to a natural outlet within the City of Tualatin, or in an area under the jurisdiction of the City, any sewage or polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this ordinance. 
(2)  Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall construct or maintain a privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage within the corporate limits of the City of Tualatin, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City. 
(3)  The owner of all buildings situated within the City and abutting on a street, sewer easement, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a public sanitary sewer of the City is required at his or her expense to connect such building directly with the proper public sewer, either by gravity or with approved pumping facilities, in accordance with this ordinance, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so; provided that the public sewer is available to or on the property and/or at a property line of the property and the structures or buildings are within 300 feet of the public sewer. 
(a)  In the event that, during the period of 90 days, the owner files written objections with the City Recorder against being required to connect to the public sewer, the City shall not enforce this subsection upon the owner until the Council shall have, at a meeting, heard the objections of the owner and rendered its decision. The meeting of the Council at which the objections are heard shall be held not less than ten days or more than 30 days from and after the date of the filing of the objections with the City Recorder. Not less than seven days prior to the date set by the Council for the meeting, the City shall give due notice of the date set to the owner. The decision of the Council shall be final, and no appeal shall be taken by the owner except as is provided by law. 
(b)  In its consideration of filed written objections, the City Council may defer the required connection to the public sewer in the following cases: 
(i)  Where the sewer line which could serve the owner's property is (a) extended by a person other than the owner to benefit property other than the owner's property; and (b) the owner's pro rata share of the cost of construction of the sewer line extension is not payable under the provisions of the Bancroft Bonding Act (ORS Chapter 223), then the required sewer connection may be deferred until declaration by the City Council of a health hazard resulting from nonconnection, or the termination date of a reimbursement agreement between the City and the person making the sewer line extension, whichever event first occurs. 
(ii)  In those cases where a structure or structures are located and used upon real property in such a manner that the use is a non-conforming use under the City of Tualatin zoning ordinance, then connection to the public sewer may be deferred for a period of two years after official notice to connect, or declaration by the City Council of a health hazard resulting from nonconnection, or a change in the use or occupancy of the premises, whichever event first occurs. 
(iii)  A connection to the public sewer may be deferred until construction of a sanitary sewer improvement in the vicinity of the owner's property in such cases where the Public Works Director shall determine in writing that the owner's property will be better served by the sewer line to be constructed. 
(4)  In the event the owner does not connect to a public sewer in accordance with subsection (3) of this section, the Council may order the connection and assess the cost thereof in accordance with TMC 6-5-200 and 6-5-210. 
(Ord. 496-80 §6, 1-14-80; Ord. 648-84, 10/22/84)  
TMC 3-2-070 - Private Sewage Disposal. 
(1)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the requirements of the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, the Oregon State Health Division, Washington County Department of Public Health, and the Plumbing Code of the State of Oregon. 
(2)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this ordinance; and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable materials, except as provided below, or as the City Council shall otherwise permit. Where existing septic tank facilities shall be maintained in use and, when so ordered by the City under TMC 3-2-060, approved, pumping facilities shall be installed to pump the septic tank effluent into the available sanitary sewer system. 
(3)  The provisions of this article shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the requirements of general law. 
(Ord. 496-80 §7, 1-14-80)  
TMC 3-2-080 - Sewer Contractor Insurance and Bond. 
(1)  No person shall make connections of private sewers to the sanitary sewer system of the City on behalf of any owner or owners of property within the City without first filing with the Public Works Director a certificate of insurance evidencing coverage for public liability in the amount of $50,000.00 for injury or death to one person and $100,000.00 for injury or death to two or more persons arising out of a single occurrence, and $50,000.00 for property damage resulting from any single occurrence for any claims, demands, suits, or actions for property damage, personal injury or death resulting from any activities of such persons, firms or corporations and their officers, agents, employees, and contractors. The certificate of insurance shall be approved by the Public Works Director before any work is commenced by the person. 
(2)  In addition to the coverage for public liability, and prior to the commencement of any work, the person shall post a corporate surety bond issued by a company authorized to sell such bonds in the State of Oregon, with the Public Works Director. The financial limits of the bond shall be determined by the Public Works Director. The bond shall guarantee all work performed by said person, within the 12-month period next following the posting of the bond, for the benefit of the City, against defects in materials, workmanship, and labor for a period of one year after completion of the work. The person shall post such a bond for each 12-month period within which any such work shall be performed within the City. The completion date shall be determined in writing by the Public Works Director. 
(Ord. 496-80 §8, 1-14-80)  
TMC 3-2-090 - Establishment of Fees, Rates and Charges. 
The Council may, by resolution, establish and modify the fees, rates and charges which are collected for sewer service within the City. A copy of the resolution shall be attached to this ordinance in the book of ordinances and shall also be attached to a copy of this ordinance which is made available for public information. 
(Ord. 496-80 §10, 1-14-80)  
TMC 3-2-100 - Billing. 
(1)  Sewer service shall be billed at regular intervals, and payment shall be made within the first 20 days of the month following the month in which the billing period ends. The billing period shall be as determined by the City Manager. 
(2)  Closing bills shall be paid at the time of discontinuance of service. 
(3)  All sewer service charges shall be mailed to the premises where service is furnished, unless the property owner requests that the bill be submitted to another address. 
(4)  Accounts receiving less than a full month's service shall be billed for a proration (based on the number of days in the billing period) of the sewer service monthly charge. 
(Ord. 496-80 §11, 1-14-80; Ord. 738-87, §1, 11-23-87)  
TMC 3-2-110 - Delinquent Accounts. 
(1)  Sewer service charges are due and payable within the first 20 days of a month immediately following a billing period. If such sewer service charges are not paid on or before the 30th day of a month immediately following a billing period, the account shall be delinquent and water service to the customer may be turned off in accordance with the procedure set forth in this section. 
(2)  Prior to the date scheduled for turnoff, the meter reader or other authorized agent of the City shall notify the customer of the scheduled turnoff as follows: 
(a)  Unless the front door of the premises is inaccessible, the meter reader or City agent shall attempt to contact the occupant at such premises. 
(b)  If no adult person responds at the premises to the meter reader's or agent's attempted contact, then a written notice shall be affixed either on or near the door. 
(3)  The notification provided to the customer under this section shall state the following: 
(a)  Water service will be terminated due to nonpayment of sewer service charges; 
(b)  Water service termination may be avoided by paying delinquent charges; 
(c)  If sewer service charges are disputed the customer may contact the City Finance Department at telephone number 692-2000; and 
(d)  A specific date and time when water service will be terminated unless delinquent charges are first paid or unless the City Finance Department is notified that the sewer service charge is disputed. Such date shall be not less than five days from the date notification is provided. 
(4)  Except in the case of extreme hardship as determined by the City Manager, unless the delinquent sewer service charges are paid in full by the time and date indicated in the notification, or the City Finance Department is notified that the sewer service charge is disputed, the meter reader or City agent shall cause water service to be turned off after the date indicated in the notification. In cases of extreme hardship water service under a delinquent account may be restored where an acceptable schedule of installment payments for delinquent and current charges is arranged between the City and the customer. 
(5)  Except in cases of extreme hardship where an installment payment plan is arranged, pursuant to Subsection (4) of this section, whenever an account shall become delinquent three or more times within one fiscal year, an additional delinquency notification charge shall be assessed and collected on the next following billing and any future billings within the fiscal year for which the account is delinquent to cover the additional administrative expense on such account. 
(6)  In addition to the accrued sewer service bill and any other charges which may be assessed, the customer responsible for the sewer bill shall pay the water service restoration fee as established by the Council before water service is restored. 
(7)  Except where a customer has appealed a determination concerning sewer service or sewer charges, where the Finance Department is notified by a customer that such customer's sewer service charge is disputed, if water service has not yet been terminated, such termination shall be stayed until the disputed charges are examined and a determination is made. If the customer alleges that a problem with the meter exists, then the meter will be examined. If the sewer service charge is determined by the City to be correct, then the customer will be notified in writing of such finding and advised of the procedures available for appeal. If sewer service charges have been determined to be correct and the same as indicated in the delinquency notification, unless an appeal is filed in accordance with procedures applicable in cases of appeal from rulings or determinations made under the City's water utility ordinance, or such charges are paid, water service shall be terminated on or after the eleventh day following the City's written notification of its finding. 
(Ord. 496-80 §12, 1-14-80; Ord. 837-91, §1, 7-22-91)  
TMC 3-2-120 - Sewer Charge Liens. 
(1)  When for any reason the sewer service charges have not been paid, the City Manager shall proceed to collect the charges in the manner provided by law. In addition to any other remedies provided by law, the City Manager may cause a report and request for lien to be prepared and forward a copy by certified mail return receipt requested to the owner of record of the property. The property owner shall be notified that unless a hearing is requested to contest the City Manager's determination, the City will docket a lien against the property. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2) of this section, requests for hearing shall be made and determined in accordance with procedures applicable to appeals of decisions of the City Manager pursuant to the City's water utility ordinance. 
(2)  At the hearing to determine the validity of the lien, the City Council may accept, reject, or modify the determination of the City Manager as set forth in the report. If the City Council finds that sewer service charges are payable by the owner as set forth in the report, unpaid and uncollected, it shall, by motion, direct the City Manager to docket the unpaid and uncollected sewer service charge in the City lien docket. Upon completion of the docketing, the City shall have a lien against the described property for the full amount of the unpaid charge, together with simple interest at the rate of ten percent per annum and with the City's actual cost of providing notice to the owner. The lien shall be enforceable in any manner provided in ORS Chapter 223. The docketing of a lien against the property by the City shall not preclude the City from pursuing other available remedies to collect such charges, interest, penalties and costs. 
(Ord. 496-80 §14, 1-14-80; Ord. 837-91, §3, 7-22-91)  
TMC 3-2-130 - Nonpayment of Bills. 
A customer's water service may be discontinued if the sewer bill is not paid in accordance with TMC 3-2-100. 
(Ord. 496-80 §15, 1-14-80)  
TMC 3-2-140 - Noncompliance. 
The City may discontinue water service to a customer for noncompliance with a City sewer regulation if the customer fails to comply with the regulation within five days after receiving written notice of the City's intention to discontinue service. If such noncompliance affects matters of health, safety or other conditions that warrant such action, the City may discontinue water service immediately. 
(Ord. 496-80 §16, 1-14-80)  
TMC 3-2-150 - Abandoned and Nonrevenue-Producing Services. 
When an improvement which is connected to the sewer system is destroyed by fire or is torn down, the owner may file a written statement with the City Recorder stating the date of destruction or removal of the improvements and pay all sewer service charges up to the date of destruction or removal. 
There will be no monthly service charge made to the property until new improvements are placed on the property and connected to the sewer system. If the new service size is larger than the previous connection, the customer shall pay a connection charge. 
(Ord. 496-80 §17, 1-14-80)  
TMC 3-2-160 - Construction Standards. 
All sewer line construction and installation of services and equipment shall be in conformance with the City of Tualatin Public Works Construction Code. In addition, whenever a property owner extends a sewer line, the extension shall be carried to the opposite property line or to such other point as determined by the Public Works Director. 
(Ord. 496-80 §18, 1-14-80)  
TMC 3-2-170 - Outside City Service. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2), no sewer service will be provided to areas outside of the City limits except by Council agreement with other governmental entities. 
(2)  If properties located outside of the City limits are assessed for sewer improvements through a local improvement district formed by the City, service will be provided according to the following conditions: 
(a)  Owners will be allowed to connect any building units or structures located on the property as of the date of the Council's adoption of the ordinance forming the local improvement district. A building or structures constructed after the date of the ordinance adoption forming the local improvement district will not be eligible to connect to the sewer system. 
(b)  Prior to connection of any facilities to the City sewer system, all applicable connection fees and inspection fees, shall be paid. 
(c)  Any delinquent installments on assessments must be paid. 
(d)  If the City levies property taxes to fund any portion of the sewer fund of the City including debt service payment on existing facilities the properties connecting to the system shall pay an in lieu of taxes bill. This bill shall be billed annually to the customer. 
(e)  All properties covered by this section shall pay all applicable monthly rates and fees equal to that paid by the sewer system customers within the City of Tualatin. 
(3)  All properties lying outside of the Urban Planning Area of the City of Tualatin that are connected to the Tualatin Sewer System shall pay double the connection charge assessed to users within the City of Tualatin. 
(Ord. 496-80 §19, 1-14-80; Ord. 626-84, 3/12/84)  
TMC 3-2-180 - Protection From Damage. 
(1)  No person shall maliciously, willfully, or as the result of gross negligence, break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, facility, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sanitary sewer system of the City of Tualatin. This section does not apply, however, to any employee of the City during the time he or she is engaged in his or her official employment, nor to any person or persons authorized to work in any manner on the sewer system. 
(Ord. 496-80 §20, 1-14-80)  
TMC 3-2-190 - Powers and Authority of Inspectors. 
The Public Works Director and other duly authorized employees of the City shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with this ordinance. 
(Ord. 496-80 §21, 1-14-80)  
TMC 3-2-200 - Recovery of Damages. 
Any person who, as the result of violating this ordinance, causes any expenses, loss or damage to the City of Tualatin, shall immediately become liable to the City for the full sum of such expense, loss or damage. The Council may, at its discretion, instruct the City Attorney to proceed against such person, in any court of competent jurisdiction, in a civil action to be brought in the name of the City of Tualatin, for the recovery of the full sum of such expense, loss or damage sustained by the City. 
(Ord. 496-80 §22, 1-14-80)  
TMC 3-2-210 - Penalty. 
In addition to any other remedy provided in this chapter, violation this ordinance is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. 496-80 §23, 1-14-80)  
TMC 3-2-230 - Customer Request for Discontinuance. 
(1)  Any occupant or manager of property connected to the public sewer system may temporarily or permanently disconnect from service and discontinue further sewer service charges only by utilizing the procedures set forth in the water utility ordinance for permanent or temporary discontinuance of water service, as appropriate. When any premises within the City become vacant, totally unoccupied, or unused, and water service is discontinued and upon application of the owner thereof or their authorized agent, payment of all outstanding water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and road utility charges, and approval by the Finance Director, the sewer utility fee shall thereafter not be billed and shall not be a charge against the property. 
(Ord. 496-80 §26, 1-14-80; Ord. 837-91, §4, 7-22-91)  
CHAPTER 3-03 - WATER SERVICE 
Sections: 
 
TMC 3-3-010 - Purpose, Findings and Short Title. 
(1)  The purpose of this ordinance is to authorize charges, rates and fees for the use of the City water system, to regulate the use of City water, to provide a process for voluntary and involuntary discontinuance of service, to avoid those connections to the system which may be detrimental to the public and to provide for collection of charges. 
(2)  The City finds that the operation and maintenance of the City water system and a portion of the costs of construction of the system should be funded through user charges imposed against those persons and activities using or receiving service from that system. 
(3)  Due to the method of adoption of Section 11b, Article XI of the Oregon Constitution by initiative petition, the use of terms without established legal meanings and the intent of the Council that this ordinance be construed to impose charges for use of the City water system and for services of all kinds provided by the City, rather than to impose taxes upon property, this ordinance adopts by reference the definitions contained in 1991 House Bill 2550 C-Engrossed, Section 210, as adopted by the 1991 legislature, which the Council finds a reasonable interpretation of those terms. 
(4)  The purpose of this ordinance is also to protect the public water supply of the City from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's internal distribution system(s) or the customer's private water system(s) such contaminants or pollutants that could backflow into the public water system. 
(5)  The City has authority to adopt this ordinance pursuant to the Oregon Constitution Article XI, Section 2 and the City of Tualatin Charter of 1967, Section 4. 
(6)  This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the City's "Water Utility Ordinance." 
(7)  It is the policy of the City of Tualatin to provide clean, healthful, and plentiful water to its residents. There may be circumstances beyond the City's control, however, including most particularly weather conditions and the effects of natural catastrophe or the actions of others on the City's water supply sources, that make it necessary to reduce the water regularly used by the City's residents and apportion among the City's residents a restricted supply of water. In those circumstances, the City intends that water be apportioned in a manner that is consistent with the City Charter and other relevant provisions of this ordinance, is determined by the City Council to be equitable under the circumstances, and takes into account public health and safety. 
(Ord. 839-91 §1, 7-22-91; Ord. 874-92, §1, 7-13-92)  
TMC 3-3-020 - Definitions. 
(1)  The definitions contained in 1991 House Bill 2550 C-Engrossed, Section 210, are adopted by reference. 
(2)  The following words shall have the following definitions when used in this ordinance and any regulation promulgated under the authority of this ordinance unless the context requires otherwise or unless such word is expressly defined otherwise: 
Backflow Preventer means an assembly or means designed to prevent backflow, including but not limited to the following: 
Air Gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet conveying water or waste to a tank, plumbing fixture, receptor, or other assembly and the flood level rim of the receptacle. These vertical, physical separations must be at least twice the diameter of the water supply outlet and never less than one inch. 
Reduced-Pressure Backflow-Prevention Assembly means the approved reduced-pressure principle backflow-prevention assembly consists of two independently acting approved check valves, together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and below the first check valve. These units are located between two tightly closing resilient-seated shutoff valves as an assembly and equipped with properly located resilient-seated test cocks. 
Double Check Valve Assembly (DCVA) means the approved double check valve assembly consists of two internally loaded check valves, either spring loaded or internally weighted, installed as a unit between two tightly closing resilient-seated shutoff valves and fittings with properly located resilient-seated test cocks. 
Double Check Detector Assembly (DCDA) means the same as a DCVA, but this device has a separate protected detecting meter. 
Pressure Vacuum Breaker (PVB) means a device consisting of a spring loaded check valve (three inches and larger consisting of two such valves), an independently operating air inlet valve, inlet and discharge shutoff valves and properly installed test cocks. The air inlet valve is internally loaded to the open position, normally by means of a spring. This internal loading allows the device to be installed on the pressure side of a shutoff valve. 
Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker (AVB) means a device which contains a float check ("poppet"), a check seat and an air inlet port. When water pressure is reduced to gauge pressure of zero or below, air enters the device preventing backsiphonage. 
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, "approval" or "approved" refers to acceptance as to adequacy by the State of Oregon, Department of Human Resources, Health Division. 
City Engineer means the person appointed by the City Manager to fulfill the responsibilities of City Engineer as set forth in this ordinance or the person authorized by the City Engineer to fulfill such responsibilities. 
City Manager means the person appointed by the City Council as the City Manager or the City employee, employees or agent whom the City Manager may designate to carry out all or portions of the administration of this ordinance. 
Connection means connection to the water system means the physical act or process of tapping a public water line, or joining onto an existing lateral line, for the purpose of connecting private plumbing or fire suppression systems to the public water system; and shall also include increasing the quantity or size of water line, water meter or pressure demand. 
Customer means any person owning or having a possessory interest in property which uses or maintains connection to or otherwise receives services from the City water supply system. 
Finance Director means the person appointed by the City Manager to fulfill the responsibilities of Finance Director as set forth in this ordinance or the person authorized by the Finance Director to fulfill such responsibilities. 
Fire Protection Service or Fire Service means a direct connection to the City water system by a fire sprinkler system, or a system of private hydrants installed to provide fire suppression water supply to buildings or structures. The fire protection service is intended only for fire suppression purposes and not domestic or industrial use, and is separated from the City water system by an appropriate back-flow prevention device. 
Hazard, Degree of means the term is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system. 
Interruption in Service means a temporary condition where water is not provided or where water pressure is substantially increased or reduced. 
Occupant means a person or persons who has or have the right to occupy property Occumeans pancy shall be determined as of July 1 of each fiscal year. A property that is occupied for a total of one month or longer for each year, shall be considered occupied, unless service is discontinued as provided by this ordinance. 
Occupied Property means property for which connection to a water supply system is maintained and which is adapted to, or available for, human occupancy. 
Operations Director means the person appointed by the City Manager to fulfill the responsibilities of Operations Director as set forth in this ordinance or the person authorized by the Operations Director to fulfill such responsibilities. 
Owner means the legal owners of record as shown on the tax rolls of the county, or where there is a recorded land sale contract, the purchaser thereunder. 
Person means an individual, public or private corporation, political subdivision, governmental agency, municipality, partnership, association, firm, trust, or any other legal entity whatsoever. 
Premises means the integral property or area, including improvements thereon, to which water service is or will be provided. 
Resident means residential (single family and multi-unit), commercial, industrial and other uses which are served by the City water system, whether or not such uses are located within the City limits. 
Service Connection means the terminal end of a connection from the public potable water system, that is, where the water purveyor loses sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow-prevention assembly located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. "Service connection" also includes water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
Structure means any temporary or permanent building or improvement to real property of any kind, which is constructed on or attached to real property, whether above, on or beneath the surface 
User means any person having a possessory interest in property, which maintains connection to or otherwise receives water services from the City. 
Water means water provided through the City's water system to users or customers wherever located regardless of the origin thereof. Water may include: (i) potable water which is safe for human consumption as described by the public health authority having jurisdiction; or (ii) non-potable water which is not safe for human consumption or that is of questionable quality; or (iii) used water which is any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor. 
(Ord. 839-91 §2, 7-22-91; Ord. 874-92, §2, 12/14/92; Ord. 877-92 §1, 9-14-92)  
TMC 3-3-030 - Application for Service. 
(1)  No water service will be provided without a signed application containing the following information: 
(a)  The location of the premises to be served. 
(b)  The date on which the applicant will be ready for service. 
(c)  The date of birth of the applicant. 
(d)  The driver's license number of the applicant. 
(e)  The address to which bills are to be mailed or delivered. 
(f)  Whether the applicant is an owner or tenant of the premises. 
(g)  An agreement to abide by all rules, regulations and ordinances of the City governing water service. 
(h)  Such other information as the City Manager may determine necessary for administration purposes. 
(2)  Two or more persons who join to make and submit a single application for service shall be jointly and severally liable for all applicable charges. Where the address of each person is indicated as the same, separate bills need not be sent. 
(3)  In addition to or in lieu of applications for service, the City Manager may require other forms of security prior to providing service. 
(4)  The City may terminate service, if service to the premises is turned on without first submitting an application and obtaining City approval. In addition to other remedies provided by this ordinance, before service is restored following termination pursuant to this section, the applicant shall pay double the applicable rate for the quantity of water consumed, as estimated by the City Manager. 
(5)  Where service to premises is provided, charges imposed and billed, and such charges have remained unpaid and the account has become delinquent, in addition to other remedies provided by this ordinance or other law, the City may require the following as a condition of providing future water service: 
(a)  When a tenant's account on leased premises has become delinquent and the tenant vacates the premises without paying the account in full, the property owner shall satisfy the outstanding water service charges or submit a joint application with the future tenant before water service will be restored. 
(b)  The City may refuse to provide service to any premises where the person to whom service has been provided has failed to pay previously imposed water service charges until such unpaid charges are paid in full. 
(Ord. 839-91 §3, 7-22-91; Ord. 1269-08 §1, 8-11-08)  
TMC 3-3-040 - Separate Services Required. 
(1)  Except as authorized by the City Engineer, a separate service and meter to supply regular water service or fire protection service shall be required for each building, residential unit or structure served. For the purposes of this section, trailer parks and multi-family residences of more than four dwelling units shall constitute a single unit unless the City Engineer determines that separate services are required. 
(2)  For nonresidential uses, separate meters shall be provided for each structure. Separate meters shall also be provided to each buildable lot or parcel on which water service is or will be provided. 
(Ord. 839-91 §4, 7/22/9)  
TMC 3-3-050 - Regular Service. 
(1)  Upon the application for water service, and payment of all charges, the City will install a service connection and meter of such size and location as approved by the City Engineer. Service connections and meters larger than two inches may be installed by the property owner after approval from the City Engineer. 
(2)  Where the service connection and meter have been installed, regular service shall be provided upon application and payment of all charges if the structure for which service is desired complies with Subsection (3) of this section. 
(3)  Regular service shall not be provided until the structure to which water is furnished has received either an approved final inspection in the case of a single-family residence, or a temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy in the case of all other structures. 
(4)  The customer shall, at the customer's own risk and expense, furnish, install and keep in good and safe condition equipment that may be required for receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing water. The City shall not be responsible for loss or damage caused by the improper care or wrongful act of the customer or the customer's agent in installing, maintaining, using, operating or interfering with the equipment. 
(5)  The service connection, whether located on public or private property, is the property of the City; and the City reserves the right to have it repaired, maintained and replaced. 
(Ord. 839-91 §5, 7-22-91)  
TMC 3-3-060 - Temporary Water Service. 
(1)  A person may not use a temporary connection to receive water from a City water source without first obtaining a permit from the City. A permit issued under this section is only valid at the connection location and duration of time specified by the City in the permit. 
(2)  Temporary water rates, permit fees, and any other related fees will be as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(3)  Temporary water service permits are only available for properties located within the corporate limits of the City of Tualatin. 
(4)  To obtain a temporary water service permit from the City, a person must: 
(a)  Provide the name, address, and contact information of the person or business receiving the water; 
(b)  Provide connection location and date(s) and time(s) the water connection is to be utilized; 
(c)  Pay all applicable permit fees; and 
(d)  Provide any other information the City Manager, or designee, deems necessary or appropriate to administer the permit. 
(5)  Temporary water service permits are subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  The temporary water service permit is non-transferable valid for one year. The permit may be renewed for one additional one-year period for a maximum of two years; 
(b)  Temporary water service will cease upon expiration of the permit; 
(c)  The permit holder must pay all meter installation fees, permit fees, applicable deposits, water use fees, and comply with any other requirements or rules required by the City Manager related to temporary water service; 
(d)  The maximum meter size for temporary water service is two inches; 
(e)  A backflow device is required to be installed on the water source before a person may receive temporary water service; 
(f)  The permit holder must inform any subsequent occupant of the property receiving the temporary service that the property is subject to a temporary water service permit; and 
(g)  Regular service will not be installed until final building inspection and application for regular service is made with the City. 
(Ord. No. 1441-20 , § 2, 7-13-20) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1441-20 , §§ 1, 2 adopted July 13, 2020, repealed § 3-3-060 and enacted a new § 3-3-060 as set out herein. Former § 3-3-060 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 839-91 § 6, adopted July 22, 1991.  
TMC 3-3-063 - Temporary Fire Hydrant Service. 
(1)  A person may not use a temporary hydrant connection to receive water from a City water source without first obtaining a permit from the City. A permit issued under this section is only valid at the connection location and duration of time specified by the City in the permit. 
(2)  Temporary hydrant service rates, permit fees, and any other related fees will be as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(3)  Temporary hydrant services are only available for properties located within the corporate limits of the City of Tualatin. 
(4)  To obtain a temporary hydrant service permit from the City, a person must: 
(a)  Provide the name, address, and contact information of the person or business receiving the water; 
(b)  Provide connection location and date(s) and time(s) the water connection is to be utilized; 
(c)  Pay all applicable permit fees; and 
(d)  Provide any other information the City Manager, or designee, deems necessary or appropriate to administer the permit. 
(5)  Temporary hydrant service permits are subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  The temporary hydrant service permit is non-transferable and valid for six months. The permit may be renewed for an additional six-month period for a maximum of one year; 
(b)  Temporary hydrant service cannot be used to supplement undersized water services or be used on an ongoing basis; 
(c)  Temporary hydrant service will cease upon expiration of the permit; 
(d)  The permit holder must pay all meter installation fees, permit fees, applicable deposits, water use fees, and comply with any other requirements or rules required by the City Manager related to temporary water service; 
(e)  Hydrant meters will be delivered and installed by City staff and locked to a preapproved hydrant for use for the duration of the permit; and 
(f)  Regular service will not be installed until final building inspection and application for regular service is made with the City. 
(6)  Upon termination of a temporary hydrant service permit, the meter and all equipment provided by the City must be returned to the City in the same condition as it was received. If the meter has not been returned to the City within ten days from the date of permit expiration, the City may retain any remaining deposit. Fee for water use, and/or the daily rental fee may still be billed in addition to the deposit when a hydrant meter is not returned. 
(7)  All funds placed on deposit for the hydrant meter or other equipment will be applied to charges owed to the City. Deposited funds that exceed charges will be returned to the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 1441-20 , § 3, 7-13-20)  
TMC 3-3-065 - Water Fill Station Service. 
(1)  A person may not receive water from a City Water Fill station without first obtaining a permit from the City. A permit issued under this section is only valid for the amount of water and the connection location specified by the City in the permit. 
(2)  Water fill station rates, permit fees, and any other related fees will be as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(3)  To obtain a water fill station service permit from the City, a person must: 
(a)  Provide the name, address, and contact information of the person or business receiving the water; 
(b)  Provide the date(s) and time(s) the water connection is to be utilized, and estimated water needed; 
(c)  Pay all applicable permit fees; and 
(d)  Provide any other information the City Manager, or designee, deems necessary or appropriate to administer the permit. 
(4)  Water fill station service permits are subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  The water fill station service permit is non-transferable and valid for six months. The, permit may be renewed for additional six-month periods. There is no limit on the number of renewals. 
(b)  Water fill station service will cease upon expiration of the permit; 
(c)  The permit holder must pay all meter installation fees, permit fees, applicable deposits, water use fees, and comply with any other requirements or rules required by the City Manager related to temporary water service. 
(Ord. No. 1441-20 , § 4, 7-13-20)  
TMC 3-3-070 - Damages, Liability, and Violations Related to Temporary, Fire Hydrant, or Water Fill Stations. 
(1)  A permit holder, as provided in TMC 3-3-060 (Temporary Water Service), TMC 3-3-063 (Temporary Fire Hydrant Service), or TMC 3-3-065 (Water Fill Station Service), is liable to the City for all damages to a meter, meter box, hydrant, or other City equipment or infrastructure, regardless of cause, including any improper use, damage from freezing temperatures, and any unauthorized water used by another person. A permit holder must promptly pay the repair or replacement costs associated with any damage. Failure of a permit holder to promptly pay for such damages is grounds for suspension of all City water service. 
(2)  Violation of any provision of TMC 3-3-060 (Temporary Water Service), TMC 3-3-063 (Temporary Fire Hydrant Service), or TMC 3-3-065 (Water Fill Station Service) is a civil infraction and subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00. Each day, and each day that a violation continues, is a separate civil infraction. 
(3)  The remedies provided herein are in addition to any other remedy provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1441-20 , § 5, 7-13-20) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1441-20 , §§ 1, 5 adopted July 13, 2020, repealed § 3-3-070 and enacted a new § 3-3-070 as set out herein. Former § 3-3-070 pertained to hydrant services and derived from Ord. 839-91 § 7, adopted July 22, 1991.  
TMC 3-3-080 - Fire Protection Service. 
Fire protection facilities will be allowed under the following conditions: 
(1)  The owner of a fire protection system shall furnish and install a service meter approved by the City. 
(2)  When a building has a fire protection service which is separate from the regular water service to the building, an appropriate backflow device, but not less than a double check detector check, approved by the Operations Director, shall be used in place of a service meter. Water supplied through this service shall not be used for any purpose except for suppressing a fire or testing of the fire protection system. If registration of regular water usage is recorded on the detector check meter, the City may require installation of a service meter or removal of the fire protection service. 
(3)  The service meter shall be owned and maintained by the City and the appropriate backflow device shall be owned and maintained by the owner. 
(4)  No charge shall be made for water used in the extinguishing of a fire or system testing if the customer reports the use to the City in writing within ten days of the use. 
(5)  Water may be obtained from fire protection facilities for filling a tank connected with the fire service, but only if written permission is secured from the City in advance and an approved means of measurement is available and utilized. The water used shall be charged at the rates for general use. 
(6)  Charges for fire protection service shall be as specified in the rates and charges. 
(Ord. 839-91 §8, 7-22-91)  
TMC 3-3-090 - Interruptions in Service. 
The City will make all reasonable efforts to prevent interruptions of service and when such interruptions occur shall endeavor to reestablish service with the shortest possible delay consistent with the safety of its consumers and the general public. The City may resort to temporary shutdowns or interruptions in service in order to carry out improvements and repairs. Insofar as practical, and as time permits, the City will endeavor to give prior notice to the affected customers, but such notice shall not be required in case of interruption due to emergency repairs or where the condition is unanticipated. The City shall not be liable for damage resulting from an interruption in service. 
(Ord. 839-91 §9, 7-22-91)  
TMC 3-3-100 - Meters. 
(1)  Meters up to and including two inches will be furnished by the City. Meters larger than two inches may be furnished by the customer upon approval of the Operations Director. 
(2)  All meters, including those for fire protection service, shall be located within the public right-of-way or within an access easement approved by the City Engineer. 
(3)  All meters, whether furnished by the City or a customer, shall be owned and maintained by the City. 
(4)  Meters will be sealed by the City at the time of installation, and no seal shall be altered or broken except by one of its authorized agents. 
(5)  If a change in size of a meter and service is required, the change shall be accomplished on the basis of a new installation. 
(6)  The customer is responsible for maintaining access to the meter free and clear of all shrubs, landscaping and other materials. Any obstructions may be trimmed or removed by the City and the cost therefore billed to the customer of the premises served. 
(Ord. 839-91 §10, 7-22-91)  
TMC 3-3-110 - Construction Standards. 
All water line construction and installation of services and equipment shall be in conformance with the City of Tualatin Public Works Construction Code. In addition, whenever a property owner extends a water line, which upon completion, is intended to be dedicated to the City as part of the public water system, said extension shall be carried to the opposite property line or to such other point as determined by the City Engineer. Water line size shall be determined by the City Engineer in accordance with the City's Development Code or implementing ordinances and the Public Works Construction Code. 
(Ord. 839-91 §10, 7-22-91)  
TMC 3-3-120 - Backflow Prevention Devices and Cross Connections. 
(1)  Except where this ordinance provides more stringent requirements, the definitions, standards, requirements and regulations set forth in the Oregon Administrative Rules pertaining to public water supply systems and specifically OAR 333 Division 61 in effect on the date this ordinance becomes effective are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. 
(2)  The owner of property to which City water is furnished for human consumption shall install in accordance with City standards an appropriate backflow prevention device on the premises where any of the following circumstances exist: 
(a)  Those circumstances identified in regulations adopted under subsection (1) of this section; 
(b)  Where there is a fire protection service, an irrigation service or a nonresidential service connection which is two inches or larger in size; 
(c)  Where the potable water supply provided inside a structure is 32 feet or more, higher than the elevation of the water main at the point of service connection; 
(3)  All double check detector assemblies used for system containment on fire protection services shall be approved by the Oregon State Health Division. The meter register on all double check detector assemblies shall be indicated in cubic feet measurement. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, all irrigation systems shall be installed with a double check valve assembly. Irrigation system backflow prevention device assemblies installed before the effective date of this ordinance, which were approved at the time they were installed but are not on the current list of approved device assemblies maintained by the Oregon State Health Division, shall be permitted to remain in service provided they are properly maintained, are commensurate with the degree of hazard, are tested at least annually, and perform satisfactorily. When devices of this type are moved, or require more than minimum maintenance, they shall be replaced by device assemblies which are on the Health Division list of approved device assemblies. 
(5)  Any installation, corrective measure, disconnection or other change to a backflow prevention device shall be performed at the sole expense of the owner of the property. All costs or expenses for any correction or modification to the City's system caused by or resulting from a cross connection shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or the user of the cross connection. 
(6)  Any backflow prevention device which is installed on property for the protection of the City water supply shall be tested at the time of installation and immediately after the device is moved or relocated. The property owner shall forward the results of such testing to the Operations Director within ten days of the date of installation or relocation. 
(Ord. 839-91 §12, 7-22-91)  
TMC 3-3-130 - Control Valves. 
The customer shall install a suitable valve, as close to the meter location as practical, the operation of which will control the entire water supply from the service. The operation by the customer of the curb stop in the meter box is prohibited. 
(Ord. 839-91 §13, 7-22-91)  
TMC 3-3-140 - Establishment of Fees, Rates and Charges. 
(1)  The City Council adopts the following charge classifications, together with the purpose noted. The City Council adopts and may amend by resolution the attached charges, rates, and fees for the use of the City water supply system and for other materials and services provided by the City in connection with such system. For purposes of this ordinance and any resolutions establishing fees under this ordinance, the following fees and charges shall mean: 
(a)  Facility Charge. Charges for the fixed and maintenance costs of having the water system available to provide water. 
(b)  Usage or Consumption Charge. The charge that covers the volume of water delivered to the customer's premises. 
(c)  Service Charge. A charge for meter reading, preparing the bill, accounting for the receipt of payment, maintaining customer records and responding to customer inquiries. 
(d)  Delinquency Notification Charge. In addition to accrued finance charges, any customer who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of any fee imposed by this ordinance and who has failed to pay the fee on or before the date required for such payment within a fiscal year shall pay a penalty, referred to as the "delinquency notification charge." 
(e)  Fire Protection Service Charges. A charge for service, defined in TMC 3-3-020(2). 
(f)  Hydrant and Temporary Water Usage Charges. Various fees relating to the temporary use of City equipment to enable water service to be temporarily obtained from a fire hydrant, including but not limited to the deposit for valves and wrenches, the permit fee and usage charges. 
(g)  Connection Charges. Charges for direct connection to the City water system or for enlarging or adding to the service connection that increases the potential flow into the customer's premises. 
(h)  In Lieu of Tax Payment. Property which lies outside of the City limits and receives water service shall pay an in lieu of tax payment, which represents an amount equivalent to what an owner of property within the City would otherwise pay for local improvements or for debt service on the water system capital improvement bonds. 
(i)  Service Restoration Charge. Where service has been discontinued either by removal or shut off of the valve, but not due to violation of TMC 3-3-200(1), a charge shall be imposed and collected for restoring service. 
(j)  Emergency or Other Shut-Off Charge or Turn On. Where the service is removed, shut off or turned on depending on whether the request is fulfilled during or outside of normal City business hours, a shut off or turn on service charge shall be imposed and collected. 
(k)  Charge for Processing Non-Sufficient Funds (NSF) Checks. When a check used to pay charges to the City is returned to the City by the bank or other financial institution from which it is drawn due to insufficient funds or the account is closed, a charge will be imposed. The collection of this charge is in addition to and not in lieu of any criminal penalties that may be available. 
(l)  Charge for restoring a meter that was removed by the City due to violation of TMC 3-3-200. 
(m)  Water Service Charge. A fee imposed and collected for water service, consumption and facilities, and where applicable, a fire protection system. 
(2)  Except as specifically provided in this ordinance or by resolution, all charges and service fees shall be due and payable within 20 days of billing for provision of service. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this ordinance for any person to use or maintain connection to the City system without paying the appropriate charges and fees established in this Section or any resolution adopted pursuant hereto, or to fail to pay such fee or fees on time. 
(4)  Nothing in this chapter shall in any way limit the right of the City to bring a civil action for legal or equitable remedies or damages in connection with failure to pay, or late payment of any charge or fee established in this ordinance or the right of the City to terminate water service through the disconnection of the service line, or other appropriate means. The expense of such a disconnection or discontinuance, as well as the cost of restoring service, shall be a debt due the City and shall be recoverable in the same manner as other delinquent charges and fees. 
(5)  In addition to any other remedies provided by this chapter or by law, the City may refuse to issue any permit to any person who is delinquent in any payment due the City, and may discontinue service pursuant to TMC 3-3-200. 
(Ord. 839-91 §14, 7-22-91; Ord. 1269-08, §2, Amended, 08-11-08)  
TMC 3-3-150 - Water Service Charges. 
(1)  The water service charge shall be imposed where one or more of the following conditions are present: 
(a)  For the occupancy of property which maintains connection to the public water system; 
(b)  For the actual use of water originating with the public water supply system; or 
(c)  For the maintenance of water service. 
(2)  Payment of the water service charge shall be the responsibility of the user. The occupant shall be responsible for charges for occupied property. For multi-tenant or unoccupied property, the charge shall be the responsibility of the manager of the property who has the authority direct or indirect, to control water service to the property. 
(3)  For billing purposes, the City may presume that the owner of property is the user, occupant or manager of the property. Except as otherwise provided, water services charges shall be mailed to the customer at the address of the premises where water service is furnished. The City may also mail a separate bill to the owner of leased premises. If the owner is not the user, occupant or manager, and notifies the City in writing of that fact, and provides the City with the name and address of the actual user, occupant or manager, the City shall cancel the original bill and submit a corrected bill to the actual user, occupant or manager. 
(4)  It shall be a violation of this ordinance to knowingly provide false information to the City regarding any fact related to billing of a water service charge or other charge of the City. 
(Ord. 839-91 §15, 7-22-91)  
TMC 3-3-160 - Adjustment of Accounts. 
(1)  The Finance Director may adjust a customer's account for any of the following circumstances: 
(a)  Accounts receiving less than one full month's service shall be billed for the actual consumption in the partial month, and a pro-ration (based on the number of days in the billing period) of the facilities charge, the service charge, and, if applicable, the fire protection charge. 
(b)  When a meter fails to register, registers inaccurately or for any reason cannot be read, the City may compute the bill upon an average consumption based on the customer's consumption during the preceding three months, or in the absence of such consumption history, the average consumption of a similarly situated customer. 
(2)  Where a customer's water consumption during a given period exceeds by more than three times the consumption amount for the same period in the immediately preceding year, or where residency is less than one year, then for the average consumption during the immediately preceding three months (herein "normal consumption"), and the customer submits a written request for adjustment of the account due to necessary repairs, together with an itemized receipt for repairs (or other satisfactory evidence of repair) within 30 days of such repair, the account may be adjusted. The City may inspect the customer's premises in order to verify that excessive consumption was caused by a leak or break in the system. Adjustment under this subsection shall only be allowed where the City is able to verify or agrees a leak or break in the customer's system was the reason for the excessive consumption. Where an adjustment under this subsection is allowed, the customer shall be required to pay the applicable consumption rate on normal consumption amounts and one-half the applicable consumption rate for consumption amounts which exceed the normal consumption amount. The facilities charge, the service charge and, if applicable, the fire protection charge shall not be adjusted under this subsection. The time period for payment of such adjusted amounts shall not exceed three months. 
(Ord. 839-91 §16, 7-22-91)  
TMC 3-3-170 - Delinquent Accounts. 
(1)  Water service charges are due and payable within the first 20 days of a month immediately following a billing period. If such water service charges are not paid on or before the thirtieth day of a month immediately following a billing period, the account shall be delinquent and water service to the customer may be turned off in accordance with the procedure set forth in this section. 
(2)  Prior to the date scheduled for turnoff, the City shall notify the customer of the scheduled turnoff by written notice, which shall be affixed either on or near the door. 
(3)  The notification provided to the customer under this section shall state the following: 
(a)  Water service will be terminated due to nonpayment of water service charges; 
(b)  Water service termination may be avoided by paying delinquent charges; 
(c)  If water service charges are disputed the customer may contact the City Finance Department; and 
(d)  A specific date and time when water service will be terminated unless delinquent charges are first paid or unless the City Finance Department is notified that the water service charge is disputed. Such date shall be not less than three days from the date notification is provided. 
(4)  Except in the case of extreme hardship as determined by the City Manager, unless the delinquent water service charges are paid in full by the time and date indicated in the notification, or the City Finance Department is notified that the water service charge is disputed, the meter reader or City agent shall cause water service to be turned off no sooner than the date indicated in the notification. In cases of extreme hardship water service under a delinquent account may be restored where an acceptable schedule of installment payments for delinquent and current charges is arranged between the City and the customer. 
(5)  Except in cases of extreme hardship where an installment payment plan is arranged, pursuant to Subsection (4) of this section, whenever an account shall become delinquent, an additional delinquency notification charge shall be assessed and collected on the next following billing and any future billings for which the account is delinquent to cover the additional administrative expense on such account. 
(6)  In addition to the accrued water service bill and any other charges which may be assessed, the customer responsible for the water bill shall pay the service restoration fee as established by the Council before water service is restored. 
(7)  Except as otherwise provided in TMC 3-3-210, where the Finance Department is notified by a customer that such customer's water service charge is disputed, if water service has not yet been terminated, such termination shall be stayed until the disputed charges are examined and a determination is made. If the customer alleges that a problem with the meter exists, then the meter will be examined. If the water service charge is determined by the City to be correct, then the customer will be notified in writing of such finding and advised of the procedures available for appeal. If water service charges have been determined to be correct and the same as indicated in the delinquency notification, unless an appeal is filed in accordance with TMC 3-3-210, or such charges are paid, water service shall be terminated on or after the eleventh day following the City's written notification of its finding. 
(Ord. 839-91 §17, 7-22-91; Ord.1269-08 §3, 08-11-08)  
TMC 3-3-180 - Water Charge Liens. 
(1)  When for any reason the water service charges have not been paid, the City Manager shall proceed to collect the charges in the manner provided by law. In addition to any other remedies provided by law, the City Manager may cause a report and request for lien to be prepared and forward a copy by certified mail return receipt requested to the owner of record of the property. The property owner shall be notified that unless a hearing is requested to contest the City Manager's determination, the City will docket a lien against the property. 
Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (2) of this section, requests for hearing shall be made and determined in accordance with TMC 3-3-210. 
(2)  At the hearing to determine the validity of the lien, the City Council may accept, reject, or modify the determination of the City Manager as set forth in the report. If the City Council finds that water service charges are payable by the owner as set forth in the report, unpaid and uncollected, it shall, by motion, direct the City Manager to docket the unpaid and uncollected water service charge in the City lien docket. Upon completion of the docketing, the City shall have a lien against the described property for the full amount of the unpaid charge, together with simple interest at the rate of ten percent per annum and with the City's actual cost of providing notice to the owner. The lien shall be enforceable in any manner provided in ORS Chapter 223. The docketing of a lien against the property by the City shall not preclude the City from pursuing other available remedies to collect such charges, interest, penalties and costs. 
(Ord. 839-91 §18, 7-22-91)  
TMC 3-3-190 - Customer Request for Discontinuance. 
(1)  Any occupant or manager of property connected to the public water system may disconnect from service and discontinue further water service charges by utilizing the procedure in this Section. If notice of discontinuance is not given as provided in this section, the customer shall remain liable for unpaid charges on service to the premises. 
(2)  A customer desiring to permanently discontinue water service to the customer's premises shall notify the City, giving the customer's name, the date of discontinuance, the name of the property owner, the name of the new occupant of such premises, if known, and a forwarding address for the final bill. The City shall then cause the meter to be read on the date of discontinuance and turn off water service while placing a notice on the premises concerning application for future water service, unless the property owner prior to discontinuance applies for continued water service until a new occupant takes possession of the premises and applies for service. 
(3)  A customer desiring to temporarily discontinue water service to the customer's premises shall notify the City in writing, giving the customer's name, the name of the property owner, the date of discontinuance and the date of resumption of service. The City shall then cause the meter to be read on the date of discontinuance and record such information in the City's account records. The customer shall be responsible for water service charges from and after the date given for resumption of service unless prior thereto service is resumed in which case water service charges shall accrue from and after such earlier date. Before a discontinuance is allowed, notice to the City must be given in accordance with this subsection and all outstanding utility charges shall first be satisfied. 
(Ord. 839-91 §19, 7-22-91)  
TMC 3-3-200 - Prohibited Conduct. 
(1)  It is unlawful and a violation of this ordinance for any person to commit or cause any of the following acts: 
(a)  Wasteful or improper use of water during times of water shortage due to drought, damage to the water system or supply capability or unanticipated substantial demand which threatens the supply or pressure capability of the water system, or some combination of the foregoing. Wasteful or improper use under this paragraph shall include, but not be limited to, the use of water at times or in a manner which is prohibited by the terms of any City Council rule which may be adopted by resolution. 
(b)  Use of an apparatus, appliance or other equipment which utilizes City water service where such equipment is dangerous, unsafe or violates City ordinances or regulations; 
(c)  Excessive demand for water service by a customer which results or may result in inadequate service to other customers; 
(d)  Obtaining water or other service provided under this ordinance by false or misleading acts or representations; 
(e)  Damage, destruction, alteration, interference with, connection to or tampering with City equipment, including but not limited to the breaking or destruction of seals, and damage to a meter resulting from hot water or steam from the customer's premises; 
(f)  Except by specific agreement from the City, the resale of water supplied by the City or the delivery of water to premises other than those specified in the application for service; 
(g)  Except as may be needed for Fire District use or as expressly permitted by the City, the operation, alteration, change, removal, disconnection, connection with or interference in any manner with any fire hydrant in the City; 
(h)  The unauthorized connection to or turn on of any water service without authorization where such service has been disconnected or turned off; 
(i)  Except by means of an approved metering device or by express authorization of the Operations Director, the use of any water from the water system; 
(j)  The further use of City water service after the date shown on a request for discontinuance of such service without a request for and approval of resumption or restoration of service. 
(k)  Where a customer has applied for the temporary discontinuance of water service, the resumption of use of City water service without first notifying the City and prior to the date previously indicated for such resumption of water service. 
(2)  In addition to any other remedy provided by City ordinance or state law, violation of any provision of this section is a civil infraction and subject to forfeiture in the amount of $500.00. 
(3)  In addition to any other remedy provided by City ordinance or state law, where the violation of this section results in damage to or destruction of City property, or the use of City water service without a meter or the nonpayment of required charges, the City shall have the right to recover in a court of competent jurisdiction the reasonable value or cost of repair or replacement of the item, plus 15 percent. 
(4)  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce this ordinance, or to connect, disconnect, turn on or turn off a water service, or whenever the City Manager has reasonable cause to believe that there exists on any premises any condition which is unsafe, dangerous or hazardous to the public water supply system, the City Manager may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty set forth in this ordinance. If the premises are occupied, the City Manager shall first present credentials and request entry; and if such premises are not occupied, the City Manager shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the premises and request entry. If entry is refused or if the owner or person in control of the premises cannot be located in a timely manner, the City Manager shall have recourse to a warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as imposing upon the City the obligation to or liability for inspection of any apparatus on the customer's premises, since such liability rests with the customer. 
(5)  In addition to any other remedy provided by City ordinance or state law, the City may discontinue water service to a customer for noncompliance with any provision of this ordinance. "Noncompliance with this ordinance" means failure or refusal to remedy a violation or a repeated violation for which written notice or warning of such violation has been given either by delivery in person, by posting on the property or by registered or certified mail return receipt requested. Except as provided below, a person who has been given warning or notice of noncompliance may request review of such determination in accordance with TMC 3-3-210. If such noncompliance affects matters of health or safety or the security of the system, or other conditions warrant such action, such as wasteful or improper use of water, the City may discontinue water service immediately, provided review of such determination pursuant to TMC 3-3-210 shall be provided upon timely and proper request. 
(Ord. 839-91 §20, 7-22-91; Ord. 874-92, §§3, 4, 7-13-92)  
TMC 3-3-210 - Administrative Appeal. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in (2) of this section, any person aggrieved by a ruling or interpretation of, and requesting a variance or exception from the provisions of this ordinance or a review of such ruling or interpretation shall submit a written appeal to the City Manager, not more than ten days after the ruling or interpretation. The appeal shall set forth the facts and circumstances leading to the appeal, the rule or interpretation at issue, the nature of the ruling or interpretation from which relief is sought, the impact of the rule or ruling on the appellant, together with any other reasons for the appeal. Failure of an appeal to conform to the requirements of this subsection shall be grounds for dismissal of the appeal. 
(2)  In the case of appeals of disputes concerning water service charges, in addition to the requirements of subsection (1) of this section, the following provisions shall apply. Unless otherwise directed by the Finance Director, where a termination notice concerning the disputed water service charge has been delivered as provided in TMC 3-3-170, water service shall be discontinued unless the written appeal is accompanied by a deposit in the full amount of the disputed water service charge. Where unpaid sewer service charges are a reason for water service termination, a deposit of the disputed sewer service charge shall also be submitted. Such deposit shall stay the termination of water service and shall be in addition to any applicable appeal fee. Upon the disposition of such appeal either by the City Manager or upon appeal by the City Council, that portion of the deposit which is determined to represent correct service charges shall be paid to the appropriate City account and that portion of the deposit which is determined to represent incorrect service charges shall be credited to the customer's service account, or if appropriate, returned to the customer. 
(3)  The City Manager shall review each complete appeal request. The City Manager may request additional information from the appellant, and from City staff. The City Manager shall cause to be prepared a written decision on the matter within 30 days of receipt of a complete appeal. The City Manager's written decision shall be mailed or delivered to the appellant. 
(4)  If the appellant is dissatisfied with the City Manager's decision, the appellant may appeal the matter to the City Council. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be actually received by the City within ten days of the date of mailing or delivery of the City Manager's decision. Failure of an appeal to conform to the requirements of this subsection shall be grounds for dismissal of the appeal. 
(5)  The City Council shall review the written appeal of the City Manager's decision, and any written material submitted by the City Manager, and the ordinance, rule or decision at issue. The City Council may schedule a hearing by written notice not less than 14 days in advance to hear testimony and further information. The City Council may uphold, set aside, or modify the decision of the City Manager. The decision of the City Manager may be rejected or modified only if: 
(a)  It exceeds the authority of the City; or 
(b)  It was based upon an incorrect interpretation of law or ordinance; or 
(c)  It was not supported by substantial evidence in the record. 
(6)  The decision of the City Council shall be made in writing, and shall be sent to the appellant not more than 60 days from receipt of the appeal to the Council. 
(7)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, this section shall not apply to civil infraction proceedings initiated by the City to enforce this ordinance. Except as otherwise provided in (2) of this section or as directed by the City Manager, an appeal of any ruling or interpretation to the City Manager or the City Council shall not stay the effective date of a City decision to discontinue service. 
(Ord. 839-91 §21, 7-22-91)  
TMC 3-3-220 - Miscellaneous Provisions. 
(1)  All users of the system, all contractors who may perform work on the system in any manner and all other persons or entities whose actions may affect the system shall indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers, employees, and representatives from and against all suits, actions or claims of any character or nature brought because of any injuries or damages received or sustained by any person or property or alleged to have been so received or sustained on account of the actions or failure to act of such users, contractors or other persons, their subcontractors, employees or representatives. Such indemnification shall include the costs of defense of such claims including attorney fees. 
(2)  A user or connector to the City water system does not thereby acquire a vested property interest in continued use or connection to the system. Such use or connection is conditional always upon such user or connector complying with all applicable terms and conditions contained in this ordinance and all resolutions adopted pursuant hereto and, further, upon compliance with all federal, state or local requirements which are or may hereafter be imposed upon such user or connector. Nothing contained herein shall require the City to provide service or access to the water system to such user or connector when the City has determined that the public interest requires a limitation on such water service or access. 
(Ord. 839-91 §21, 7-22-91)  
TMC 3-3-230 - Prior Ordinances Repealed. 
(1)  Except as provided in (2) and (3) of this section, Ordinance No. 498-80 is hereby repealed. 
(2)  Ordinance Number 498-80, Section 14 and agreements officially approved by the City pursuant to such ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect until connection charges pursuant thereto are paid or the agreements expire according to their terms and thereafter said ordinance provisions are repealed. 
(3)  Charges for materials and services which were imposed and deposits for meters and other equipment which were collected pursuant to Ordinance 498-80 or any implementing resolution shall remain effective, due and owing. Enforcement of such charges shall be as provided in this ordinance. 
(Ord. 839-91 §23, 7-22-91)  
TMC 3-3-240 - Construction. 
The rules of statutory construction contained in ORS Chapter 174 are adopted and by this reference made a part of this ordinance. 
(Ord. 839-91 §24, 7-22-91)  
TMC 3-3-270 - Outside City Service. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, no water service shall be provided to areas outside of the City limits except by Council agreement with other governmental entities. 
(2)  If properties located outside of the City limits are assessed for water improvements through a local improvement district formed by the City, service will be provided according to the following conditions: 
(a)  Owners will be allowed to connect any building units or structures located on the property as of the date of the Council's adoption of the ordinance forming the local improvement district. Any building or structures constructed after the date of the ordinance adoption forming the local improvement district will not be eligible to connect to the water system. 
(b)  Prior to connection of any facilities to the City water system, all applicable connection fees and inspection fees, shall be paid. 
(c)  Any delinquent installments on assessments must be paid in accordance with the local improvement ordinance. 
(d)  If the City levies property taxes to fund any portion of the water fund of the City, including debt service payment on existing facilities, the properties connecting to the system shall pay an in lieu of taxes bill. This bill shall be billed annually to the customer. 
(e)  All properties covered by this section shall pay all applicable monthly rates and fees equal to that paid by the water system customers within the City of Tualatin. 
(3)  All persons receiving water service pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of the City's Water Utility Ordinance, as now or hereafter constituted, as well as any rules and regulations adopted pursuant to such ordinance. By accepting water service from the City, a person thereby accepts jurisdiction of the Tualatin Municipal Court for purposes of enforcement of City water regulations. 
(Ord. 877-92 §2, 9-14-92)  
CHAPTER 3-04 - ROAD UTILITY FEES 
Sections 
 
TMC 3-4-010 - Title. 
This Chapter shall be known as the Road Utility Fee of the City of Tualatin. 
(Ord. 803-90 §1, 4-23-90; Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
TMC 3-4-020 - Legislative Findings. 
(1)  In 1987/88, the City developed a pavement management plan for purposes of determining the costs of maintaining City streets and thereby preventing their further deterioration. This plan resulted in City Council adoption of the "City of Tualatin Pavement Management Plan," (the "Plan") which concluded in part that over the following 11 years the average annual cost of street maintenance would be $300,000.00. 
(2)  As documented in the Plan, a substantial percentage of streets under City jurisdiction are less than 20 years old, and, therefore, have not deteriorated to the point where reconstruction has become necessary. However, unless funds are allocated for periodic, regular and, where necessary, aggressive maintenance activities on such roads, then deterioration of such roads will ultimately require extensive reconstruction for substantially greater cost. 
(3)  Historically the City has devoted its road fund revenues to new street and intersection construction and minor maintenance. Since the greatest percentage of roads under City jurisdiction are relatively new, historically revenues have not been budgeted for aggressive road maintenance, as proposed by the Plan. Therefore, although the City considers the maintenance of its streets to be a proprietary function, the expenditures required for aggressive road maintenance are different than those historically budgeted from General Fund revenues. 
(4)  The cost of road reconstruction far exceeds the cumulative cost of aggressive road maintenance. Current revenue sources available to the City, such as the Systems Development Charges and the City's share of fuel and weight/mile taxes are addressing the need for expansion of capacity, elimination of certain hazard locations and minor maintenance. No revenue source exists however to adequately fund maintenance of the City's streets. According to the Plan, there exists an average revenue shortfall of $300,000.00 annually within the Road Fund for pavement management. 
(5)  Like road maintenance expenditures, the City has no identified, regular source of funds to cover the cost of electricity and maintenance for its street lights. With a current cost of $108,000.00 annually, the City's Road Fund shows an average revenue shortfall of $50,000.00 annually for street lighting. 
(6)  In 1989, the City Council commissioned a study by CH2M Hill to examine the various funding options available to the City for road maintenance, identified in the Plan, and for street lighting, and to analyze the advantages and disadvantages of each. The CH2M Hill report, dated December 1989, and entitled, "City of Tualatin Road Maintenance and Street Lighting Funding Study," ("Study,") recommended the City establish a utility based revenue source so as to best address citizen desires for equity, revenue stability and flexibility. Such a system is deemed most appropriate for apportioning the cost of local road maintenance in relation to the impact of a particular use of property served by the local road system. The benefit obtained by a property from regular local road maintenance is closely related to the use that the property makes of City streets as measured by trip generation of developed properties. 
(7)  It is anticipated that each City street will receive routine maintenance services every year. In addition, many City streets will receive major maintenance service, such as a chip seal or overlay, within the next 11 years. Unless these activities are funded, budgeted and appropriated, thereby properly maintaining City streets; the public health, safety and welfare will be seriously jeopardized. 
(8)  The Council finds the following source documents to be generally accepted and reliable for use in implementing the terms of this ordinance. 
(a)  Trip Generation, 7th Edition, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, ("ITE Manual,") and 
(b)  The City of Tualatin Pavement Management Plan, dated September 28, 1988, as updated. 
(9)  Since the Pavement Management Plan identifies a need to generate $300,000.00 per year over the next 11 years and the next largest unfunded expense within the Road Fund is the cost of street lighting, the Council determined that the unfunded needs of these two programs would be $350,000.00. It was further assumed that these costs would rise gradually as the City street system grows and the City builds and accepts more streets and street lights. The City Council established a goal of funding the entire average annual projected cost of street maintenance, according to the Pavement Management Plan, as well as $50,000.00 or approximately one-half of the current cost of street lighting. The ratio of one to seven should be used in the future as a benchmark for allocating revenues from the Road Utility Fee collected under this ordinance to the expenditures for road maintenance and street lighting. 
(10)  Funds received under this ordinance shall be placed in the City's Road Fund and dedicated and used exclusively for street maintenance, including sidewalk repair, landscape enhancements along the rights-of-way, street tree replacement, and street lighting and for no other purpose, as more specifically outlined in TMC 3-4-100. 
(11)  The adoption of this ordinance and the levying of charges and fees hereunder are adopted pursuant to the authority contained in the Oregon Constitution, Article XI, Section 2 and the City of Tualatin Charter of 1967, Section 4. 
(Ord. 803-90 §2, 4-23-90; Ord. 1077-01 §2, 7-9-01; Ord. 1196-05, 8/22/05; Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
TMC 3-4-030 - Creation of Road Utility and Dedication of Revenue to Road Fund. 
(1)  A road utility within the Road Fund is created for the purpose of maintenance of City streets, which includes repairing sidewalks under a sidewalk maintenance program, landscape enhancements along the rights-of-way, street tree replacement, and for paying the operating cost of street lights. 
(2)  All funds collected pursuant to this Chapter must be allocated to the City's Road Fund. The portion of the Road Fund that represents the fees collected under this chapter during a given year, fees carried over from prior years and investment earnings from the fees shall be used to operate and administer the City's street maintenance program, which includes repairing sidewalks under a sidewalk maintenance program, landscape enhancements along the rights-of-way, replacing street trees, and to pay the cost of lighting City streets. The fees paid and collected must be reasonably related to the cost of providing street maintenance and street lighting, and generate revenues that are required to provide those services pursuant to the Plan. To the extent that road utility fees collected are insufficient to properly maintain local streets, the cost may be paid from such other non-dedicated City funds as may be allocated by the City Council, but the City Council may direct the reimbursement to such fund if additional fees are collected. All amounts on hand in the Road Fund, including those collected pursuant to this Chapter may be invested by the Finance Director in accordance with State law. Earnings from such investments shall also be dedicated to the Road Fund. 
(3)  It is not necessary that the operations, administration and maintenance expenditures from the Road Fund for street maintenance and lighting purposes specifically relate to any particular property from which the fees for such purposes were collected. The fees shall not be used for other governmental or proprietary purposes of the City, except to pay for an equitable share of the City's accounting, management and other governing costs, incident to operation of the street maintenance program and the lighting of City streets. Otherwise the fees and charges shall be used solely to pay for the cost of operation, administration, maintenance, repair, improvement, renewal, replacement and reconstruction of City streets and related facilities and the actual costs of electricity and maintenance of City street lights. 
(4)  Revenues collected under this ordinance will be budgeted within the City Road Fund between expenditures for street maintenance and the operation and maintenance of City street lighting on the basis of approximately 6/7ths for street maintenance and 1/7th for street lighting. Revenues received for future years maintenance under the Plan will be reserved. 
(Ord. 803-90 §3, 4-23-90; Ord. 1077-01 §3, 7-9-01; Ord. 1196-05, 8/22/05; Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
TMC 3-4-040 - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter, the following means: 
City Manager means the City Manager, or the City Manager's designee. 
City Street or Street means a public road or right-of-way, which is under the jurisdiction or control of the City. 
Developed Property or Developed Use means a lot or parcel, a portion of a lot or parcel, or other real property, on which an improvement exists or has been constructed. 
Improvement means the development of property, or a portion thereof, and includes, but is not limited to, buildings, parking lots, landscaping, and outside storage. 
ITE Manual means the manual entitled Trip Generation, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, 7th Edition. 
Mixed Uses means a single lot or parcel or property with more than one distinct use, and where, if located on separate lots or parcels without any shared amenities, such as walkways, driveways or parking areas, the uses would be assigned to distinct Use Categories. Mixed uses may include retail shopping centers with more than one tenant in either shared or separate leasable spaces and shared or common areas such as walkways, on site traffic areas, and parking. Mixed uses will generally contain a single water meter and sewer utility service. 
Multi-Family Residential Property means residential property consisting of more than three separate living units or spaces. 
Non-Residential means a use of property which is primarily not for personal, domestic accommodation. The term non-residential includes, but is not limited to, industrial and commercial uses of property. 
Related Properties means more than one lot or parcel or property with at least one common boundary, where the uses on such properties would be assigned to distinct Use Categories if the uses did not share common driveways, walkways or parking areas, and whose orientation is designed to reduce the number of trip destinations. Related properties may have more than a single water meter and sewer utility service. 
Residential Property means a use of property which is primarily for personal, domestic accommodation, including single family, multi-family residential property and group homes, but not including hotels and motels. 
Single-Family Residential means residential property consisting of single family detached dwellings, duplexes, and triplexes. 
Trip Generation means the "average rate" of weekday vehicle trips, as determined by reference to the ITE Manual. 
Use Category or Category of Use means the Code number and resulting trip generation estimate determined with reference to the ITE Manual, and applicable to a particular developed or improved property. 
Vacant means that an entire building or billing unit has become vacant or continuously unoccupied for at least 30 days, not that a portion of a developed property without separate water meters has become vacant or unoccupied. 
(Ord. 803-90 §4, 4-23-90; Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
TMC 3-4-050 - Administration. 
(1)  The City Manager is responsible for the administration of this Chapter, including for developing administrative procedures, and for collecting the fees established by Council. 
(2)  The City Manager is responsible for developing and maintaining street maintenance programs for the maintenance of City streets and, subject to City Budget Committee review and City Council approval, allocation and expenditure of budget resources for street maintenance and street lighting in accordance with this Chapter. 
(3)  The City Manager is authorized and responsible to interpret all terms, provisions, and requirements of this Chapter, to adopt administrative policies, and to determine the appropriate fees, consistent with this Chapter and the Council fee resolution. The City Manager is also authorized and directed to review the operation of this Chapter and where appropriate recommend changes to Council. 
(Ord. 803-90 §5, 4-23-90; Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
TMC 3-4-100 - Road Utility Fee Established. 
(1)  A Road Utility Fee is imposed and levied upon the owner, tenant, agent, or other authorized representative responsible for occupancy of an improved or developed property within the City. 
(2)  The Road Utility Fee will be established annually by resolution of the Council. The fee shall be based on the benefit that an owner, occupant, tenant, agent, or other authorized representative responsible for occupancy of a property receives from the direct and indirect use of or benefit derived from the use of public streets, sidewalk maintenance, street tree replacement, landscape enhancements along the rights-of-way, street lights and related facilities, as set forth in this Chapter. 
(3)  The Road Utility Fee imposed may be paid by the owner, occupant, tenant, agent, or other authorized representative responsible for occupancy of a property. 
(Ord. 803-90 §7, 4-23-90; Ord. 1077-01 §5, 7-9-01; Ord. 1196-05, 8/22/05; Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
TMC 3-4-110 - Road Utility Fee Rates. 
(1)  The Road Utility Fee rates established annually by resolution of the Council will be based upon the trip generation impacts and the base rate maintenance cost for each Customer Group. The Customer Groups are: 
(a)  Single Family Residential Customer Group; 
(b)  Multi-Family Residential Customer Group; and 
(c)  Non-Residential Customer Group. The Non-Residential Customer Group Consists of multiple subgroups based upon vehicle trips generated by the property's uses, as determined by the ITE Manual. The Non-Residential Customer Groups are, as follows: 
(i)  Group 1: Seven or fewer average daily vehicle trips per thousand square feet of developed area; 
(ii)  Group 2: more than seven but less than 21 average daily vehicle trips per thousand square feet of developed area; 
(iii)  Group 3: 21 or more but less than 53 average daily vehicle trips per thousand square feet of developed area; 
(iv)  Group 4: 53 or more but less than 151 average daily vehicle trips per thousand square feet of developed area; 
(v)  Group 5: 151 or more but less than 400 average daily vehicle trips per thousand square feet of developed area; 
(vi)  Group 6: 400 or more average daily vehicle trips per thousand square feet of developed area; and 
(vii)  Group 7: specially assigned trip generation figures. 
(2)  On or before July 1, 2018, and each July 1 thereafter, the Council will adjust the Road Utility Fee based upon the rolling five-year average of the following inflationary indices: 
(a)  The National Highway Construction Cost Index reflecting the cost of materials, weighted at 50 percent; 
(b)  The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Employment Cost Index for Private Industry Workers, By Occupational Group and Industry, Construction Group reflecting the cost of labor, weighted at 30 percent; and 
(c)  The average annual change in total real market value of Washington County real property as estimated from data published by the Washington County Department of Assessment and Taxation reflecting the cost of right-of-way, weighted at 20 percent. 
(3)  Notwithstanding subsection (2), the Council may revise the Road Utility Fee to reflect actual revenues, anticipated maintenance and lighting requirements, improvements in the methods of calculating revenues or requirements and changes in conditions which the Council finds should be taken into consideration in rates. 
(Ord. 803-90 §8, 4-23-90; Ord. 1077-01 §6, 7-9-01; Ord. 1196-05, 8/22/05; Ord. 1348-12, 6-25-12; Ord. 1395-16, 6-27-16; Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
TMC 3-4-120 - Determination and Application of Rates. 
(1)  To determine the Road Utility Fee for each owner, occupant, tenant, agent, or other authorized representative responsible for occupancy of a property, the City Manager must determine the appropriate Customer Group, use category, number of trips generated, and Gross Floor Area for each property and apply the rates set by Council. 
(2)  The City Manager must determine the appropriate Customer Group based on the use of the property and the trips generated per thousand square feet of development with reference to the ITE Manual. 
(3)  The City manager must determine the appropriate use category of each developed property as follows: 
(a)  Apply the use category from the ITE Manual that best represents the use of the property. 
(b)  In the absence of a specific use category from within the ITE Manual for a particular developed use, the City Manager must determine the appropriate category by interpreting the ITE Manual and assigning the category which most accurately reflects the use of the particular property based upon the following factors: 
(i)  The size of the site and the building; 
(ii)  The number of employees; 
(iii)  Other developed sites operated by the same or an affiliated owner for a use generating comparable amounts of traffic; 
(iv)  Other developed sites operated by a different owner for a use generating comparable amounts of traffic; 
(v)  The number of work shifts; 
(vi)  The number of hours of operation; and 
(vii)  The planning district designation. 
(c)  In lieu of, or in addition to, the factors in subsection (b) for determining the use category, the City Manager may require and consider the results of a traffic study conducted in accordance with the methodology outlined in the ITE Manual, and provided the study includes on site traffic counts not less than twice nor more than four times during the year immediately following the beginning of operation on site. 
(d)  In furtherance of this rule, the City Manager may assign a use category on an interim basis, provided it is not less than the lowest use category among available residential or nonresidential groups. 
(e)  The determination of use category is not a land use decision as that term is defined in ORS 197.015. 
(4)  For Non-Residential Customer Groups, after determining the appropriate use category for a developed property, the City Manager must use the estimated vehicle trip generation figures for the assigned use category from the ITE Manual and designate the developed property to a particular Customer Group based on the estimated number of vehicle trips in the ITE Manual for that use category. 
(5)  For each Non-Residential Customer Group, the City Manager must determine the Gross Floor Area measured in thousands of square feet or fractions of thousand square feet as follows: 
(a)  the sum in square feet of the area of each floor level in the building, including cellars, basements, mezzanines, penthouses, corridors, lobbies, stores, and offices, that are within the principal outside faces of exterior walls, not including architectural setbacks or projections. Included are all areas that have floor surfaces with clear standing head room (six feet, six inches minimum) regardless of their use. 
(b)  If a ground-level area, or part thereof, within the principal outside faces of the exterior walls is not enclosed, this Gross Floor Area is considered part of the overall square footage of the building. 
(c)  Unroofed areas and unenclosed roofed-over spaces, except those contained within the principle outside faces of exterior walls, are excluded from the Gross Floor Area calculations. 
(d)  Parking garages within the building are excluded from the Gross Floor Area calculations. 
(6)  For the Non-Residential Customer Group, when uses of property under the ITE Manual are analyzed according to acreage rather than square footage, the City Manager must convert the ITE Manual trip generation rates to a square footage calculation and calculate the Road Utility Fee based on the square footage calculation. If conversion to a square footage calculation is not practical, then the City Manager may assign a special trip generation rate for an individual parcel. 
(Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
TMC 3-4-130 - Mixed Uses and Related Properties. 
(1)  Mixed uses within a single building and Related Properties are not entitled to apportionment of the Road Utility Fee bill, unless the separate uses contain separate water meters and sewer services. 
(2)  For each separate use, the City Manager will determine the appropriate Customer Group, use category, number of trips generated, and Gross Floor Area, as set forth in TMC 3-4-120 (Determination and Application of Rates). 
(3)  The City Manager will then apply the rates set by Council, as appropriate for each separate use. The Road Utility Fee for each separate use will then be billed with the water and sewer services account related to the separate use. 
(4)  Although these standards will generally apply to nonresidential uses, they may be used to determine the appropriate Use Category or Customer Group for mixed uses which consist of residential and nonresidential uses. 
(Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
TMC 3-4-140 - Application of Road Utility Fee to Certain Properties. 
The application of the Road Utility Fee under of this Chapter to certain properties is as follows: 
(1)  City-owned parking lots, which are not associated with public services other than parking, are not subject to the Road Utility Fee as they do not generate traffic in and of themselves. 
(2)  Parking lots owned and operated by Tri-Met for mass transit passengers, such as "Park and Ride "are not subject to the Road Utility Fee as they serve a purpose of reducing overall trip generation through the use of public transportation. 
(3)  Publicly owned Park land, Open spaces and Greenways are not be subject to the Road Utility Fee unless public off-street parking designed to accommodate the use of such areas is provided. 
(4)  Areas used for commercial farming or forestry operations will be billed according to the predominant use of any structures on the site. Where a site is used exclusively for farming or forestry and not for residential or commercial uses, the site shall not be subject to the Road Utility Fee. Where there is more than one developed use on the site, the Use Category shall be determined by examining the predominant use which shall be the use which is made on the property for the longest portion of the year. Where more than one use is made of a farming or forestry site and two or more uses predominate, then each use must be examined separately, as set forth in TMC 3-4-130 (Mixed Uses and Related Properties), and a combination of use categories will be used to determine the Road Utility Fee. 
(5)  Areas encompassing railroad and public right-of-way are not subject to the Road Utility Fee. 
(6)  Railroad property containing structures, such as maintenance areas, non-rolling storage areas, and areas used for the transfer of rail transported goods to non-rail transport are subject to Road Utility Fees. 
(7)  Road Utility Fees imposed under this Chapter apply to all developed property, including developed property owned by local, state, federal governments as well as property which may be entitled to exemption from or deferral of ad valorem property taxation. 
(8)  The fees imposed under this Chapter become due and payable from and after the date when the developed property is connected to the public sanitary sewer system and is receiving service therefore. 
(Ord. 803-90 §15, 4-23-90; Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
TMC 3-4-150 - Change in Use of Property. 
Except as provided in TMC 3-4-220 (Vacant Property), a developed property which undergoes a change in use will continue to be responsible for fees imposed by this Chapter. Upon learning of the change in use and determining that a different Customer Group, use category, number of trips generated, or Gross Floor Area applies to the developed property, the City Manager will determine and assign the appropriate Customer Group, use category, number of trips generated, or Gross Floor Area, and modify the Road Utility Fee accordingly. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as a waiver of the City's right and responsibility to charge and collect the road utility fee in accordance with correct information concerning the developed property. 
(Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
TMC 3-4-200 - Billing and Collection of the Road Utility Fee. 
(1)  The road utility fee shall be billed and collected with and as part of the monthly water and sewer bill for those lots or parcels utilizing City water and sewer, and billed and collected separately for those lots or parcels not utilizing City water and sewer. In cases where a developed property is subject to water and sewer utility charges, the Road Utility Fee bill shall be directed to the same person as the bill for water and sewer charges, whether that be the owner, tenant, agent, or other authorized representative responsible for occupancy the developed property. All such bills shall be rendered monthly by the City Manager and shall become due and payable upon receipt. 
(2)  In the event funds received from City utility billings, as described in subsection (1) of this section, are inadequate to satisfy in full all of the water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and road utility fees, credit shall be given first to the road utility fee, second to the sanitary and storm sewer service charges and third to the charges for water service. 
(Ord. 803-90 §9, 4-23-90; Ord. 838-91, §1, 7-22-91; Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
TMC 3-4-210 - Delinquent Accounts. 
When a person's account is delinquent, the person will be provided a notice of delinquency. If payment is not received, the City may discontinue City utility services and may collect the charges through any means authorized by law. 
(Ord. 1395-16, 6-27-16; Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
TMC 3-4-220 - Vacant Property. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, when any premises within the City become vacant, totally unoccupied, or unused, but water service remains, and upon written application of the owner or the owner's authorized agent, and approval by the City Manager, the Road Utility Fee shall thereafter be billed at the lowest rate within either the residential or nonresidential Customer Group, as appropriate. 
(2)  When any premises within the City become vacant, totally unoccupied, or unused, and water service is discontinued, and upon written application of the owner or the owner's authorized agent, payment of all outstanding water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and road utility charges, and approval by the City Manager, the road utility fee shall thereafter not be billed and shall not be a charge to the owner of the property. 
(3)  The City Manager is authorized to cause an investigation of any property for which a fee reduction or waiver application is submitted under this section to verify any of the information contained in the application. 
(4)  Fees may be reduced of waived in accordance with this section only while the property remains vacant. 
(5)  The person signing the application for waiver or reduction of fees shall notify the City within five days of the premises being occupied, partially occupied or used, regardless of whether water service is restored. The City may charge any person the appropriate Road Utility Fee, including charges for prior billing periods, upon determining by whatever means that the property did not qualify as vacant during such time. 
(6)  The decision of the City Manager under this section is final. 
(Ord. 803-90 §11, 4-23-90; Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
TMC 3-4-300 - Request for Review of Determination of Rate. 
(1)  A property owner, tenant, agent, or other authorized representative responsible for payment of the Road Utility Fee wishing to challenge the City Manager's determination of the Customer Group, use category, number of trips generated, or Gross Floor Area applicable to determine the Road Utility Fee must file a Request for Review with the City Manager. 
(2)  The Request for Review must contain a statement and supported by evidence setting forth the reason(s) that the Customer Group, use category, number of trips generated, or Gross Floor Area is invalid, otherwise improper, or why it should be modified. 
(3)  Within 30 days of the submission of the Request for Review, the City Manager must issue a decision. The decision must be written and include findings of fact and conclusions for the particular aspects of the decision, based upon applicable criteria. A copy of the decision must be mailed to the person submitting the request. The City Manager must maintain a collection of such decisions. 
(4)  If the City Manager agrees in whole or in part with the Request for Review, the City Manager will modify the Road Utility Fee to be charged in the future. No back charges or refunds are allowed. 
(5)  The decision of the City Manager may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with TMC 3-4-310 (Appeal to Council). 
(Ord. 803-90 §12, 4-23-90; Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
TMC 3-4-310 - Appeal to Council. 
(1)  Any owner, tenant, agent, or other authorized representative responsible for payment of the Road Utility Fee wishing to challenge the City Manager's determination on their Request for Review may appeal the City Manager's determination to the Council by filing a Notice of Appeal. 
(2)  The Notice of Appeal must contain a statement and supported by evidence setting forth the reason(s) that the City Manager's decision is invalid, otherwise improper, or why it should be modified. The Notice of Appeal must be filed with the City Manager within ten days from the date of the City Manager's decision, together with a filing fee in the amount of $300.00. The Notice of Appeal must also include an engineering study prepared by a licensed professional engineer in conformance with the methodology outlined in the ITE Manual. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a Notice of Appeal within the timelines established in subsection (2), the City Manager shall schedule the matter for City Council review and notify the appellant not less than ten days prior to the date of such Council review. The Council will conduct a hearing during a public meeting and determine whether there is substantial evidence in the record to support the interpretation given by the City Manager. The Council may continue the hearing for purposes of gathering additional information bearing on the issue. The Council will make a tentative oral decision and must adopt a final written decision together with appropriate findings in support. The failure to appeal an interpretation made under this Chapter within the time and in the manner provided is sufficient cause to deny the relief requested. 
(4)  If the Council agrees in whole or in part with the Notice of Appeal, the Council will modify the Road Utility Fee to be charged that account in the future. No back charges or refunds are allowed. Except in cases of hardship as determined by the Council, disputes which result in changes in the Road Utility Fee charged under this Chapter become effective with the next billing cycle. 
(5)  The Council's decision on the matter is final. 
(Ord. 803-90 §13, 4-23-90; Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
TMC 3-4-320 - Inspection of Premises. 
The City Manager is authorized, through consent of a person in charge of private property, or otherwise by administrative warrant, to enter upon private property for purposes of conducting any studies or collecting information bearing upon the determination of the appropriate Customer Group, use category, number of trips generated, or Gross Floor Area applicable to determine the Road Utility Fee in accordance with this Chapter. 
(Ord. 803-90 §16, 4-23-90; Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
TMC 3-4-400 - Civil Penalty. 
(1)  In addition to any other remedy provided in this Chapter, violation of this ordinance is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day after an account subject to Road Utility Fees remains delinquent in payment of such fees constitutes a separate violation. 
(2)  The civil infraction procedures in TMC 7-1 apply to the prosecution of any violation that results in a civil penalty under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 803-90 §17, 4-23-90; Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
TMC 3-4-500 - Special Assessments. 
Nothing contained herein shall be construed as limiting the City's authority to levy special assessments in connection with public improvements pursuant to applicable. 
(Ord. 803-90 §18, 4-23-90; Ord. 1402-17, 6-26-17)  
CHAPTER 3-05 - SOIL EROSION, SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT, WATER QUALITY FACILITIES, AND BUILDING AND SEWERS 
Sections: 
Erosion Control 
Additional Surface Water Management Standards 
Permanent On-Site Water Quality Facilities 
Standard Specifications for Building and Side Sewers  
EROSION CONTROL 
 
TMC 3-5-010 - Policy. 
It is the policy of the City to require temporary and permanent measures for all construction projects to lessen the adverse effects of construction on the environment. The contractor shall properly install, operate and maintain both temporary and permanent works as provided in this chapter or in an approved plan, to protect the environment during the term of the project. In addition, these erosion control rules apply to all properties within the City, regardless of whether that property is involved in a construction or development activity. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any person from the obligation to comply with the regulations or permits of any federal, state, or local authority. 
(Ord. 846-91 §1, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-020 - Application and Purpose, Short Title. 
(1)  It is the City's policy and the purpose of this ordinance to reduce the amount of sediment and other pollutants reaching the public storm and surface water system resulting from development, construction, grading, excavating, clearing, and any other activity whether natural or manmade which causes or accelerates erosion. The requirements of this ordinance are intended to apply to all parcels and land within the City. 
(2)  This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the City's "storm and surface water regulations" or "this ordinance." 
(Ord. 846-91 §2, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-030 - Definitions. 
As used in this ordinance the following words have the following definitions: 
Erosion means the movement of soil particles resulting from the flow or pressure from storm water, irrigation water, other water, or wind. 
Land Development has the meaning in OAR §340-41-006(22), adopted December 14, 1989. 
The Property or the Site means the subject real property. 
Visible or Measurable Erosion includes, but is not limited to: (a) deposits of mud, dirt, sediment or similar material exceeding one-half cubic foot in volume on public or private streets, adjacent property, or into the storm and surface water system, either by direct deposit, dropping, discharge, or as a result of the action of erosion; (b) evidence of concentrated flows of water over bare soils; turbid or sediment laden flows; or evidence of on-site erosion such as rivulets on bare soil slopes, where the flow of water is not filtered or captured on the site using the techniques in this ordinance; (c) earth slides, mud flows, earth sloughing, or other earth movement which leaves the property. 
(Ord. 846-91 §3, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-040 - Erosion Prohibited. 
Visible or measurable erosion which enters, or is likely to enter, the public storm and surface water system or leaves the property on which it originates, is prohibited, and is a violation of this ordinance. The owner of the property from which erosion originates and any person whose activity on the property causes such erosion, shall be deemed responsible for causing such erosion and shall be responsible to stop erosion, cleanup past erosion, and prevent erosion from occurring in the future. 
(Ord. 846-91 §4, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-050 - Erosion Control Permits. 
(1)  Except as noted in subsection (3) of this section, no person shall cause any change to improved or unimproved real property that causes, will cause, or is likely to cause a temporary or permanent increase in the rate of soil erosion from the site without first obtaining a permit from the City and paying prescribed fees. Such changes to land shall include, but are not limited to, grading, excavating, filling, working of land, or stripping of soil or vegetation from land. 
(2)  No construction, land development, grading, excavation, fill, or the clearing of land is allowed until the City has issued an Erosion Control Permit covering such work, or the City has determined that no such permit is required. No public agency or body shall undertake any public works project without first obtaining from the City an Erosion Control Permit covering such work, or receiving a determination from the City that none is required. 
(3)  No Erosion Control Permit from City is required for the following: 
(a)  For work of a minor nature provided all the following criteria are met: 
(A)  The development does not require a development permit or approval from the City; 
(B)  No development activity or disturbance of land surface occurs within 100 feet of a sensitive area defined in TMC 3-5.270; 
(C)  The slope of the site is less than 20 percent; 
(D)  The work on the site involves the disturbance of less than 500 square feet of land surface; and 
(E)  The excavation, fill or combination thereof involves less than 20 cubic yards of material. 
(b)  Permits and approvals of land division, interior improvements to an existing structure, and other activities for which there is no physical disturbance to the surface of the land. 
(c)  A permit shall not be required for activities within the City which constitute accepted farming practices as defined in ORS 215.203, provided any erosion does not cause sedimentation in waters of the Tualatin River basin. 
(4)  An exception from the permit requirement shall not relieve the property or its owner from the prohibition of TMC 3-5.040. 
(Ord. 846-91 §5, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-060 - Permit Process. 
(1)  Applications for an Erosion Control Permit. Application for an Erosion Control Permit shall include an Erosion Control Plan which contains methods and interim facilities to be constructed or used concurrently and to be operated during construction to control erosion. The plan shall include either: 
(a)  A site specific plan outlining the protection techniques to control soil erosion and sediment transport from the site to less than one ton per acre per year as calculated using the Soil Conservation Service Universal Soil Loss Equation or other equivalent method approved by the City Engineer, or 
(b)  Techniques and methods contained and prescribed in the Soil Erosion Control Matrix and Methods, outlined in TMC 3-5.190 or the Erosion Control Plans - Technical Guidance Handbook, City of Portland and Unified Sewerage Agency, January, 1991. 
(2)  Site Plan. A site specific plan, prepared by an Oregon registered professional engineer, shall be required when the site meets any of the following criteria: 
(a)  Greater than five acres; 
(b)  Greater than one acre and has slopes greater than 20 percent; 
(c)  Contains or is within 100 feet of a City-identified wetland or a waterway identified on FEMA floodplain maps; or 
(d)  Greater than one acre and contains highly erodible soils. 
(Ord. 846-91 §6, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-070 - Maintenance. 
The property owner or holder of an erosion control permit shall maintain the facilities and techniques contained in the approved Erosion Control Plan so as to continue to be effective during the construction or other permitted activity. If the facilities and techniques approved in an Erosion Control Plan are not effective or sufficient as determined by the City site inspection, the permittee shall submit a revised plan within three days, (excluding Saturday, Sunday and holidays) of written notification either by personal delivery or regular mail, from the City. Upon approval of the revised plan by the City, the permittee shall immediately implement the additional or revised facilities and techniques of the revised plan. In cases where erosion is occurring, the City may require the applicant to install interim control measures prior to submittal of the revised Erosion Control Plan. In no event will the City be responsible for the success or failure of any approved Erosion Control Plan. 
(Ord. 846-91 §7, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-080 - Inspection. 
All erosion control measures shall be installed prior to the start of any work requiring an erosion control permit and shall be maintained until after the work is complete and until no further potential of erosion exists. The permittee shall call the City prior to the foundation inspection of a building for an inspection of the erosion control measures for that property. 
(Ord. 846-91 §8, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-090 - Physical Erosion. 
No person shall drag, drop, track or otherwise place or deposit, or allow to be placed or deposited mud, dirt, rock or other debris upon a public street or into any part of a public storm and surface water system, or into any part of a private storm and surface water system which drains or connects to the public storm and surface water system. Any such deposit of material shall be immediately removed using hand labor or mechanical means. No material shall be washed or flushed into any part of the storm and surface water system without approved erosion control measures first being installed to the satisfaction of the City. 
(Ord. 846-91 §9, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-100 - Permit Fee. 
(1)  The City Engineer shall collect a fee, as established by the City Council by resolution, for the review of plans, administration, enforcement and field inspection to carry out the rules contained herein. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued and no regulated activity requiring a permit shall occur until fees required by this chapter are first paid. 
(Ord. 846-91 §10, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-110 - Air Pollution—Dust, Fumes, Smoke and Odors. 
(1)  Dust shall be minimized to the extent practicable, utilizing all measures necessary, including, but not limited to: 
(a)  Sprinkling haul and access roads and other exposed dust producing areas with water. 
(b)  Applying dust palliatives on access and haul roads. 
(c)  Establishing temporary vegetative cover. 
(d)  Placing wood chips or other effective mulches on vehicle and pedestrian use areas. 
(e)  Maintaining the proper moisture condition on all fill surfaces. 
(f)  Pre-wetting cut and borrow area surfaces. 
(g)  Use of covered haul equipment. 
(2)  Tires, oils, paints, asphalts, coated metals or other such materials will not be permitted in combustible waste piles, and will not be burned at the construction site. 
(3)  Open burning shall not be permitted unless approved by the Department of Environmental Quality and the prevailing wind will carry smoke away from nearby built-up areas or communities. 
(4)  Open burning shall not be permitted within 1,000 feet of a residence or built-up area or within 250 feet of the drip line of any standing timber or flammable growth. 
(5)  Open burning shall not be permitted during a local air inversion or other climatic conditions that may result in a smoke pall hanging over a built-up area or community. 
(6)  Open burning shall not be permitted when climatic and moisture conditions are contributing to high danger of forest or range fires as determined by local, state or federal authorities. 
(Ord. 846-91 §11, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-120 - Maintaining Water Quality. 
(1)  Construction between stream banks shall be kept to a minimum. 
(2)  Pollutants such as fuels, lubricants, bitumens, raw sewage, and other harmful materials shall not be discharged into or near rivers, streams or impoundments. 
(3)  The use of water from a stream, or impoundment shall not result in altering the temperature of the water body enough to affect aquatic life. 
(4)  All sediment-laden water from construction operations shall be routed through stilling basins, filtered or otherwise treated to reduce the sediment load. 
(Ord. 846-91 §12, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-130 - Fish and Wildlife Habitat. 
(1)  The construction shall be done in a manner to minimize the adverse effects on wildlife and fishery resources. 
(2)  The requirements of local, state, and federal agencies charged with wildlife and fish protection shall be adhered to by the entire construction work force. 
(Ord. 846-91 §13, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-140 - Control of Noise Levels. 
Construction noise shall be minimized by the use of proper engine mufflers, protective sound reducing enclosures, and other sound barriers. Construction activities producing excessive noise that cannot be reduced by mechanical means shall be restricted to locations where their sound impact is reduced to a minimum at the edge of work area. 
(Ord. 846-91 §14, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-150 - Natural Vegetation. 
(1)  As far as is practicable, the natural vegetation shall be protected and left in place. Work areas shall be carefully located and marked to reduce potential damage. Trees shall not be used as anchors for stabilizing working equipment. 
(2)  During clearing operations, trees shall not be permitted to fall outside the work area. In areas designated for selective cutting or clearing, care in falling and removing trees and brush shall be taken to avoid injuring trees and shrubs to be left in place. 
(3)  Where natural vegetation has been removed, or the original land contours disturbed, the site shall be revegetated, and the vegetation established, as soon as practicable after construction has commenced, except where construction of sewers will be followed by paving. 
(Ord. 846-91 §15, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-160 - Historical and Archeological Areas. 
When burial sites, buried camp areas, or village sites, and other distinctive archeological or historical items are uncovered, or other items suspected of being of historical or archeological significance are encountered, the contractor shall report the matter to the City and the state liaison officer. Construction operations shall be stopped until the appropriate authorities can examine the area and give clearance to proceed with the work. Under the Natural Historical Preservation Act, state liaison officers shall be notified when historical or archeological items are unearthed. 
(Ord. 846-91 §16, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-170 - Pesticides, Fertilizers. 
(1)  The use of pesticides, including insecticides, herbicides, defoliants, soil sterilants, and so forth, and the use of fertilizers, must strictly adhere to federal, state, county and local restrictions. Time, area, method and rate of application must be cleared with the local authorities and their requirements followed. 
(2)  All materials defined in subsection (1) of this section delivered to the job site shall be covered and protected from the weather. None of the materials shall be exposed during storage. Waste material, rinsing fluids, and other such material shall be disposed of in such manner that pollution of groundwater, surface water, or the air does not occur. In no case shall toxic materials be dumped into drainageways. 
(3)  All personnel shall stay out of sprayed areas for the prescribed time. All such areas shall be fenced, appropriately signed, or otherwise protected to restrict entry. 
(Ord. 846-91 §17, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-180 - Contaminated Soils. 
If the construction process reveals soils contaminated with hazardous materials or chemicals the contractor shall stop work immediately, ensure no contaminated material is hauled from the site, remove the contractor's work force from the immediate area of the contaminated area, leaving all machinery and equipment, and secure the area from access by the public until such time as a mitigation team has relieved them of that responsibility. Contractor shall notify the City and an emergency response team (911) of the situation upon its discovery. No employees who may have come in contact with the contaminated material shall be allowed to leave the site until such time as the emergency response team releases them. 
(Ord. 846-91 §18, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-190 - Soil Erosion Control Matrix and Methods. 
(1)  Establishing Primary Access Point. As one of the initial activities at the start of any earthwork, a gravel driveway shall be established. The driveway shall meet the following: 
(a)  The driveway shall begin at curb line, or at the edge of the street or pavement if no curb, and be of sufficient length to allow construction and delivery vehicles to unload material and have access without needing to frequently drive over muddy areas. 
(b)  The rock surface must be kept clean and free of mud, either from mud or dirt dropping or washing onto the surface, or from mud or soil "pumping" through the crushed rock from the action of vehicles. If contaminated such that significant mud will be washed or transported onto the streets, then the crushed rock shall be placed or covered with an additional thickness of crushed rock. 
(c)  The responsibility for design and performance of the driveway remains with the applicant. It is suggested the driveway be a minimum of 20 feet × 20 feet, eight inches thick, and be made of two inches minus or larger crushed rock, or ¾ inches minus crushed rock with a geotextile fabric installed between the subbase and rock. 
(d)  Tires and equipment shall be washed or otherwise cleaned prior to entering public right-of-way when the vehicle or equipment has entered a muddy area. 
(2)  Additional Access. Construction and delivery vehicles and equipment shall use the primary access point (the gravel driveway). Vehicles and equipment shall not access the property from any other point (shall not "hop the curb"), unless required due to the physical layout of the parcel, and not simply due to convenience. 
If is necessary to access the site at other than the primary access point: 
(a)  A second temporary or permanent crushed rock access point shall be established if there is an ongoing need to access the property at a second point. Large or difficult properties may require more than one permanent access point. 
(b)  If there is only a one time or infrequent need to access the property at other than an established access point, then the vehicle or equipment may "hop the curb". Each time the vehicle or equipment reenters the street any mud, dirt, or other such debris that falls or is deposited on the street shall be immediately cleaned using hand labor or mechanical means. 
Immediate means within five minutes of the mud, dirt, or debris being deposited on the street. Mud, dirt and debris shall not be allowed to accumulate to be cleaned up at the end of the day or "later". Under no circumstance shall mud, dirt or debris be washed into the storm and surface water system. 
(c)  Under no circumstance shall vehicles or equipment enter a property adjacent to a stream, water course, or other storm and surface water facility, or a wetland such that it would not be possible to avoid contaminating or depositing mud, dirt, or debris into the water or wetland. 
(3)  Silt Barriers. Silt barriers shall be installed concurrent with grading, and will be inspected prior to "footing" inspection. They shall be installed downhill of all graded, filled and stripped areas, and across the path of concentrated flows. They shall be designed and installed to capture erosion on site. Silt barriers can be: 
(a)  Hay bales; 
(b)  Silt fence; or 
(c)  Gravel filter system, such as the early installation of sidewalk base rock. A gravel filter is permitted only when slopes are less than five percent. 
(4)  Exceptions to Silt Barrier Requirement. Silt barriers are not required as described above on a site, or on portions of a site: 
(a)  Where a "community" Erosion Control Plan is in effect; 
(b)  Where there are no concentrated flows and the slope being protected has a grade of less than two percent; 
(c)  Where flows are collected through the use of temporary or permanent grading or other means such that the flows are routed to an approved settling pond, filtering system or silt barrier; or 
(d)  Where there are no concentrated flows, the slopes are less than ten percent, and where the run-off passes through a grassed area which is either owned by the applicant, or approved for such use in writing by the owner of the grassed area. The grass area shall be at least equal in area to the area being protected. 
(5)  Community Plan. An individual or group may submit a plan to control erosion from multiple lots, and this shall be referred to as a "Community Erosion Control Plan", or "Community Plan". In such case, the group of lots will be evaluated as if they were one lot. 
If an individual lot in a Community Plan is sold to new owners, the new owner may either join the Community Plan (with the approval of the other "community" owner or owners), or will need to submit their own Erosion Control Plan if erosion potential still exists on the parcel. If a lot is sold and the new owner does not join the Community Plan, then the community Plan must be revised to prevent erosion from entering the withdrawn property. 
(6)  Protection Measure Removal. The erosion control facilities and techniques shall remain in place and be maintained in good condition until all disturbed soil areas are permanently stabilized by installation of landscaping, seeding, mulching or otherwise covered and protected from erosion. 
(7)  Miscellaneous. Filter systems may not be used on catch basins in public streets as a part of single family erosion control plans. Plastic sheeting should generally not be used as an erosion control measure in single family house construction. Plastic sheeting may be used to protect small, highly erodible areas, or temporary stock-piles of material. If used, the path of concentrated flow from the plastic must be protected. 
(Ord. 846-91 §19, 10-28-91)  
ADDITIONAL SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS 
 
TMC 3-5-200 - Downstream Protection Requirement. 
Each new development is responsible for mitigating the impacts of that development upon the public storm water quantity system. The development may satisfy this requirement through the use of any of the following techniques, subject to the limitations and requirements in TMC 3-5-210: 
(1)  Construction of permanent on-site stormwater quantity detention facilities designed in accordance with this title; 
(2)  Enlargement of the downstream conveyance system in accordance with this title and the Public Works Construction Code; 
(3)  The payment of a Storm and Surface Water Management System Development Charge, which includes a water quantity component designated to meet these requirements. 
(Ord. 846-91 §20, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-210 - Review of Downstream System. 
For new development other than the construction of a single family house or duplex, plans shall document review by the design engineer of the downstream capacity of any existing storm drainage facilities impacted by the proposed development. That review shall extend downstream to a point where the impacts to the water surface elevation from the development will be insignificant, or to a point where the conveyance system has adequate capacity, as determined by the City Engineer. 
To determine the point at which the downstream impacts are insignificant or the drainage system has adequate capacity, the design engineer shall submit an analysis using the following guidelines: 
(1)  Evaluate the downstream drainage system for at least ¼ mile; 
(2)  Evaluate the downstream drainage system to a point at which the runoff from the development in a build out condition is less than ten percent of the total runoff of the basin in its current development status. Developments in the basin that have been approved may be considered in place and their conditions of approval to exist if the work has started on those projects; 
(3)  Evaluate the downstream drainage system throughout the following range of storms: Two-, five-, ten-, 25-year; 
(4)  The City Engineer may modify items (1), (2), (3) to require additional information to determine the impacts of the development or to delete the provision of unnecessary information. 
If the increase in surface waters leaving a development will cause or contribute to damage from flooding, then the identified capacity deficiency shall be corrected prior to development or the development must construct onsite detention. To determine if the runoff from the development will cause or contribute to damage from flooding the City Engineer will consider the following factors: 
(1)  The potential for or extent of flooding or other adverse impacts from the run-off of the development on downstream properties; 
(2)  The potential for or extent of possibility of inverse condemnation claims; 
(3)  Incremental impacts of runoff from the subject and other developments in the basin; and 
(4)  Other factors that may be relevant to the particular situation. 
The purpose of the City Engineer's review is to protect the City and its inhabitants from the impacts or damage caused by runoff from development while recognizing all appropriate limitations on exactions from the development. 
(Ord. 846-91 §21, 10-28-91; Ord. 972-97 §1, 2/24/1997)  
TMC 3-5-220 - Criteria for Requiring On-Site Detention to be Constructed. 
The City shall determine whether the onsite facility shall be constructed. If the onsite facility is constructed, the development shall be eligible for a credit against Storm and Surface Water System Development Charges, as provided in City ordinance. 
On-site facilities shall be constructed when any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  There is an identified downstream deficiency, as defined in TMC 3-5-210, and detention rather than conveyance system enlargement is determined to be the more effective solution. 
(2)  There is an identified regional detention site within the boundary of the development. 
(3)  There is a site within the boundary of the development which would qualify as a regional detention site under criteria or capital plan adopted by the Unified Sewerage Agency. 
(4)  The site is located in the Hedges Creek Subbasin as identified in the Tualatin Drainage Plan and surface water runoff from the site flows directly or indirectly into the Wetland Protected Area (WPA) as defined in TDC 71.020. Properties located within the Wetland Protection District as described in TDC 71.010, or within the portion of the subbasin east of SW Tualatin Road are excepted from the on-site detention facility requirement. 
(Ord. 846-91 §22, 10-28-91; Ord. 952-95 § 4, 10/23/1995)  
TMC 3-5-230 - On-Site Detention Design Criteria. 
(1)  Unless designed to meet the requirements of an identified downstream deficiency as defined in TMC 3-5.210, stormwater quantity onsite detention facilities shall be designed to capture run-off so the run-off rates from the site after development do not exceed predevelopment conditions, based upon a 25-year, 24-hour return storm. 
(2)  When designed to meet the requirements of an identified downstream deficiency as defined in TMC 3-5.210, stormwater quantity on-site detention facilities shall be designed such that the peak runoff rates will not exceed predevelopment rates for the two through 100 year storms, as required by the determined downstream deficiency. 
(3)  Construction of on-site detention shall not be allowed as an option if such a detention facility would have an adverse effect upon receiving waters in the basin or subbasin in the event of flooding, or would increase the likelihood or severity of flooding problems downstream of the site. 
(Ord. 846-91 §23, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-240 - On-Site Detention Design Method. 
(1)  The procedure for determining the detention quantities is set forth in Section 4.4 Retention/Detention Facility Analysis and Design, King County, Washington, Surface Water Design Manual, January, 1990, except subchapters 4.4.5 Tanks, 4.4.6 Vaults and Figure 4.4.4G Permanent Surface Water Control Pond Sign. This reference shall be used for procedure only. The design criteria shall be as noted herein. Engineers desiring to utilize a procedure other than that set forth herein shall obtain City approval prior to submitting calculations utilizing the proposed procedure. 
(2)  For single family and duplex residential subdivisions, stormwater quantity detention facilities shall be sized for the impervious areas to be created by the subdivision, including all residences on individual lots at a rate of 2,640 square feet of impervious surface area per dwelling unit, plus all roads which are assessed a surface water management monthly fee under Unified Sewerage Agency rules. Such facilities shall be constructed as a part of the subdivision public improvements. Construction of a single family or duplex residence on an existing lot of record is not required to construct stormwater quantity detention facilities. 
(3)  All developments other than single family and duplex, whether residential, multi-family, commercial, industrial, or other uses, the sizing of stormwater quantity detention facilities shall be based on the impervious area to be created by the development, including structures and all roads and impervious areas which are assessed a surface water management monthly fee under Unified Sewerage Agency rules. Impervious surfaces shall be determined based upon building permits, construction plans, site visits or other appropriate methods deemed reliable by City. 
(Ord. 846-91 §24, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-250 - Floodplain Design Standards. 
(1)  Balanced Cut and Fill Standard. All fill placed in a floodplain shall be balanced with an equal amount of removal of soil material. No net fill in any floodplain is allowed with two exceptions: 
(a)  When an engineering study has been conducted and approved by the City showing that the increase in water surface elevation resulting from the fill will not cause or contribute to significant damage from flooding to existing buildings or dwellings on properties upstream and downstream; 
(b)  When an area has received special protection from floodplain improvement projects which either lower the floodplain, or otherwise protect affected properties, are approved by the City, where the exceptions comply with adopted master plans, if any, and where all required permits and approvals have been obtained in compliance with other local, state, and federal laws regarding fill in floodplains, including FEMA rules. 
(2)  Excavation Restricted. Large areas may not be excavated in order to gain a small amount of fill in a floodplain. Excavation areas shall not exceed the fill areas by more than 50 percent of the square footage, unless approved by the City. 
(3)  Excavation and Fill Volume Calculation. Any excavation dug below the winter "low water" elevation shall not count towards compensating for fill, since these areas would be full of water in the winter, and not available to hold storm water following a rain. Winter "low water" elevation is defined as the water surface elevation during the winter when it has not rained for at least three days, and the flows resulting from storms have receded. This elevation may be determined from records, studies or field observation. Any fill placed above the 100 year floodplain will not count towards the fill volume. 
(4)  Excavation Grade Design Standard. The excavated area must be designed to drain if it is an area identified to be dry in the summer; for example, if it is to be used for a park, or if it is to be mowed in the summer. Excavated areas identified as to remain wet in the summer, such as a constructed wetland, shall be designed not to drain. For areas that are to drain, the lowest elevation should be at least six inches above the winter "low water" elevation, and sloped at a minimum of two percent towards the drainage way. One percent slopes will be allowed in small areas. 
(5)  Excavation Location. Excavation to balance a fill does not need to be on the same property as the fill, but shall be in the same drainage basin, within points of constriction on the conveyance system, if any, as near as practical to the fill site, and shall be constructed as a part of the same development project which placed the fill. 
(Ord. 846-91 §25, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-260 - Floodway Design Standards. 
(1)  Obstruction Prohibited. Nothing may be constructed or placed in a floodway that will impede or constrict the flow of storm water. This includes, but is not limited to earth works, street and bike path crossings, and trees. If an object is placed in the floodway, the floodway must be widened or modified to accommodate the storm flows with no measurable increase in water surface elevation upstream or downstream, or unless the property owners of property where the water surface increase occurs grant written permission by agreement or easement. 
The floodway may not be modified such that water velocities are increased such that stream bank erosion will be increased, unless the stream banks are protected to prevent an increase in erosion. 
(2)  Floodway Modifications. Any proposed work within or modification to a floodway must be certified by an Oregon Registered Professional Engineer as meeting the requirements of TMC 3-5.250(1). 
(3)  Floodway Identification. For streams, creeks, rivers and other watercourses where the City has not identified the floodway, the entire floodplain shall be treated as a floodway, or a study prepared by an Oregon Registered Professional Engineer and approved by the City may be used to define the floodway limits for a stream section. 
(Ord. 846-91 §26, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-280 - Placement of Water Quality Facilities. 
Title III specifies that certain properties shall install water quality facilities for the purpose of removing phosphorous. No such water quality facilities shall be constructed within the defined area of existing or created wetlands unless a mitigation action, approved by the City, is constructed to replace the area used for the water quality facility. 
(Ord. 846-91 §28, 10-28-91; Ord. 972-97 § 3, 2/24/1997; Ord. 1068-01 §2, 3/26/2001; Ord. 1068-01, 03/26/2001)  
PERMANENT ON-SITE WATER QUALITY FACILITIES 
 
TMC 3-5-290 - Purpose of Title. 
The purpose of this title is to require new development and other activities which create impervious surfaces to construct or fund on-site or off-site permanent water quality facilities to reduce the amount of phosphorous entering the storm and surface water system. 
(Ord. 846-91 §29, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-300 - Application of Title. 
Title III of this Chapter shall apply to all activities which create new or additional impervious surfaces, except as provided in TMC 3-5.310. 
(Ord. 846-91 §30, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-310 - Exceptions. 
(1)  Those developments with application dates prior to July 1, 1990, are exempt from the requirements of Title III. The application date shall be defined as the date on which a complete application for development approval is accepted by the City in accordance with City regulations. 
(2)  Construction of one and two family (duplex) dwellings are exempt from the requirements of Title III. 
(3)  Sewer lines, water lines, utilities or other land development that will not directly increase the amount of storm water run-off or pollution leaving the site once construction has been completed and the site is either restored to or not altered from its approximate original condition are exempt from the requirements of Title III. 
(Ord. 846-91 §31, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-320 - Definitions. 
Stormwater Quality Control Facility refers to any structure or drainage way that is designed, constructed and maintained to collect and filter, retain, or detain surface water run-off during and after a storm event for the purpose of water quality improvement. It may also include, but is not limited to, existing features such as constructed wetlands, water quality swales, low impact development approaches ("LIDA"), and ponds which are maintained as stormwater quality control facilities. 
Low Impact Development Approaches or LIDA means stormwater facilities constructed utilizing low impact development approaches used to temporarily store, route or filter run-off for the purpose of improving water quality. Examples include; but are not limited to, Porous Pavement, Green Roofs, Infiltration Planters/Rain Gardens, Flow-Through Planters, LIDA Swales, Vegetated Filter Strips, Vegetated Swales, Extended Dry Basins, Constructed Water Quality Wetland, Conveyance and Stormwater Art, and Planting Design and Habitats. 
Water Quality Swale means a vegetated natural depression, wide shallow ditch, or constructed facility used to temporarily store, route or filter run-off for the purpose of improving water quality. 
Existing Wetlands means those areas identified and delineated as set forth in the Federal Manual for Identifying the Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, January, 1989, or as amended, by a qualified wetlands specialist. 
Created Wetlands means those wetlands developed in an area previously identified as a non-wetland to replace, or mitigate wetland destruction or displacement. 
Constructed Wetlands means those wetlands developed as a water quality or quantity facility, subject to change and maintenance as such. These areas must be clearly defined and/or separated from existing or created wetlands. This separation shall preclude a free and open connection to such other wetlands. 
(Ord. 846-91 §32, 10-28-91; Ord. 1319-11 §1, 3/28/2011)  
TMC 3-5-330 - Permit Required. 
Except as provided in TMC 3-5-310, no person shall cause any change to improved or unimproved real property that will, or is likely to, increase the rate or quantity of run-off or pollution from the site without first obtaining a permit from the City and following the conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. 846-91 §33, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-340 - Facilities Required. 
For new development, subject to the exemptions of TMC 3-5-310, no permit for construction, or land development, or plat or site plan shall be approved unless the conditions of the plat, plan or permit approval require permanent stormwater quality control facilities in accordance with this Title III. 
(Ord. 846-91 §34, 10-28-91; Ord. 1323-11 §1, 6/13/2011)  
TMC 3-5-345 - Inspection Reports. 
The property owner or person in control of the property shall submit inspection reports annually to the City for the purpose of ensuring maintenance activities occur according to the operation and maintenance plan submitted for an approved permit or architectural review. 
(Ord. 1319-11§6, 3/28/2011)  
TMC 3-5-350 - Phosphorous Removal Standard. 
The stormwater quality control facilities shall be designed to remove 65 percent of the phosphorous from the runoff from 100 percent of the newly constructed impervious surfaces. Impervious surfaces shall include pavement, buildings, public and private roadways, and all other surfaces with similar runoff characteristics. 
(Ord. 846-91 §35, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-360 - Design Storm. 
The stormwater quality control facilities shall be designed to meet the removal efficiency of TMC 3-5-350 for a mean summertime storm event totaling 0.36 inches of precipitation falling in four hours with an average return period of 96 hours. 
(Ord. 846-91 §36, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-370 - Design Requirements. 
The removal efficiency in TDC Chapter 35 specifies only the design requirements and are not intended as a basis for performance evaluation or compliance determination of the stormwater quality control facility installed or constructed pursuant to this Title III. 
(Ord. 846-91 §37, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-380 - Criteria for Granting Exemptions to Construction of On-Site Water Quality Facilities. 
On-site facilities shall be constructed as required by OAR 340-41-455, unless otherwise approved by the City on a case by case basis due to the size of the development, topography, or other factors causing the City to determine that the construction of onsite permanent stormwater treatment systems is impracticable or undesirable. Determinations by the City may be based upon, but not limited to, consideration of the following factors: 
Site topography, geological stability, hazards to public safety, accessibility for maintenance, environmental impacts to sensitive areas, size of the site and development, existence of a more efficient and effective regional site within the basin capable of serving the site, and consistency with sub-basin master plan. 
A regional public facility may be constructed to serve private non-residential development provided: 
(1)  The facility serves more than one lot; and 
(2)  All owners sign a stormwater facility agreement; and 
(3)  Treatment accommodates reasonable worst case impervious area for full build-out, stormwater equivalent to existing or proposed roof area is privately treated in LIDA facilities, and any detention occurs on each lot. 
(Ord. 846-91 §38, 10-28-91; Ord. 1323-11 §2, 06/13/2011)  
TMC 3-5-390 - Facility Permit Approval. 
A stormwater quality control facility permit shall be approved only if the following are met: 
(1)  The plat, site plan, or permit application includes plans and a certification prepared by an Oregon registered, professional engineer that the proposed stormwater quality control facilities have been designed in accordance with criteria expected to achieve removal efficiencies for total phosphorous required by this Title III. Clean Water Services Design and Construction Standards shall be used in preparing the plan for the water quality facility; and 
(2)  The plat, site plan, or permit application shall be consistent with the areas used to determine the removal required in TMC 3-5-350; and 
(3)  A financial assurance, or equivalent security acceptable to the City, is provided by the applicant which assures that the stormwater quality control facilities are constructed according to the plans established in the plat, site plan, or permit approval. The financial assurance may be combined with our financial assurance requirements imposed by the City; and 
(4)  A stormwater facility agreement identifies who will be responsible for assuring the long term compliance with the operation and maintenance plan. 
(Ord. 846-91 §39, 10-28-91; Ord. 1323-11 §3, 06/13/2011)  
TMC 3-5-400 - System Development Charge. 
If under TMC 3-5-380, an on-site facility will not be constructed, the Storm and Surface Water System Development Charge shall be paid. 
(Ord. 846-91 §40, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-410 - Permit Fee. 
The City shall collect a reasonable fee established by the Council by resolution for the review of plans, administration, enforcement and field inspection to carry out the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 846-91 §41, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-420 - Residential Developments. 
The permanent stormwater quality control facilities for the construction of any single family and duplex subdivision shall be adequately sized for the public improvements of the subdivision and for the future construction of single family and duplex houses on the individual lots at a rate of 2,640 square feet of impervious surface per dwelling unit. 
(Ord. 846-91 §42, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-430 - Placement of Water Quality Facilities. 
No water quality facilities shall be constructed within the defined area of existing or created wetlands unless a mitigation action is approved by the City, and is constructed to replace the area used for water quality. 
(Ord. 846-91 §43, 10-28-91)  
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR BUILDING AND SIDE SEWERS 
 
TMC 3-5-440 - General Provisions. 
(1)  The specifications contained in this Title III, together with the State of Oregon Uniform Plumbing Code and all other applicable requirements of federal, state and local law, shall govern the installation of all building and side sewers. 
(2)  No person other than the owner of the property on which the sewer is being installed or a state or DEQ licensed sewer contractor may excavate or dig up such property and install building sewers within the City. 
(3)  Each single family residence shall be served by a side sewer discharging directly into a public sanitary sewer line. The minimum size of a side sewer shall be four-inch for PVC and six-inch for concrete. 
(Ord. 846-91 §44, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-450 - Building Sewers. 
(1)  Materials. Pipes for building sewers shall be one of the following types or approved equal: 
(a)  A.B.S. (Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene), conforming to ASTM D2751. 
(b)  P.V.C. (Polyvinyl Chloride), conforming to ASTM D3034. 
(c)  Concrete conforming to ASTM C-14, Class 2. 
(d)  Ductile iron or cast iron conforming to Class 50. 
(2)  Joints. The ends of pipes, collars, gaskets and retaining clamps shall be kept clean and free of foreign material when pipe is laid. All joints shall be made watertight and gastight. 
(3)  Cleanouts. All changes in direction shall be made with long radius bends, 45 degrees, 22½ degrees, tee or wye branches with straight-through opening plugged for a cleanout. Cleanouts shall be installed in the building sewer between the building outlet and the side sewer when the distance is greater than 100 feet. All bends within the sewer shall not exceed 135 degrees without an additional cleanout. Cleanouts shall be plugged to prevent entrance of dirt, roots, or ground water. Plugs shall be sealed with rubber gaskets and secured against back pressure. 
(4)  Size. The minimum size of any building sewer shall be determined on the basis of the total number of fixture units drained by such sewer in accordance with Table 4-3 of the Oregon State Plumbing Code. 
(5)  Installation. 
(a)  Connection. Where two buildings are adjacent to one another on the same lot, each building shall have a separate connection pipe to the receiving line. The pipes from each building shall be in separated ditches to point of connection on the receiving line. A duplex may be served by one side sewer providing that a deed restriction is placed on the property requiring the owners thereof to be jointly responsible for maintenance of the building sewers and side sewer. A copy of the deed restriction shall be submitted at the time of sewer permit application. No roof, surface, foundation, footing or other ground water drain shall be connected to the sanitary system. 
(b)  Connection to Cesspools and Septic Tanks. 
(A)  Direct connection from all plumbing fixtures in the building to the sanitary sewer system is required. 
(B)  No connection shall be allowed from a cesspool, septic tank, or kitchen grease trap to the building sewer. 
(C)  When a private sewage disposal system is abandoned and no longer to be used, all septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private systems shall be pumped and backfilled in accordance with the Department of Environmental Quality regulations. 
(6)  Excavation. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the City. 
(7)  Alignment. All pipe shall be true to grade with the bells upgrade. Pipe shall be carefully centered prior to jointing. The bottom of the trench shall be smooth and free from rocks which may injure the pipe. The pipe shall be laid on four inches of 3/4-inch minus crushed rock throughout its entire length, and any such piping laid in fill shall be laid on a bed of approved materials and shall be adequately supported to the satisfaction of the City. 
(8)  Grade. All sewers shall be laid on a grade of not less than ¼ inch per foot for a four-inch pipe and 3/16-inch per foot for a six-inch pipe. 
(a)  Special Release. If the grade of the side sewer or building sewer is to be less than ¼ inch per foot for a four-inch pipe, or 3/16-inch per foot for a six-inch pipe, the property owner shall sign and acknowledge a grade release in a form approved by the City. The effect of such form shall be to release the City from all future claims for damages due to the installation of said sewer. If there is doubt about the grade, a grade release shall be procured before the pipe is laid. If upon inspection the grade is inadequate, the grade release shall be filed with the City Engineer before backfilling takes place. In all special cases, the installation of a backwater valve will be required. 
(b)  Elevation. In any buildings, structures, or premises in which the house waste drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the sewer, the sewage may with the approval of the City be lifted by artificial means and discharged to the sewer. Wherever a situation exists involving an unusual danger of back-up, the City may prescribe the minimum elevation at which the house drain may be discharged to the public sewer. Sewers below such minimum elevation shall be lifted by artificial means, or if approved by the City, a back-water sewage valve may be installed. The effective operation of the back-water valve shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property served. 
(9)  Backfill. If common material is available which is free from rocks one inch in diameter, it may be used to backfill the remainder of the ditch. If suitable material is not available, 3/4-inch minus granular material shall be used to backfill the trench to a point six inches above the top of the pipe. The remainder of the ditch may then be backfilled with common material. 
A modified method of backfilling shall be used where the house service laterals cross lawn, shrub, or planting areas between the curb and the property line. In this area, backfill shall be modified so that a minimum of 18 inches and a maximum of 36 inches of compacted top soil shall be provided in the upper portions of the trench. The lower portions of the trench shall be backfilled as described above. 
(10)  Cover. Cover on private property shall be not less than 12 inches from top of pipe to finished grade. 
(11)  Sewer and Water Lines. Building sewers or drainage piping of materials which are not approved for use within a building shall not be laid in the same trench with water service pipes unless both of the following requirements are met. 
(a)  Separation. The bottom of the water pipe, at all points, shall be at least 12 inches above the top of the sewer line. 
(b)  Placement. The water pipe shall be placed on a shelf excavated at one side of the common trench. 
(12)  Testing. All building sewers shall be tested for leakage 15 minutes prior to the City inspection and prior to backfilling the trench. Sewers shall be tested by plugging the building sewer at its point of connection with the side sewer and completely filling the building sewer with water from the lowest point to the highest point thereof. The building sewer shall be watertight and have no visible leakage. 
A tee shall be installed at the property line at the expense of the installer. After the test is complete, a plug shall be inserted in the tee. After a satisfactory test has been performed, the trench shall be backfilled. 
(Ord. 846-91 §45, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-460 - Installation of Side Sewers. 
(1)  Material. 
(a)  Pipes for side sewers shall be one of the following types or approved equal: 
(A)  PVC (Polyvinyl chloride), conforming to ASTM D3034. 
(B)  Concrete conforming to ASTM C-14, Class 2. 
(C)  Ductile iron conforming to Class 51. 
(2)  Excavation and Backfill. All excavation and backfill shall comply with the standards set forth in the City's Public Works Construction Code. 
(3)  Alignment and Grade. Side sewers shall be laid in a straight grade and alignment from the main sewer line to the edge of right-of-way or edge of permanent easement. The grade shall be a minimum of two percent. The pipe shall be laid on a pipe base of 4-inches of 3/4 inch-minus crushed rock. All plastic pipe shall have 3/4 inch-minus rock placed 6-inches over the top of the pipe. 
(4)  Markings. The side sewers shall be marked with a detectable underground magnetic tape. The magnetic tape shall be placed from the main pipeline to the end of the side lateral. The magnetic tape shall be green in color and have the following marking depending whether it is a sanitary or storm line: 
(a)  CAUTION STORM DRAIN BURIED BELOW 
(b)  CAUTION SEWER BURIED BELOW 
A two × four stake shall be installed at the end of the side sewer extending from the invert of the pipe to the ground surface. A magnetic tape shall be placed alongside the two × four. 
(5)  Testing. Sanitary side sewers shall be air tested in accordance with the standards set forth in the City's Public Works Construction Code. 
(Ord. 846-91 §46, 10-28-91)  
TMC 3-5-470 - Enforcement. 
(1)  A violation of a provision of this ordinance or failure to comply with any permit or condition of a permit issued under this ordinance is a civil infraction; failure to take immediate steps to correct a condition which is or may result in erosion or water quality degradation or pollution. Failure to implement or comply with an erosion control plan or maintenance plan approved by the City or an amendment thereto is a civil infraction. Each day that a violation of this ordinance exists shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. 846-91 §47, 10-28-91; Ord. 1319-11 §2, 3/28/2011)  
CHAPTER 3-06 - UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
Sections: 
 
TMC 3-6-010 - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to: 
(1)  Permit and manage reasonable access to the City's rights-of-way for utility purposes and conserve the limited physical capacity of those rights-of-way, which are held in trust by the City, consistent with applicable state and federal law; 
(2)  Assure the City is fully compensated for the City's costs of granting access to, and regulating the use of rights-of-way, from the persons seeking access and causing such costs; 
(3)  Secure fair and reasonable compensation for the City and its residents, who have invested millions of dollars in public funds to build and maintain the rights-of-way, from persons who generate revenue from the placing of facilities in the City's rights-of-way and charging the public for services delivered by those facilities in the City's rights-of-way; 
(4)  Assure all utility companies, persons, and other entities owning or operating facilities, or providing services within the City, register and comply with City ordinances, rules, and regulations; 
(5)  Assure the City can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety, and welfare of its residents, and the structural integrity of its rights-of-way, when a primary cause for the early and excessive deterioration of the rights-of-way is the frequent excavation by persons whose facilities are located within the City's rights-of-way; 
(6)  Enhance the safety and aesthetics in the City's rights-of-way; and 
(7)  Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive utility services on the widest possible basis to businesses and residents of the City. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-020 - Jurisdiction and Management of the Public Rights-of-Way. 
(1)  Under authority of the City Charter and state law, the City has jurisdiction of, and exercises regulatory management over, all rights-of-way within the City, whether acquired by fee, easement, or other legal interest, and whether the legal interest was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure, or other means. 
(2)  The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory management of the rights-of-way by the City is not official acceptance of the rights-of-way, and does not obligate the City to maintain or repair any part of the rights-of-way. 
(3)  The provisions of this Chapter are subject to and will be applied consistent with applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations. To the maximum extent practicable all regulatory and judicial interpretations of this Chapter must be interpreted to be consistent with such laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-030 - Regulatory Fees and Compensation Not a Tax. 
(1)  All City fees and costs charged under this Chapter are separate from, and in addition to, any and all other federal, state, local and City charges, including any permit fee, or any other generally applicable fee, tax, or charge on the business, occupation, property, or income, as may be levied, imposed or due from a utility operator, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery, or transmission of utility services. 
(2)  The City has determined that any fee provided for by this Chapter is not subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Sections 11 and 11(b) of the Oregon Constitution. These fees are not imposed on property or property owners. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-050 - Definitions. 
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following words and phrases mean: 
Cable Service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of: (i) video programming, or (ii) other programming service; and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service and is to be defined consistent with federal laws 
City means the City of Tualatin, an Oregon municipal corporation, and individuals authorized to act on the City's behalf. 
City Council means the elected governing body of the City of Tualatin, Oregon. 
City Facilities means City or publicly-owned structures or equipment located within the rights-of-way or public easement used for governmental purposes. 
City Manager means the City Manager for the City of Tualatin, or designee. 
Communications Services means any service provided for the purpose of transmission of information including, but not limited to, voice, video, or data, without regard to the transmission protocol employed, whether or not the transmission medium is owned by the provider itself. Communications services includes all forms of telephone services, voice, video, data, or information transport, but does not include: (a) cable service; (b) open video system service, as defined in 47 C.F.R. 76; (c) over-the-air radio or television broadcasting to the public-at-large from facilities licensed by the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto; (d) public communications systems; and (e) direct-to-home satellite service within the meaning of Section 602 of the Telecommunications Act. 
License means the authorization granted by the City to a utility operator pursuant to this Chapter. 
Person means and includes any individual, firm, sole proprietorship, corporation, company, partnership, co-partnership, joint-stock company, trust, limited liability company, association, local service district, governmental entity, or other organization, including any natural person or any other legal entity. 
Public Communications System means any system owned or operated by a government entity or entities for their exclusive use for internal communications or communications with other government entities, and includes services provided by the state of Oregon pursuant to ORS 190.240 and 283.140. "Public communications system" does not include any system used for sale or resale, including trade, barter, or other exchange of value, of communications services or capacity on the system, directly or indirectly, to any person. 
Public Utility Easement means the space in, upon, above, along, across, over, or under an easement for the construction, reconstruction, operation, maintenance, inspection, or repair of utility facilities. "Public utility easement" does not include any of the following: (i) an easement that has been privately acquired by a utility operator; (ii) an easement acquired solely for the construction, reconstruction, operation, maintenance, inspection, and repair of City facilities; and an easement granted to the City where its terms do not allow, or is inconsistent with, the proposed use by the utility operator. 
Rights-of-Way means and includes, but is not limited to, the space in, upon, above, along, across, over, or under the public streets, roads, highways, lanes, courts, ways, alleys, boulevards, bridges, trails, paths, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, public utility easements, and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas, but does not include parks, parkland, or other City property not generally open to the public for travel. This definition applies only to the extent of the City's right, title, interest, and authority to grant a license to occupy and use such areas for utility facilities. 
State means the state of Oregon. 
Utility Facility or Facility means any physical component of a system, including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, junction boxes, vaults, structures cables, wires, transmitters, plants, equipment, and other facilities, located within, under, or above the rights-of-way, any portion of which is used or designed to be used to deliver, transmit, or otherwise provide utility service. 
Utility Operator or Operator means any person who owns, places, operates, or maintains a utility facility or utility service within the City. 
Utility Service means the provision, by means of utility facilities located within, under, or above the rights-of-way, whether or not such facilities are owned by the service provider of electricity, natural gas, communications services, cable services, water, sewer, or storm sewer to or from customers within the corporate boundaries of the City, or the transmission of any of these services through the City, whether or not customers within the City are served by those transmissions. 
Work means the construction, demolition, installation, replacement, repair, maintenance, or relocation of any utility facility, including but not limited to any excavation and restoration required in association with such construction, demolition, installation, replacement, repair, maintenance, or relocation. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-100 - Rights-of-Way Fee. 
(1)  A Rights-of-Way Fee, as determined by resolution of the Council, must be paid by: 
(a)  Every person that owns utility facilities in the City's rights-of-way; and 
(b)  Every person that uses utility facilities in the City's rights-of-way to provide utility service, regardless of whether or not the person owns the utility facilities used to provide the utility services, and regardless of whether or not customers within the City are served by those facilities. 
(2)  Unless otherwise agreed in writing by the City, the Rights-of-Way Fee must be paid quarterly, in arrears, for each quarter during the term of the license. Payment must be received by the City within 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter, and must be accompanied by an accounting of gross revenues, if applicable, and a calculation of the amount payable. 
(3)  In the event the Rights-of-Way Fee is not received by the City on or before the due date or is underpaid, the utility operator must pay interest from the due date until full payment is received by the City at a rate equal to nine percent per annum, compounded daily, or the maximum interest rate allowed by law. 
(4)  The calculation of the Rights-of-Way Fee required by this section is subject to all applicable limitations imposed by federal or state law. 
(5)  The Rights-of-Way Fee payments required by this section will be reduced by any franchise fee payments received by the City, but in no case will the Rights-of-Way Fee be less than zero dollars. 
(6)  The City reserves the right to enact other fees and taxes applicable to the utility operators subject to this Chapter. Unless expressly permitted by the City in enacting such fee or tax, or required by applicable state or federal law, no utility operator may deduct, offset or otherwise reduce or avoid the obligation to pay any lawfully enacted fees or taxes based on the payment of the Rights-of-Way Fee or any other fees required by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-120 - Attachment Fee. 
(1)  A utility operator must pay an Attachment Fee, as set by resolution of the Council, for each attachment if: 
(a)  The utility operator only has facilities in the rights-of-way that are mounted on structures within the rights-of-way; 
(b)  The structures on which the facilities are mounted are owned by another person; and 
(c)  The utility operator does not have any facilities strung between such structures or otherwise within, under, or above the rights-of-way. 
(2)  Unless otherwise agreed in writing by the City, the Attachment Fee must be paid annually, in arrears, for each year during the term of the license within 30 days after the end of each calendar year, and must be accompanied by information sufficient to illustrate the calculation of the amount payable. The utility operator must pay interest at a rate of nine percent per year for any payment made after the due date. 
(3)  Payment of the Attachment Fee does not authorize an attachment to be located on a structure without the structure owner's consent. Separate consent must be negotiated with the owner of the structure, regardless of whether the owner is a private or public entity. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-200 - Business License Required. 
Every person who wants to provide utility services to customers within the City must acquire a business license from the City, as provided in TMC 9-01. In addition to the information required to be submitted for a business license, a person who wants to provide utility service, must also provide a description of the type, or types, of utility services to be provided. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-205 - Rights-of-Way Licenses. 
(1)  Rights-of-Way License Required. Every person must obtain a rights-of-way license from the City prior to conducting any work in the rights-of-way or placing any utility facilities in the rights-of-way. 
(2)  License Application. The license application must be on a form provided by the City and contain the following: 
(a)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person seeking a license; 
(b)  The corporate governing structure, including all parent and subsidiary businesses, along with all "doing business as" names. 
(c)  Whether the person is a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other legal status of the person; 
(d)  A description of the type of utility services provided or to be provided; 
(e)  The authorization to do business in Oregon, 
(f)  A list of facilities and their locations within the City, in a manner acceptable to the City; 
(g)  Any other documents or information required by the City to identify the person, its legal status, its authorization to do business in Oregon, its facilities, or to determine the applicant's ability to comply with the terms of this Chapter; 
(h)  Payment of the nonrefundable license application fee. 
(3)  License Application Fee. Each application for a rights-of-way license must be accompanied by a nonrefundable license fee, in an amount to be determined by resolution of the Council, sufficient to fully recover all of the City's costs of administering the license program. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-210 - License Determination by City. 
(1)  The City will evaluate the license application based upon the provisions of this Chapter, the continuing capacity of the rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant's proposed utility facilities, and the applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations, and policies. 
(2)  Within 90 days of receipt of a completed application, the City must issue a written determination granting or denying the license in whole or in part. If the license is denied, the written determination must include the reasons for denial. 
(3)  If the City determines that an applicant is in violation of the terms of this Chapter at the time it submits its application, the City may require the applicant to cure the violation or submit a detailed plan to cure the violation before the City will consider the application or grant the license. 
(4)  If the City requires the applicant to cure or submit a plan to cure a violation, the City will grant or deny the license application within 90 days of confirming that the violation has been cured or of accepting the applicant's plan to cure the violation. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-220 - Rights Granted to Licensee. 
(1)  A license granted under this Chapter authorizes and permits the licensee to construct, place, maintain, and operate utility facilities in the rights-of-way for the term of the license, subject to the provisions of City code, including any amendments which may be enacted during the term of the license, and other applicable provisions of state and federal law. 
(2)  Each license granted under this Chapter authorizes only those utility facilities or services applied for and approved by the City. The City may approve the provision of multiple services in one license. 
(3)  A license granted under this Chapter may not be assigned or transferred, except as permitted by this Chapter. 
(4)  A license granted under this Chapter does not grant, convey, create, or vest in a licensee any real property interest in land, including any fee, leasehold interest, or easement, and does not convey equitable or legal title in the rights-of-way. 
(5)  The issuance of a license does not constitute a waiver or bar to the City's exercise of any governmental right or power, including without limitation the City's police powers and regulatory powers, regardless of whether such powers existed before or after the license is issued. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-225 - Term of License. 
A license granted under this Chapter will remain in effect for a term of five years, unless sooner terminated as provided in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-230 - License Nonexclusive. 
(1)  A license granted under this Chapter does not confer any exclusive right, privilege, license, or franchise to occupy or use the rights-of-way for delivery of utility services or any other purpose. The City expressly reserves the right to grant licenses, franchises, or other rights to other persons, as well as the City's right to use the rights-of-way for similar or different purposes. 
(2)  A license granted under this Chapter is subject to all recorded deeds, easements, dedications, conditions, covenants, restrictions, encumbrances, and claims of title of record that may affect the rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-240 - Reservation of City Rights. 
(1)  The City reserves all rights, title, and interest in its rights-of-way. A license granted under this Chapter does not prevent the City from exercising any of its rights, including but not limited to grading, paving, repairing, or altering any rights-of-way, constructing, laying down, repairing, relocating, or removing City facilities, or establishing any other public work, utility, or improvement of any kind, including repairs, replacement, or removal of any City facilities. 
(2)  If a licensee's utility facility interferes with the construction, repair, replacement, alteration, or removal of any rights-of-way, public work, City use of the rights-of-way, City utility, City improvement, or City facility, except those providing utility services in competition with a licensee, licensee's facilities must be removed or relocated as provided in this Chapter, in a manner acceptable to the City and consistent with City and industry engineering standards, environmental laws and regulations, and safety laws and regulations. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-245 - Multiple Services. 
(1)  A utility operator that provides or transmits or allows the provision or transmission of utility services and other services over its facilities is subject to the license and Rights-of-Way Fee requirements of this Chapter for the portion of the facilities and extent of utility services delivered over those facilities. 
(2)  A utility operator that provides or transmits more than one utility service over its facilities is not required to obtain a separate license for each utility service, provided the license granted by the City authorizes the multiple utility services provided and the utility operator pays the applicable Rights-of-Way fee for each utility service provided. 
(3)  A utility operator may lease capacity on or in its systems to third parties, provided the utility operator provides the City with the name and business address of any third party lessee. A utility operator is not required to provide such information if disclosure is prohibited by applicable law. 
(4)  A utility operator is not required to pay the license or Rights-of-Way Fee owed to the City by the third party that leases capacity of the utility operator's facilities. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-250 - Transfer or Assignment. 
(1)  A licensee must obtain the written consent of the City prior to the transfer or assignment of a license, unless state or federal law specifically prohibits the City from requiring its prior written consent. 
(2)  A transfer or assignment will only be authorized if the proposed transferee or assignee is authorized under all applicable federal, state, and local laws to own or operate the utility system and the transfer or assignment is approved by all agencies or organizations required or authorized under federal, state, and local to approve such transfer or assignment. 
(3)  Upon a license being transferred or assigned, the transferee or assignee immediately becomes responsible for fulfilling all obligations under the license, including all facilities. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-260 - Rights-of-Way License Renewal. 
(1)  License Renewal. At least 120 days before the expiration of a license, a licensee seeking renewal of its rights-of-way license must submit a rights-of-way license renewal application on forms provided by the City and provide the following: 
(a)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person seeking a license; 
(b)  The corporate governing structure, including all parent and subsidiary businesses, along with all "doing business as" names. 
(c)  Whether the person is a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other legal status of the person; 
(d)  A description of the type of utility services provided or to be provided; 
(e)  The authorization to do business in Oregon, 
(f)  A list of facilities and their locations within the City; 
(g)  Any other documents or information required by the City to identify the person, its legal status, its authorization to do business in Oregon, its facilities, or to determine the applicant's ability to comply with the terms of this Chapter; 
(h)  Payment of the nonrefundable license renewal application fee. 
(2)  License Renewal Application Fee. Each renewal application for a rights-of-way license must be accompanied by a nonrefundable license renewal fee, in an amount to be determined by resolution of the Council. 
(3)  Renewal Criteria. The City will evaluate the license renewal application based upon the provisions of this Chapter, the continuing capacity of the rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant's proposed utility facilities, and the applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations, and policies. 
(4)  Renewal Determination by City. Within 90 days of receipt of a completed application, the City must issue a written determination granting or denying the license renewal in whole or in part. If the license renewal is denied, the written determination must include the reasons for denial. 
(5)  Requirement to Cure Violations. If the City determines that a licensee is in violation of the terms of this Chapter at the time it submits its renewal application, the City may require the applicant to cure the violation or submit a detailed plan to cure the violation before the City will consider the renewal application or grant the license renewal. 
(6)  Determination after Violation Cured. If the City requires the licensee to cure or submit a plan to cure a violation, the City will grant or deny the license application within 90 days of confirming that the violation has been cured or of accepting the applicant's plan to cure the violation. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-265 - Revocation or Termination of a License. 
(1)  The Council may terminate or revoke the license granted under this Chapter for any of the following reasons: 
(a)  Violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter; 
(b)  Any violation of local, state, or federal law, including but not limited to Clean Water Services regulations; 
(c)  Violation of any provision of the license; 
(d)  Fraud or misrepresentation to a City official, including but not limited to in a license application, permit application, or other document submitted to the City; 
(e)  Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees, or costs due the City after final determination of the taxes, compensation, fees, or costs; 
(f)  Failure to restore the rights-of-way, as required by this Chapter or other applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations; 
(g)  Failure to comply with technical, safety, and engineering standards related to work in the rights-of-way; or 
(h)  Failure to obtain or maintain any and all licenses, permits, certifications, and other authorizations required by local, state, or federal law for the placement, maintenance, or operation of the utility facilities. 
(2)  In determining whether to terminate, revoke, or impose a sanction, the Council must consider the following factors: 
(a)  Whether the violation was intentional, knowing, reckless, or negligent; 
(b)  The seriousness of the violation; 
(c)  The harm caused; 
(d)  The compliance history of the utility operator; and 
(e)  The utility operator's cooperation in discovering, informing the City, admitting to, and curing the violation. 
(3)  Before terminating a license, the City must give the utility operator written notice of any apparent violations and an opportunity to cure. The notice must include a clear and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance and provide a reasonable time of not to exceed 30 days, or other period of time the City determines is reasonable, for the utility operator to demonstrate that the utility operator has remained in compliance, that the utility operator has cured or is in the process of curing any violation or noncompliance, or that it would be in the public interest to impose a penalty or sanction less than termination or revocation. 
(4)  If the utility operator is in the process of curing a violation or noncompliance, the utility operator must demonstrate that it acted promptly and continues to actively work on compliance. 
(5)  If the utility operator does not respond to the notice of violation or does not cure the violation within the reasonable time allowed, the City Manager will refer the matter to the Council, which must provide a duly noticed public hearing to determine whether the license should be terminated or revoked. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-270 - Franchise Agreements. 
(1)  If the public interest warrants, the City may enter into a written franchise agreement with a utility operator. 
(2)  The franchise terms may clarify, enhance, expand, waive, or vary the provisions of this Chapter, consistent with applicable state and federal law. Unless specifically modified or waived by the terms of a franchise, the provisions of this Chapter control. 
(3)  All franchise agreements must be reviewed and approved by Council by special ordinance. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-300 - Construction and Restoration Activities. 
(1)  Construction Codes. Utility facilities must be constructed, installed, operated, and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local codes, rules, and regulations, including without limitation the National Electrical Code, the National Electrical Safety Code, state building code, state plumbing code, state fire code, the City's Public Works Construction Code, Clean Water Services Design and Construction standards, Occupational Safety and Health laws, the Americans with Disabilities Act requirements, and state utility locate requirements. 
(2)  Construction Permits. No person may perform any work on utility facilities within the rights-of-way without first obtaining all required permits. The City cannot issue a permit for the construction, installation, maintenance, or repair of utility facilities unless the utility operator of the facilities has registered and applied for and received the license required by this Chapter, or has a current franchise with the City, and all applicable fees have been paid. 
(3)  Emergency. In the event of an emergency, a utility operator with a license granted under this Chapter, or its authorized contractor, may perform work on its utility facilities without first obtaining a permit from the City, provided that, to the extent reasonably feasible, it attempts to notify the City Manager prior to commencing the emergency work and in any event initiates a permit application as soon as reasonably practicable, but not later than 12:00 noon of the next business day after commencing the emergency work. As used in this subsection, "emergency" means a circumstance in which immediate work is necessary to restore lost service or prevent immediate harm to persons or property. 
(4)  Applications for Permits. Applications for permits to construct utility facilities must be submitted on forms provided by the City and must be accompanied by drawings, plans, and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate: 
(a)  That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable ordinances, codes, rules, and regulations to the satisfaction of the City. 
(b)  The location and route of all utility facilities to be installed and, if the utility operator owns the existing utility poles, a comprehensive summary, including ownership, of any and all infrastructure currently attached to the pole. Unless approved in writing by the City, the construction of new utility poles is prohibited. An existing utility pole that is damaged or failing may be repaired or replaced with a new utility pole of substantially similar dimensions and materials. 
(c)  The location and route of all utility facilities on or in the rights-of-way to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points along the route that are within the rights-of-way. Applicant's existing utility facilities must be differentiated on the plans from new construction. A vertical profile along the proposed utility section must be provided showing new and existing utility facilities in relation to the street, curb, sidewalk, and rights-of-way. 
(d)  The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing structures, fixtures and facilities within or adjacent to the rights-of-way, and description of any improvements that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate. 
(e)  All permit applications must be accompanied by the verification of a qualified and duly authorized representative of the applicant that the drawings, plans, and specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules, and regulations. The City may, in the City's sole discretion, require the verification of a registered professional engineer. 
(f)  All permit applications must be accompanied by a written construction schedule, which must include an estimated start date and completion date of construction. The construction schedule is subject to approval by the City. 
(g)  Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the applicant must pay a construction permit fee in the amount determined by resolution of the Council. 
(h)  If satisfied that the application, plans and documents submitted comply with all requirements of this Chapter, the City will issue a permit authorizing construction of the utility facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place, and manner of performing the work as deemed necessary or appropriate. 
(i)  Except in the case of an emergency, the permittee must notify the City not less than two business days in advance of any excavation or construction in the rights-of-way. 
(j)  All construction practices and activities must be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the utility facilities. The City must be provided access to the work site and such further information as may be required to ensure compliance with such requirements. 
(k)  All construction activities must comply with the work hours and noise regulations of the Public Works Construction Code. 
(l)  All work that does not comply with the permit, the approved or corrected plans and specifications for the work, or the requirements of this Chapter, must be removed or corrected at the sole expense of the permittee. The City is authorized to stop work in order to assure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(m)  The permittee must promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the City rights-of-way and other public and private property. All construction work within the rights-of-way, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of issuance of the construction permit unless an extension or an alternate schedule has been approved by the City. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-305 - Performance Surety for Construction Activities. 
(1)  Before construction is commenced, a performance bond, or other form of surety acceptable to the City, equal to at least 125 percent of the estimated cost of the work within the rights-of-way of the City must be provided to the City. The performance bond or other form or surety must guarantee, to the satisfaction of the City: 
(a)  Timely completion of the work; 
(b)  That the work is performed in compliance with applicable ordinances, plans, permits, technical codes, and standards; 
(c)  Proper location of the facilities as specified by the City; 
(d)  Restoration to City standards of the rights-of-way and other property affected by the work; and 
(e)  Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work. 
(2)  The performance bond, or other form of surety acceptable to the City, must remain in force until substantial completion of the work, including restoration of rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction, as determined by the City. 
(3)  The provisions of this Section do not apply if a franchise agreement is in place with the City, or the City otherwise agrees to a different arrangement in writing. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-310 - Injury to Persons or Property. 
(1)  A utility operator must preserve and protect from injury or damage the public using the rights-of-way, other utility operators' facilities in the rights-of-way, and any adjoining property, and take other necessary measures to protect life and property, including but not limited to sidewalks, streets, buildings, walls, fences, trees, and facilities that may be subject to damage from the permitted work. 
(2)  A utility operator must use suitable barricades, flags, flagging attendants, lights, flares, and other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general public and must comply with all applicable Americans with Disabilities Act requirements and the requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). 
(3)  A utility operator is responsible for all injury to persons or damage to public or private property resulting from its failure to properly protect people and property and to carry out the work, regardless of whether the work is performed by a utility operator or performed by an independent contractor performing the work on behalf of the utility operator. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-315 - Restoration Required. 
(1)  Any utility operator performing work in or affecting the rights-of-way must, at its sole expense, promptly restore all rights-of-way and property impacted by the work to the same or better condition as existed before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the City. All work must be in accordance with applicable federal, state, and local laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations, including the most recent Americans with Disabilities Act standards. 
(2)  If weather or other conditions beyond the utility operator's control do not permit the complete restoration required by the City, the utility operator must temporarily restore the affected rights-of-way or property. Such temporary restoration must be at the utility operator's sole expense and the utility operator must promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration. Any corresponding modification to the construction schedule is subject to approval by the City. 
(3)  If the utility operator fails to restore rights-of-way or property as required in this Chapter, the City will give the utility operator written notice and provide a period of time not less than ten days and not exceeding 30 days, to restore the rights-of-way or property. If, after the notice is provided, the utility operator fails to restore the rights-of-way or property as required in this Chapter, the City must cause such restoration to be made at the expense of the utility operator. In cases where the City believes that an emergency or threat to public safety exists, it may act without notice to and at the expense of the utility operator. Upon receipt of an invoice from the City, the utility operator must reimburse the City within 30 days for the costs the City incurred. 
(4)  The utility operator is responsible for compliance with the provisions of this section, regardless of whether the work is performed by a utility operator or performed by an independent contractor performing the work on behalf of the utility operator. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-320 - Inspection by City. 
Every utility operator's facilities is subject to the right of periodic inspection by the City to determine compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and all other applicable state and City codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations. Every utility operator must cooperate with the City in permitting the inspection of its utility facilities upon request of the City. The utility operator must perform all testing, or permit the City to perform any testing at the utility operator's expense, required by the City to determine that the installation of the utility operator's facilities and the restoration of the rights-of-way comply with the terms of this Chapter and applicable federal, state, and local codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-325 - Coordination of Construction. 
(1)  All utility operators are required to make a good faith effort to cooperate and coordinate construction schedules with the City and other users of the rights-of-way. 
(2)  Prior to March 1 of each year, utility operators must provide the City with a schedule of known proposed construction activities for that year that may affect the rights-of-way. 
(3)  At the City's request, utility operators must meet with the City annually, or as determined by the City, to schedule and coordinate construction activities in the rights-of-way. 
(4)  All construction locations, activities, and schedules within the rights-of-way must be coordinated as ordered by the City to minimize public inconvenience, disruption or damages. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-330 - Undergrounding of Facilities Required. 
(1)  Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City, whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or communications facilities are located underground within a right-of-way of the City, a utility operator with permission to occupy the same right-of-way must locate its facilities underground at its own expense. 
(2)  Whenever all new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or communication facilities are located or relocated underground within a public right-of-way of the City, a utility operator that currently occupies the same public right-of-way must relocate its facilities underground concurrently with the other affected utilities to minimize disruption of the public rights-of-way, absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the City and consistent with applicable state and federal law. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-335 - Interference with the Rights-of-Way. 
No utility operator or other person may locate or maintain its facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the rights-of-way by the City, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the rights-of-way. All use of the rights-of-way must be consistent with City codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-340 - Relocation of Utility Facilities. 
(1)  When requested to do so in writing by the City, a utility operator must, at no cost to the City, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facility within a right-of-way, including relocation of aerial facilities underground. 
(2)  Nothing in this section precludes a utility operator from requesting reimbursement or compensation from a third party, pursuant to applicable laws, regulations, tariffs, or agreements. However, the utility operator must timely comply with the requirements of this section regardless of whether it has requested or received reimbursement or compensation. 
(3)  The City will coordinate the schedule for relocation of utility facilities and will provide written notice of the time by which the utility operator must remove, relocate, change, alter, or underground its facilities. If a utility operator fails to remove, relocate, change, alter, or underground any utility facility by the date reasonably established by the City, the utility operator must pay all costs incurred by the City due to such failure, including but not limited to costs related to project delays. In addition, the City may cause the utility facility to be removed, relocated, changed, altered, or undergrounded and charge the utility operator for all expenses incurred. The City will use qualified workers in the field and in accordance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations. Upon receipt of a detailed invoice from the City, the utility operator must reimburse the City within 30 days for the costs incurred by the City. 
(4)  The obligation to remove survives the termination of the license or franchise. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-345 - Removal of Abandoned and Unauthorized Facilities. 
(1)  A utility operator and any other person that owns, controls, or maintains any abandoned or unauthorized utility facility within a right-of-way must, at its own expense, remove the facility and restore the rights-of-way to City standards. The City will provide written notice of any known abandoned or unauthorized facilities and require compliance within 30 days after written notice is sent, or such other time as is reasonable under the circumstances. 
(2)  A utility system or facility is unauthorized under any of the following circumstances: 
(a)  The utility facility is outside the scope of authority granted by the City under the license, franchise, or other written agreement; 
(b)  The utility facility was never licensed or franchised; 
(c)  The utility facility was once licensed or franchised, but the license or franchise has expired or been terminated. 
(d)  The utility facility is abandoned. Abandoned means that the utility facility is not in use and is not planned for further use. A facility will be presumed abandoned if it is not used for a period of one year. A utility operator may attempt to overcome this presumption by presenting plans for future use of the facility to the City, which will determine application of the presumption in its sole discretion. 
(e)  The utility facility is improperly constructed or installed or is in a location not permitted by the construction permit, license, franchise, or this Chapter. 
(f)  The utility operator is in violation of a material provision of this Chapter and fails to cure such violation within 30 days of the City sending written notice of such violation, unless the City extends such time period in writing. 
(3)  The City's written authorization is required to abandon utility facilities in place, which the City may deny in its sole discretion. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-350 - Emergency Removal by City. 
The City retains the right and privilege to cut or move the facilities of any utility operator or similar entity located within the rights-of-way of the City, without notice, as the City may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to a public health or safety emergency. The City will use qualified personnel or contractors consistent with applicable state and federal safety laws and regulations to the extent reasonably practicable without impeding the City's response to the emergency. If the City cuts or moves a utility operator's facility as a result of a public health or safety emergency, the City will notify the utility operator as soon as reasonably practical what facilities were cut or moved. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-355 - No City Liability. 
(1)  The City is not liable to any utility operator for any damage to utility facilities, or for any consequential losses resulting directly or indirectly from any damage, caused by the City's actions, or its contractor, in removing, relocating, altering, or undergrounding the facilities, unless such damage arises directly from the City's negligence or willful misconduct. 
(2)  The City is not liable to any utility operator for any damage to utility facilities, or for any consequential losses resulting directly or indirectly from any damage, resulting from a utility operator's failure to remove, relocate, alter, or underground its facilities as required by this Chapter, unless such damage arises directly from the City's negligence or willful misconduct. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-360 - Engineering Designs and Plans. 
(1)  The utility operator must provide the City with two complete sets of as-built plans, in a form acceptable to the City, showing the location of its utility facilities in the rights-of-way and must provide an update of its as-builts if the utility operator's engineered plans materially changed during construction. 
(2)  Each January, upon request from the City, the utility operator must provide two updated complete sets of asbuilt plans showing all of its utility facilities in the right-of-way. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-365 - Maintenance. 
(1)  Every utility operator must install and maintain all facilities in a manner that complies with applicable federal, state, and local laws, rules, regulations, and policies. The utility operator must, at its own expense, repair and maintain facilities from time to time as may be necessary to accomplish this purpose. 
(2)  If a utility operator fails to repair and maintain facilities, the City may provide written notice of the failure to repair or maintain and establish a date upon which such repair or maintenance must occur. If the utility operator fails to cause the repair or maintenance to occur within the date established by the City, the City may perform such repair or maintenance using qualified personnel or contractors and charge the utility operator for the City's costs. The utility operator must reimburse the City for the costs the City incurred within 30 days of receipt of an invoice from the City. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-370 - Vacation of Rights-of-Way. 
(1)  If the City vacates any rights-of-way, or portion thereof, that a utility operator uses, the utility operator must, at its own expense, remove its facilities from the rights-of-way unless: 
(a)  the City reserves a public utility easement, which the City must make a reasonable effort to do provided that there is no expense to the City; or 
(b)  the utility operator obtains an easement for its facilities. 
(2)  If the utility operator fails to remove its facilities within 30 days after a right-of-way is vacated, or as otherwise directed or agreed to in writing by the City, the City may remove the facilities using qualified workers in accordance with state and federal laws and regulations, and charge the utility operator for the City's costs. The utility operator must reimburse the City for the costs the City incurred within 30 days of receipt of an invoice from the City. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-375 - Insurance. 
(1)  All utility operators must maintain in full force and effect the following liability insurance policies that protect the utility operator and the City, as well as the City's officers, employees, and agents: 
(a)  Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits of not less than: 
(i)  $3,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death to each person; 
(ii)  $3,000,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident; and 
(iii)  $3,000,000.00 for all other types of liability. 
(b)  Motor vehicle liability insurance for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a limit of $1,000,000.00 for each person and $3,000,000.00 for each accident; and 
(c)  Worker's compensation within statutory limits and employer's liability with limits of not less than $1,000,000.00. 
(2)  The limits of the insurance are subject to statutory changes as to maximum limits of liability imposed on municipalities of the State of Oregon. 
(3)  The insurance provided must be without prejudice to coverage otherwise existing and must name the City, its officers, employees, and agents as additional insureds. The coverage must apply to claims between insureds on the policy. The utility operator must provide the City 30 days prior written notice of any cancelation or material alteration of insurance. If the insurance is canceled or materially altered, the utility operator must maintain continuous uninterrupted coverage in the terms and amounts required. The utility operator may self-insure, or keep in force a self-insured retention plus insurance, for any or all of the above coverage in accordance with Oregon law. 
(4)  The utility operator must maintain on file with the City sufficient proof of insurance or self-insurance acceptable to the City, certifying the coverage required. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-380 - Financial Assurance. 
Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City, before a franchise granted or a license issued pursuant to this Chapter is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the utility operator must provide a performance bond or other financial security. The performance bond or other financial security must be in a form acceptable to the City, as security for the full and complete performance of the franchise or license, and for compliance with the terms of this Chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss to the City because of any failure attributable to the utility operator to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the City. This obligation is in addition to the performance surety required by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-385 - Indemnification. 
(1)  To the fullest extent permitted by law, each utility operator must defend, save, hold harmless, and indemnify the City, its officers, employees, and agents from and against any and all claims, suits, actions, losses, damages, liabilities, costs and, expenses of any nature whatsoever, including attorneys' fees at trial and on appeal, resulting from, arising out of, or relating to the activities of the utility operator or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors, or lessees, including from any negligent, careless, or wrongful acts, omissions, failure to act, or other misconduct of the utility operator or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors or lessees. This includes, but is not limited to, the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, or removal of a utility operator's facilities, and in providing or offering utility services over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Chapter or by a franchise agreement. The acceptance of a license under this Chapter constitutes an agreement by the applicant to this requirement. 
(2)  The City will promptly notify the utility operator upon receipt of any claim made and provide the utility operator with an opportunity to provide defense regarding any claim. 
(3)  Every utility operator must also indemnify the City for any damages, claims, additional costs or expenses assessed against or payable by the City arising out of or resulting, directly or indirectly, from the utility operator's failure to remove or relocate any of its facilities in the rights-of-way or easements in a timely manner, unless the utility operator's failure arises directly from the City's negligence or willful misconduct. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-390 - Compliance with Laws. 
Every utility operator must comply with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations, including regulations of any administrative agency thereof, as well as all applicable ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City, heretofore or hereafter adopted or established during the term of any license granted under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-395 - Confidential and Proprietary Information. 
If any person is required by this Chapter to provide books, records, maps or information to the City that the person reasonably believes to be confidential or proprietary, the City will take reasonable steps to protect the confidential or proprietary nature of the books, records, maps or information to the extent permitted by the Oregon Public Records Law, provided that all documents are clearly marked as confidential by the person at the time of disclosure to the City. The City will not be required to incur any costs to protect such documents, other than the City's routine internal procedures for complying with the Oregon Public Records Law. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-400 - Open Books and Records. 
Upon providing a utility operator with five business days' prior notice, the City has the right to inspect, at any time during normal business hours, all books, records, maps, plans, income tax returns, financial statements, service complaint logs, performance test results, record of requests for service, and other like materials, whether in paper, electronic, or other form, of the utility operator which relate to the operation under the Rights-of-Way License and compliance with this Chapter. Access to the aforementioned records must not be denied by the licensee on the basis that said records contain "proprietary" information. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-405 - Audits. 
(1)  The City may audit any utility operator at any time. The City will make a written request for information and the utility operator must comply with the request within 30 days of receipt of the City's written request, or such other time as agreed in writing. 
(2)  Every utility operator must furnish the City with information sufficient to demonstrate that the provider is in compliance with all the requirements of this Chapter and its franchise agreement, if any, including but not limited to payment of any applicable registration fee, rights-of-way fee, or franchise fee. 
(3)  Every utility operator must make available for inspection by the City at reasonable times and intervals all maps, records, books, diagrams, plans, and other documents maintained by the utility operator with respect to its facilities within the rights-of-way or public utility easements. Access must be provided within the City unless prior arrangement for access elsewhere has been agreed with the City. 
(4)  If the City's audit of the books, records, and other documents or information of the utility operator or utility service provider demonstrates that the utility operator or provider has underpaid the rights-of-way fee or franchise fee by three percent or more in any one year, the utility operator must reimburse the City for the cost of the audit, in addition to any interest owed as provided by this Chapter or as specified in a franchise agreement. 
(5)  Any underpayment, including any interest or audit cost reimbursement, must be paid within 30 days of the City's notice to the utility operator. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-410 - Severability and Preemption. 
The provisions of this Chapter must be interpreted to be consistent with applicable federal and state law, and must be interpreted, to the extent possible, to cover only matters not preempted by federal or state law. If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision, condition, covenant or portion of this Chapter is for any reason declared or held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction or superseded by state or federal legislation, rules, regulations or decision, the remainder of this Chapter must not be affected thereby but must be deemed as a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding must not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, and each remaining section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision, condition, covenant or portion of this Chapter must be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. In the event any provision is preempted by federal or state laws, rules or regulations, the provision must be preempted only to the extent required by law and any portion not preempted must survive. If any federal or state law resulting in preemption is later repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed to end the preemption, such provision must thereupon return to full force and effect and must thereafter be binding without further action by the City. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-420 - Application to Existing Agreements. 
This Chapter applies to any and all franchise agreements existing on the date this Chapter is enacted and any subsequent franchise agreements to the extent this Chapter is not in direct conflict with and can be implemented consistent with such franchise agreements. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TMC 3-6-500 - Violations. 
(1)  Prior to issuing a violation citation, the City will give the utility operator written notice of any violations and provide at least 30 days, or such other reasonable amount of time, for the utility operator to remedy the violation. 
(2)  Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter commits a civil infraction and is subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00. Each violation, and each day that a violation continues, is a separate civil infraction. 
(3)  The civil infraction procedures in Tualatin Municipal Code Chapter 7-01 apply to the prosecution of any violation of this Chapter. 
(4)  Any civil penalties assessed are in addition to, and not in lieu of, other remedies available by law to the City and are in addition to other remedies provided by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1399-17, 6-22-17)  
TITLE 4 - BUILDING  
CHAPTER 4-01 - BUILDING CODES 
Sections: 
 
TMC 4-1-010 - Standards Applicable to Building. 
(1)  The City adopts the following specialty codes, rules, and standards: 
(a)  The Oregon Structural Specialty Code, 2019 edition, adopted by the State in OAR 918-750-0100 (2019); 
(b)  The Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code, 2019 edition, adopted by the State in OAR 918-440-0012 (2019); 
(c)  The Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, 2017 edition, adopted by the State in OAR 918-480-0005 (2017); 
(d)  The Manufactured Dwelling rules adopted by the State in OAR 918-500-510 to 918-500-0595 (2010); 
(e)  The Manufactured Dwelling and Parks Specialty Code, 2002 edition, adopted by the State in OAR 918-600-0010 (2002), including the April 1, 2005 amendments; 
(f)  The Recreational Parks and Organizational Camps Administrative Rules, 2011 edition, adopted in OAR 918-650-0000 to 918-650-0085 (2011); 
(g)  The Oregon Manufactured Dwelling Installation Specialty Code, 2010 edition, adopted by the State in OAR 918-500-510 to 981-500-590 (2010); 
(h)  The Oregon Residential Specialty Code, 2017 edition, adopted by the State in OAR 918-480-0005 (2017); 
(i)  The Oregon Zero Energy Ready Commercial Code, 2019 edition, adopted by the State in OAR 918-460-0500 (2019); and 
(j)  The Oregon Fire Code, 2014 edition, adopted by the State in OAR 837-040-0140 (2014), and as adopted and amended by Tualatin Valley Fire and Rescue District Ordinance No. 14-02. 
(2)  The provisions in subsection (1) apply to all building and related activities conducted within the City and are in addition to all other applicable provisions of the Tualatin Municipal Code and the Tualatin Development Code. 
(Ord. 509-80 §1, 5-12-80; Ord. 801-90, 3-26-90; Ord. 886-93 §1, 2-22-93; Ord. 897-93 §1, 5-24-93; Ord. 980-97 §1, 7-14-97; Ord. 1011-98 §1, 12-14-98; Ord. 1056-00 §1, 9-11-00; Ord. 1132-03, 3-10-03; Ord. 1121-02, , 10-28-02; Ord. 1178-05, 1-24-05; Ord. 1235-07 §1, 4-9-07; Ord. 1249-07, 11-26-07; Ord. 1254-08 §1, 3-24-08; Ord. 1303-10 §1, 6-14-10; Ord. 1312-10 §1, 11-22-10; Ord. 1383-15, 07-27-2015; Ord. 1407-18, 01-22-2018; Ord. 1429-19 , §1, 12-9-19)  
TMC 4-1-020 - City Code Administration. 
The City provides for the administration of a plan checking, building permit and inspection program for the codes adopted in TMC 4-1-010. The City does not provide a building program for electrical work. The electrical program is provided by Washington County Building Services. 
(Ord. 509-80 §2, 5-12-80; Ord. 1178-05, 1-24-05; Ord. 1383-15, 07-27-2015)  
TMC 4-1-030 - Grading. 
A person seeking a grading permit must submit a soil report with the permit application. The soils report submitted must be signed and sealed by an Oregon-certified soils engineer and comply with Appendix J of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code, 2014 edition. No grading activities may occur unless and until a person receives a grading permit and complies with this section. 
(Ord. 509-80 §5, 5-12-80; Ord. 600-83 §2, 7-25-83; Ord. 801-90, 3-26-90; Ord. 886-93 §2, 2-22-93; Ord. 980-97 §2, 7-14-97; Ord. 1011-98 §2, 12-14-98; Ord. 1178-05, 1-24-05; Ord. 1235-07 §2, 4-9-07; Ord. 1383-15, 07-27-2015)  
TMC 4-1-040 - Alternate Materials and Methods. 
The Building Official is authorized to consider and approve alternate materials or methods of construction, as provided in the codes adopted by TMC 4-1-010. 
(Ord. 509-80 §6, 5-12-80; Ord. 801-90, 3-26-90; Ord. 1178-05, 1-24-05; Ord. 1292-09 §1, 11-23-09; Ord. 1383-15, 07-27-2015)  
TMC 4-1-070 - Appeals. 
A person may appeal a decision of the Building Official to the State Specialty Code Chief, as provided by OAR 918-008-0120. The appeal must be filed within 30 days of the Building Official's decision. 
(Ord. 509-80 §9, 5-12-80; Ord. 801-90, 3-26-90; Ord. 1178-05, 1-24-05; Ord. 1292-09 §3, 11-23-09;Ord. 1383-15, 07-27-2015)  
TMC 4-1-080 - Violation is Civil Infraction. 
(1)  It is unlawful and a civil infraction for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain a building or structure in the City, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of this Chapter. 
(2)  A person who violates or refuses to comply with this Chapter commits a civil infraction and is subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00. Each violation, and each day that a violation continues, constitutes a separate civil infraction. 
(3)  Unless the building codes adopted in TMC 4-1-010 provide otherwise, the civil infraction procedures in TMC 7-01 apply to the prosecution of any violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 509-80 §10, 5-12-80; Ord. 699-86, 6-23-86; Ord. 1292-09 §4, 11-23-09;Ord. 1383-15, 07-27-2015)  
CHAPTER 4-02 - FIRE HYDRANT LOCATIONS AND RATES OF FLOW 
Sections: 
 
TMC 4-2-010 - Hydrants and Water Supply for Fire Protection. 
(1)  Every application for a building permit and accompanying plans shall be submitted to the Building Division for review of water used for fire protection, the approximate location and size of hydrants to be connected, and the provisions for access and egress for firefighting equipment. If upon such review it is determined that the fire protection facilities are not required or that they are adequately provided for in the plans, the Fire and Life Safety Reviewer shall recommend approval to the City Building Official. 
(2)  If adequate provisions for such facilities are not made, the Fire and Life Safety Reviewer shall either recommend against approval of the plans or indicate to the applicant in writing where the plans are deficient or recommend approval of plans subject to conditions. 
(Ord. 510-80 §1, 5-12-80; Ord. 1033-99 §1, 10-25-99; Ord. 1292-09 §6, 11-23-09)  
TMC 4-2-020 - Access to Hydrants Located on Private Property. 
(1)  For the purpose of prescribing regulations and governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, the 2007 State of Oregon Fire Code as adopted by the Oregon State Fire Marshal's Office and Tualatin Valley Fire and Rescue Ordinance No. 07-01 is adopted as part of this Code. 
(2)  The 2007 State of Oregon Fire Code Handbook, a companion document to the Uniform Fire Code, as adopted by Tualatin Valley Fire & Rescue Ordinance No. 07-01, is adopted as part of this Code. 
(Ord. 510-80 §2, 5-12-80; Ord.1033-99 §2, 10-25-99; Ord. 1178-05, 1-24-05; Ord. 1292-09 §7, 11-23-09)  
TMC 4-2-030 - Reserved. 
[Repealed by Ord. 1033-99, 10-25-99)  
TMC 4-2-040 - Penalty. 
Violation of this ordinance is punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. Each violation and each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 510-80 §4, 5-12-80; Ord. 1292-09 §8, 11-23-09) 
TABLE 4-2A 
NUMBER AND DISTRIBUTION OF FIRE HYDRANTS 
Fire-Flow Requirement 
(gallons per minute) 	Minimum Number of Hydrants 	Average Spacing Between Hydrants a , b , c (feet) 	Maximum Distance from any point on Street or Road Frontage to a Hydrant (d) (feet) 
1,750 or less 	1 	500 	250 
2,000-2,500 	2 	450 	225 
2,500 	3 	450 	225 
3,000 	3 	400 	225 
3,500-4,000 	4 	350 	210 
4,500-5,000 	5 	300 	180 
5,500 	6 	300 	180 
6,000 	6 	250 	150 
6,500-7,000 	7 	250 	150 
7,500 or more 	8 or more e 	200 	120 
 
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m. 
___________ 
a Reduce by 100 feet for dead-end streets or roads. 
b Where streets are provided with medial dividers which can be crossed by fire fighters pulling hose lines, or where arterial streets are provided with four or more traffic lanes and have a traffic count of more than 30,000 vehicles per day, hydrant spacing shall average 500 feet on each side of the street and be arranged on an alternating basis up to a fire-flow requirement of 7,000 gallons per minute and 400 feet for higher fire-flow requirements. 
c Where new water mains are extended along streets where hydrants are not needed for protection of structures or similar fire problems, fire hydrants shall be provided at spacing not to exceed 1,000 feet to provide for transportation hazards. 
d Reduce by 50 feet for dead-end streets or roads. 
6 One hydrant for each 1,000 gallons per minute or fraction thereof. 
(Ord. 1292-09 §10, 11-23-09)  
CHAPTER 4-03 - PROVIDING FOR THE ABATEMENT OF BUILDING NUISANCES 
Sections: 
 
TMC 4-3-010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this ordinance: 
Dangerous Building includes: (a) a structure which, for the want of proper repairs or by reason of poorly installed electrical wiring or equipment, defective chimney, defective gas connection, defective heating apparatus, or for any other cause or reason, is especially liable to fire and which is so situated or occupied as to endanger any other building or property or human life; (b) a structure containing combustible or explosive material, rubbish, rags, waste, oils, gasoline or inflammable substance of any kind especially liable to cause fire or danger to the safety of such building, premises or to human life; (c) a structure which shall be kept or maintained or shall be in a filthy or unsanitary condition, especially liable to cause the spread of contagious or infectious disease or diseases; or (d) a structure in such weak or weakened condition, or dilapidated or deteriorated condition, as to endanger any person or property by reason of probability of partial or entire collapse; 
Person includes every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation. 
(Ord. 511-80 §1, 5-12-80)  
TMC 4-3-020 - Nuisance. 
Every building or part of a building which is found by the Council to be a dangerous building is declared to be a public nuisance; and may be abated by the procedures specified, or a suit for abatement may be brought by the City. 
(Ord. 511-80 §2, 5-12-80)  
TMC 4-3-030 - Initial Action. 
Whenever a City official shall find or be of the opinion that there is a dangerous building in the City, it is his or her duty to schedule a public hearing before the Council to declare the building a nuisance and order its abatement. 
(Ord. 511-80 §3, 5-12-80)  
TMC 4-3-040 - Hearing; Mailed Notice. 
Notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record of the premises where the building in question is located, by the City Recorder, notifying the owner in general terms that a hearing will be held concerning the nuisance character of the property, and the time and place of the hearing. A copy of this notice shall also be posted on the property. At that time and place, or at such other time or place as the Council may adjourn to, the hearing shall be held; and the Council shall determine by resolution whether or not the building is dangerous. The Council may, as a part of the hearing, inspect the building; and the facts observed by the Council at such inspection may be considered by it in determining whether or not the building is dangerous. At the hearing, the owner or other person interested in the property or building shall have the right to be heard. At such hearing the Council shall have the power to order any building declared to be dangerous removed or abated, if in its judgment such removal or abatement is necessary in order to remove the dangerous condition; or the Council shall have the power to order the building made safe and to prescribe what acts or things must be done to render the same safe. 
(Ord. 511-80 §4, 5-12-80)  
TMC 4-3-050 - Published and Posted Notices. 
Ten-days' notice of any hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City or by posting notices in three public places in the City. If the last-mentioned notice be published or given as required, no irregularity or failure to mail notices shall invalidate the proceedings. 
(Ord. 511-80 §5, 5-12-80)  
TMC 4-3-060 - Council Orders; Notice. 
Five days' notice of findings made by the Council at a hearing and any orders made by the Council shall be given to the owner of the building, the owner's agent or other person controlling the same; and if the orders be not obeyed and the building rendered safe within the time specified by the order, being not less than five days, then the Council shall have the power and duty to order the building removed or made safe at the expense of the property on which the building is situated. 
(Ord. 511-80 §6, 5-12-80)  
TMC 4-3-070 - Abatement by City. 
(1)  If, within the time allowed, the nuisance has not been abated by the person responsible, the Council may cause the nuisance to be abated. 
(2)  The officer charged with abatement shall have the right to enter into or upon the property to cause the removal of a nuisance. 
(Ord. 511-80 §7, 5-12-80)  
TMC 4-3-080 - Assessment. 
The Council shall ascertain and determine the cost of the work and assess the same against the property upon which the building is situated. The assessment shall be declared by resolution, and it shall be entered in the docket of City liens and shall become a lien against the property. The creation of the lien and the collection and enforcement of the cost shall all be performed in substantially the same manner as in the case of the cost of street improvements, but irregularities or informalities in the procedure shall be disregarded. 
(Ord. 511-80 §8, May 12, 1980.)  
TMC 4-3-090 - Summary Abatement. 
The procedures of this ordinance pertaining to Council declaration of a dangerous building need not be followed when a building is unmistakably dangerous and imminently endangers human life or property. In such an instance, the chief of the fire department, the fire marshal, the Chief of Police, or the Building Official may proceed summarily to abate the building. 
(Ord. 511-80 §9, 5-12-80)  
TMC 4-3-100 - Penalties. 
Any person who is the owner of, in possession of, or in responsible charge of a dangerous building within the City and who shall knowingly suffer or permit the building to be or remain dangerous for as long as 30 days after receipt of the notice specified in TMC 4-3-060 shall be guilty of a civil infraction and is punishable by penalty of not more than $1,000.00 per violation. Each violation and each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 511-80 §10, 5-12-80; Ord. 1292-09 §9, 11-23-09)  
CHAPTER 4-04 - BUILDING RELOCATION WITHIN THE CITY 
Sections: 
 
TMC 4-4-010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following mean: 
Building or Structure means a building that exceeds eight feet in width, or as loaded for moving, extends upward more than 13.5 feet from the ground, and is removed from its foundation, moved to another location within the State using highways or streets of the State, County or City, and affixed or attached to a foundation. For purposes of this Ordinance, a building shall not include a mobile home, or prefabricated or modular structure, which means a structure designed to be transported or used upon a highway or trailer capable of being used for human habitation or for business, commercial or office purposes. 
Building Official means the City Building Official or the City Building Official's designee responsible for enforcing this ordinance. 
City Engineer means the City Engineer or the City Engineer's designee responsible for enforcing this ordinance. 
Historic Structure means a building which has been designated as a historic structure by the City or identified and accepted as historically significant by the State of Oregon, by a county within the State, or by the United States government. A structure must obtain its historic designation in advance of any relocation permit application in order to be treated as such under this ordinance. 
Police Chief means the City Police Chief or the City Police Chief's designee responsible for enforcing this ordinance. 
Street means a highway, road, street or alley as defined in ORS 801.305. 
(Ord. 757-88 §1, Oct. 10, 1988; Ord. 759-88 §1, Nov. 15, 1988; Ord. 772-89 §3; April 10, 1989.)  
TMC 4-4-020 - Permit Required. 
(1)  It is unlawful for a person, firm, or corporation to move a building or structure upon, over, or along a public street, alley, or highway within the City without first obtaining a permit from the Building Official. 
(2)  It is unlawful for a person, firm, or corporation to move a building or structure upon, over, or along a public street, alley, or highway within the City without complying with all provisions of this ordinance and all provisions of the permit issued under this ordinance. 
(Ord. 757-88 §2, 10-10-88)  
TMC 4-4-030 - Application Fee. 
(1)  Application for a permit to move a building shall be made to the Building Official on forms provided by the Building Official and shall include the following information: 
(a)  The name and address of the person who owns the building; 
(b)  The name and address of the person engaged to move the building; 
(c)  The location from which the building is proposed to be moved and its planning district designation; 
(d)  The location of the proposed new site of the building and its planning district designation; 
(e)  The proposed route for moving the building; 
(f)  The dimensions, type of construction, and approximate age of the building; 
(g)  The use or purpose for which the building was designed; 
(h)  Plans for restoration of the site from which the building is to be moved if located within the City; 
(i)  The use or purpose to be made of the building at its new location; 
(j)  Permits from the State and County where State and County roads within the City are proposed to be used; 
(k)  The proposed moving date and hours; and 
(l)  Any additional information the Building Official considers necessary for a fair determination of whether the permit should be issued. 
(2)  An application shall be signed by the owner of the building to be moved or by the person engaged to move the building. 
(3)  The applicant shall agree to defend, indemnify, and hold the City, its officers, agents, and employees harmless from injuries and damage which arise in whole or in part from the moving of the building. 
(4)  In addition to any other required fees, the permit shall not be issued until the applicant pays a permit fee to defray the costs of issuing the permit. The fee is $100.00 and is non-refundable. 
(Ord. 757-88 §3, 10-10-88)  
TMC 4-4-040 - Inspection by City Engineer, Police Chief and Building Official. 
(1)  The City Engineer and Police shall review the proposed route and advise the Building Official whether to approve an application, and recommend that the Building Official impose conditions on the issuance of the permit to assure the requirements of this ordinance are met. 
(2)  The Building Official, before approving an application for a permit to move any building, shall inspect the building to be moved, and if he or she finds that the building is of substantial construction and in condition that it may be moved without collapsing or falling apart and without endangering any person upon, along, or adjacent to any public street, and further finds that the building is designed and adaptable for the purpose, that there are no substantial reasons indicated by the City Engineer or the Police Chief why the application should be denied, and that the use or occupancy to which it is proposed to be put at the new location is permitted according to the Tualatin Development Code, then he or she shall approve the application. The applicant shall comply with the applicable provisions of the Structural Specialty Code, the Uniform Building Code, the Fire and Life Safety Code, the Tualatin Development Code, any other applicable ordinances, codes, and regulations, and any conditions imposed on the issuance of the permit. No moving permit shall be issued until the appropriate building permit is issued for the site onto which the building is proposed to be used. The Building Official may impose conditions on the issuance of the permit to assure the requirements of this ordinance are met. In addition to the matters in this section enumerated, and prior to issuance of the moving permit, the Building Official shall require compliance with all provisions of this ordinance which are prerequisite to the granting of a moving permit. 
(Ord. 757-88 §4, 10-10-88; Ord. 779-89 §1, 7-10-89)  
TMC 4-4-050 - Utility Installations. 
Where the electric, telephone or cable television wires, poles or other utility installations along the route on which the building is to be moved would or may be affected by the move, the permit shall not be issued until the applicant submits signed statements from the affected utility: 
(a)  That the moving will not interfere with or endanger the installations; or 
(b)  That the applicant has made arrangements to the satisfaction of the affected utility for protecting the installations and reimbursing the utility for the cost of removal and reinstallation of the installations that the moving necessitates. 
(Ord. 757-88 §5, 10-10-88; Ord. 779-89 § 4, 7-10-89)  
TMC 4-4-060 - Security; Liability Insurance; Liability. 
(1)  The permit shall not be issued until the applicant furnishes the City a certificate or other evidence of liability insurance satisfactory to the City Attorney in the sum of $50,000.00 per occurrence for claims arising out of damage to or destruction of property, $100,000.00 per occurrence for claims arising out of personal injuries to any person, and $500,000.00 for any number of claims arising out of a single accident or occurrence. 
(2)  The permit shall not constitute an authorization for damaging property. The permit shall constitute no defense against whatever liability the permittee incurs for personal injury or property damage caused by the moving. 
(3)  In the case of historic structures, where the plans indicate an intent on the part of the applicant to retain the historic status, the applicant may be granted a relocation permit without submitting a performance bond under subsection (1), and without complying with the three-month readiness for occupancy requirement under (1)(c), provided an agreement signed by the applicant and adequate security, approved by the City Attorney, are submitted to assure compliance with the requirements of (a), (b), and (d) of subsection (1), and provided further that a reasonable time frame for completion of readiness for occupancy requirements is submitted and approved by the Building Official prior to issuance of the relocation permit. Compliance with this subsection shall not excuse compliance with all other provisions of this ordinance, the conditions attached to any permit issued hereunder and the provisions and permit requirements of TDC Chapter 73. 
(Ord. 757-88 §6, 10-10-88; Ord. 779-89 §5, 7-10-89; Ord. 759-88 §2, 11-15-88)  
TMC 4-4-070 - Posting a Route for No Parking 
(1)  Not less than 24 hours prior to the scheduled move, the City Engineer shall cause the portion of the route of the move where public, vehicular parking would otherwise be allowed and would impair the scheduled structure move as determined by the City Engineer to be posted "No Parking - Tow Away Zone" in accordance with Ordinance No. 506-80. A vehicle parked in violation of such posted notice may be towed, which shall be at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. 757-88 §7, 10-10-88; Ord. 772-89 §, 4-10-89; Ord. 779-89 §, 7-10-89)  
TMC 4-4-080 - Continuity; Litter; Restoration of Former Building Site. 
(1)  Once a building has been moved onto a public street under a permit authorized by this ordinance, the person moving the building shall continue with the moving project without interruption until it is completed, except as the permit for the moving or the City Engineer specifically allows to the contrary. Except as specifically allowed by the City Engineer, it is unlawful to leave standing or abandon the moving of such building while the same or any part of the building is in or upon any part of any street, alley, or highway. 
(2)  A person moving a building under a permit authorized by this ordinance shall promptly remove from public streets and private property all litter produced by the moving. 
(3)  Where the former building site is located within the City limits, the applicant shall remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations and any wells to existing grade so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition. Any septic tank or cesspool which is intended to be abandoned shall comply with closure rules of the State of Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. The Building Official shall cause an inspection to be made for purposes of assuring compliance with this section. 
(Ord. 757-88 §8, 10-10-88)  
TMC 4-4-090 - Movement on State Highways. 
(1)  The Building Official may waive any of the requirements of this ordinance for only that portion of the building movement which occurs upon a state highway if: 
(a)  Movement will be made pursuant to a permit issued by the appropriate state agency; 
(b)  Notice of the proposed movement and a copy of the permit is submitted to the Building Official before the movement; and 
(c)  The Building Official is satisfied that adequate precautions have been taken to protect the public safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 757-88 §9, 10-10-88; Ord. 772-89 §4, 4-10-89)  
TMC 4-4-100 - Issuance of Permit; Conditions. 
(1)  The Building Official shall issue the permit applied for if: 
(a)  The application complies with the requirements of this ordinance; 
(b)  The moving can be accomplished without damage to property or, in case of damage to the property, it is consented to by the owner of the property or is to be paid for to the owner's satisfaction; 
(c)  The building at its new site, if within the City, will conform to the requirements of the Tualatin Development Code and the Uniform Building Code; 
(d)  The applicant has submitted the required security and evidence of insurance; 
(e)  The applicant has obtained consents from or made arrangements for reimbursing the costs of temporary utility relocations; 
(f)  The applicant has agreed to comply with the conditions imposed by the Police Chief, Building Official, and City Engineer; 
(g)  The applicant has submitted a defense, indemnity, and hold harmless agreement; and 
(h)  The route has been posted for no parking if necessary. 
(2)  The permit shall specify: 
(a)  The route for moving the building; 
(b)  The time within which the moving is to be completed; and 
(c)  Whatever additional conditions the City Engineer, the Police Chief, or the Building Official considers necessary to minimize the obstruction of traffic, protect property, and protect the public safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 757-88 §10, 10-10-88; Ord. 772-89 §2, 4-10-89; Ord. 779-89 §7, 7-10-89)  
TMC 4-4-110 - Appeals; Penalties. 
(1)  A decision of the Building Official with respect to the permit or conditions attached to the permit may be appealed to the City Council only by the applicant. The appeal shall be in writing, together with the appeal fee as established by City Council resolution and shall be submitted within five City business days of the decision. The appeal shall be based only upon the provisions of this ordinance or the conditions of any permit issued under this ordinance. The filing of an appeal shall automatically stay the issuance of the permit. The Council shall hold a hearing in accordance with quasi-judicial hearing procedures of the TDC 31.077, except that mailing of notice shall not be required. 
(2)  A violation of this ordinance or the conditions or provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this ordinance is a civil infraction and is punishable by penalty of not more than $500.00. Each violation and each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 757-88 §11, 10-10-88; Ord. 779-89 §8, 7-10-89)  
TITLE 5 - LIBRARY, PARKS, AND CITY FACILITIES 
Chapters:  
CHAPTER 5-01 - LIBRARY RULES OF CONDUCT 
Sections: 
 
TMC 5-1-010 - Policy. 
The City of Tualatin may improve, operate and maintain the Library and other related premises in a manner that will best afford the public with necessary and convenient use. In order to protect such areas, protect the health, safety, and wellbeing of the public, and insure the greatest use and enjoyment for all Library users of the benefits from such facilities, it is necessary to adopt rules, regulations, and enforcement provisions as provided in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 883-92 §1, 12-14-92; Ord. 1275-09§1, 1-26-09; Ord. 1410-18, 6-25-18)  
TMC 5-1-020 - Reserved.  
TMC 5-1-030 - Definitions. 
The words and phrases have the following meanings: 
City Manager means the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. 
Library means the City's public library, related offices, lobby, restrooms, entryways, and plaza. 
Library Employee means a regular or temporary employee of the City assigned to the Library Department. 
Library Rules means the administrative rules adopted by the City to govern the use of the library and library materials, as provided by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 883-92 §3, 12-14-92; Ord. 1275-09§2, 1-26-09; Ord. 1410-18, 6-25-2018)  
TMC 5-1-040 - Administrative Rulemaking Authority. 
The City Manager is authorized to issue administrative rules, known as Library Rules, to govern the use of the library and library materials, consistent with the procedures of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 883-92 §4, 12-14-92; Ord. 1410-18, 6-25-18)  
TMC 5-1-050 - Notice of Administrative Rulemaking. 
(1)  Prior to the adoption, amendment, or repeal of an administrative rule, the City Manager must: 
(a)  Give public notice of the proposed rule, including: 
(i)  Posting copies of the proposed rule on the City's website; and 
(ii)  Posting copies of the proposed rule in a conspicuous location in the Library; 
(b)  Provide copies of the proposed rule to interested persons; and 
(c)  Submit copies of the proposed rule to the Library Advisory Committee. 
(2)  In addition to the draft language of the rule considered to be adopted, amended, or repealed, the notice must also: 
(a)  Generally state the subject matter and purpose of the rule; 
(b)  State the time, place, and manner for persons to submit data or written comments about the proposed rule; and 
(c)  The date upon which the rule will be adopted and effective. 
(Ord. 1386-15, 11-23-2015; Ord. 1410-18, 6-25-18)  
TMC 5-1-060 - Opportunity for Comment; Consideration of Comments. 
(1)  The City must provide persons with not less than 15 calendar days to submit data or written comments on the proposed administrative rule. 
(2)  The City Manager must consider data or comments received from persons prior to adopting the administrative rule. 
(Ord. 883-92 §6, 12-14-92; Ord. 1275-09§4, 1-26-09; Ord. 1410-18, 6-25-18)  
TMC 5-1-070 - Final Adoption; Filing with City Recorder; Available to Public. 
(1)  Unless the City Manager specifies another date in the adoption order, all rules adopted are effective upon adoption. 
(2)  Unless otherwise required by law, the adoption, amendment, or repeal of a rule need not be based upon, or supported by, an evidentiary record. 
(3)  The adopted administrative rule must be filed with the City Recorder. The City Recorder must compile all adopted rules, including any temporary or emergency rules. Copies of current administrative rules must be made available to the public on the City's website and upon request. 
(Ord. 883-92 §7, 12-14-92; Ord. 1275-09 §5, 1-26-09; Ord. 1410-18, 6-25-18)  
TMC 5-1-080 - Temporary and Emergency rules; Effective Period. 
(1)  Temporary Rules. Temporary rules may be adopted without notice or opportunity to comment, if needed to implement the provisions of any new or amended ordinance upon the ordinance's effective date. 
(2)  Emergency Rules. Emergency rules may be adopted, amended, or suspended without prior notice or opportunity to comment, or upon abbreviated notice and opportunity to comment, if the City Manager adopts written findings that an emergency exists, and the failure to act promptly will result in prejudice to the public interest. 
(3)  Effective Period. Any temporary or emergency rule adopted, amended, or suspended is effective for a period of not more than 180 calendar days. 
(4)  No Preclusion of Permanent Rule. The adoption of a temporary or emergency rule does not preclude the subsequent adoption of an identical permanent rule. 
(Ord. 1410-18, 6-25-18)  
TMC 5-1-090 - Council Review of Administrative Rules. 
(1)  The Council, upon its own motion, may review a proposed or adopted administrative rule at any time. 
(2)  After review of a proposed or adopted administrative rule, the Council may take no action, amend, or repeal an administrative rule. If the Council chooses to amend or repeal an administrative rule, the amendment or repeal must be by resolution of the Council. 
(Ord. 1410-18, 6-25-18)  
TMC 5-1-100 - Authority. 
(1)  The City Manager or designee may close all or portions of the Library to the public at any time and without notice for any reasonable and necessary circumstance, including but not limited to construction, maintenance, or any condition which poses a risk of bodily injury or damage to the public. 
(2)  The City Manager, library employees designated by the City Manager, and City police officers may obtain compliance by the public with the Library Rules and issue reasonable directions in furtherance of the Library Rules. If an individual fails to obey or disregards a Library Rule or an order or directive given to obtain compliance with a Library Rule, that individual is subject to immediate ejection and temporary suspension of library use privileges. An individual who fails to leave and remain off library premises, or designated portions of the library, after being lawfully directed to do so is subject to criminal trespass charges. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the foregoing regulations, upon prior request the City Manager may allow temporary, minor deviations from the strict requirements of the Library Rules where the harm to library facilities and the risk to library users are negligible or non-existent. 
(Ord. 1410-18, 6-25-18)  
TMC 5-1-110 - Enforcement of Violations. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in the Library Rules, a violation of a Library Rule is a civil infraction and punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each violation of this Chapter constitutes a separate offense, and each day that a violation of this Chapter is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in the Library Rules, the civil infraction procedures in Tualatin Municipal Code Chapter 7-01 apply to the prosecution of any violation of a Library Rule. 
(3)  In addition to any other remedies provided by law, a person who violates a Library Rule may be subject to Civil Exclusion, as provided by TMC Chapter 5-10. 
(4)  The remedies provided by this Chapter for violations are cumulative and the pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the use of another. 
(Ord. 883-92 §9, 12-14-92; Ord. 1275-09§8, 1-26-09; Ord. 1386-15, 11-23-2015; Ord. 1410-18, 6-25-18)  
CHAPTER 5-02 - USE OF CITY PARKS AND OTHER RECREATIONAL AREAS, PROVIDING FOR REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS 
Sections: 
 
TMC 5-2-010 - Policy. 
The City of Tualatin may develop, construct, improve, operate and maintain park and recreation facilities in a manner which will best afford the public with necessary conveniences and accommodations. In order to protect such areas, protect the health, safety and wellbeing of the public, and insure the greatest use and enjoyment for all park users of the benefits from such areas, it is necessary to make regulations and provisions the City Council deems necessary. 
(Ord. 852-91 §1, 11-25-91)  
TMC 5-2-020 - Short Title. 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the City of Tualatin's "Park Rules". 
(Ord. 852-91 §2, 11-25-91)  
TMC 5-2-030 - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter the following definitions apply: 
Alcohol or Alcoholic Beverage means any form of alcohol containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, including but not limited to malt and fermented beverages, whether licensed for sale in the state or not. 
Council means the Tualatin City Council. 
Criminal Negligence means that a person fails to be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the result will occur or that the circumstance exists. The risk must be of such nature and degree that the failure to be aware of it constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable person would observe in the situation. Where the definition of an offense prescribes criminal negligence as the culpable mental state, it is also established if a person acts intentionally or knowingly. 
Off-Road Vehicle means every self-propelled motor vehicle designed or capable of traversing on or over natural terrain, including but not limited to snowmobiles, minibikes, motorcycles, four-wheel drive trucks, pickups, all-terrain vehicles, jeeps, motor vehicles, half track and helicopters. 
Park or Park Area means the City's community parks, area parks and other park classifications, the buildings and other facilities located within such areas, public bike paths and pedestrian ways (but not sidewalks along City streets), recreation facilities and greenway and riverbank areas, or portions thereof, which have been placed under City jurisdiction, either by deed or dedication, regardless of whether such areas have been opened up for public use. Park areas include any river or streams adjacent to park areas. 
Park Alcohol Privilege means an opportunity, subject to City approval, for a person to obtain a permit relating to group or individual consumption of alcohol in a City park, or to consume alcohol, to possess an open container of alcohol or to open a container of alcohol, while in a City park. Park alcohol privileges refers to all of the above collectively. Unless otherwise specified in a permit, a park alcohol permit issued under this ordinance allows a person to exercise all park alcohol privileges in accordance with park rules. 
Park Employee means any regular employee of the City who has been assigned to the Parks and Recreation Department. 
Parks and Recreation Director or Director means the individual designated by the City Manager to be in charge of the Parks and Recreation Department of the City of Tualatin or the person designated by the Director to perform some or all of the functions of that position. 
Special Event means the use of a park or park area which constitute one or more of the following: (a) large or special use of an area or facility; (b) create a special demand for park services such as parking, cleaning, power or water; (c) requires coordination so that other users can coexist without disruption; and (d) which constitutes a commercial use. 
(Ord. 852-91 §3, 11-25-91; Ord. 889-93, §1, 3-22-93)  
TMC 5-2-040 - General Rules and Regulations. 
The general rules and regulations for City of Tualatin parks and park areas shall be as provided in this section. Unless otherwise provided, although an offense defined under this ordinance requires no culpable mental state with respect to one or more of its material elements, the culpable commission of the offense may be alleged and proved, in which case criminal negligence constitutes sufficient culpability. The parent or parents of an un-emancipated minor child, other than a parent who is not entitled to legal custody of such child, shall be liable for any damage to persons or property and responsible for the acts committed by such child. 
(1)  Fires in Park Areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to build or permit to be built a fire in any park area unless said fire is confined to: 
(i)  Park camp stoves or fireplaces. 
(ii)  Portions of parks designated as permitting fires. 
(iii)  Portable stoves in established picnic areas and designated where fires are permitted. 
(b)  No fire shall be left unattended, and every fire shall be extinguished before its user leaves the park area. 
(c)  If, in the judgment of the Community Services Director, there exists a danger that even confined fires may spread, such as in dry seasons or during times of high winds, all outdoor fires may be prohibited in parks. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to: 
(a)  Use an animal or any weapon, stick, stone, missile or other device of any kind which causes or tends to result in the destruction, injury, disturbance, or molestation of any wild or domestic animal, fowl, or fish (except fishing in designated areas) or any habitat thereof within a park or park area. 
(b)  Give, or offer, or attempt to give any animal within a park, any tobacco or other known noxious article, or anything the giving of which is prohibited by printed notices conspicuously posted therein. 
(c)  Discharge any firearm, pellet gun, B.B. gun, slingshot, bow and arrow, or other weapon capable of injuring any person, bird or animal. Provided, however, this paragraph shall not apply to the use of officially approved weapons by duly authorized peace officers so authorized under the laws of the State of Oregon or the federal government, or except under agreement or special regulations of the Council, or by permission of the Community Services Director. 
(d)  Possess any firearm, pellet gun, or B.B. gun in any park area except as provided by law or by peace officers authorized under the laws of the State of Oregon or the federal government, or except under agreement or special regulations of the Council, or by permission of the Community Services Director. 
(e)  Use a bean-shooter, javelin, shotput, discus, horseshoe, golf equipment or self-propelled, remote or non-controlled devices, such as model airplanes, helicopters or vehicles in or upon any park area, except in those areas specifically designated or provided for the particular use. 
(3)  For any person other than a person authorized by the Community Services Director the following acts are hereby declared to be unlawful: 
(a)  The removal, destruction, breaking, injuring, mutilating, or defacing in any way any structure, monument, statue, vase, fountain, faucet, barrier, wall, fence, gate, railing, or other enclosure or part thereof or any vehicle, traffic recorder, sign, marker, bench, tree, shrub, fern, plant, flower, fixture or other property in any park. 
(b)  The act of bringing upon any of the parks or having in such person's possession while therein, any tree, shrub or plant, or any newly plucked branch or leaf or tree, shrub or plant. 
(c)  The movement or removal of any sign, marker, monument, fence, barrier, faucet, buoy, traffic recorder, or other structure or facility of any kind in a park. 
(d)  The digging, defacing, or removal of any dirt, stones, rock or other substance whatever, make any excavation, quarry any stone, possess or discharge any explosive device, or lay or set off any blast, or roll any stones or other objects, or cause or assist in doing any such things within a park. 
(e)  The possession, discharge or causing to be discharged of any firecracker, explosive, torpedo, rockets propelled by either water pressure or combustible materials, fireworks as defined by ORS 480.110, or other substance which could be harmful to park area visitors or resources. 
(f)  The erection of any sign, marker, poster or inscription of any type within a park area. The posting of advertisements for any product or service will only be permitted at a designated resource board where appropriate. 
(g)  The obstruction of the free use and enjoyment of any park, the placement of any straw, grass clippings, dirt, chips, paper, shavings, shells, ashes, swill, garbage, rubbish, refuse or debris, or the leaving or abandonment of any vehicle or part thereof in or upon any park; provided, however, the foregoing prohibition shall not apply to the landscaping and other maintenance activities of City employees and agents. 
(h)  The entering of any park with straw, grass clippings, chips, paper, shavings, shells, ashes, swill, garbage, rubbish, refuse or debris that has originated from outside the park, for the purpose of disposing of any of the rubbish, refuse, or debris in the park; provided, however, the foregoing prohibition shall not apply to the disposal of garbage or refuse that results from the normal use of the park for recreational or other lawful purposes. 
(i)  The operation or permission to operate any sound amplification system which is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet or more from the source of the sound, unless that system is being operated to request assistance or warn of a hazardous situation. This paragraph shall not apply to emergency vehicles as defined in ORS 801.260, vehicles operated by utilities as defined in ORS 757.005, 758.505 and 759.005, audio alarm systems installed in vehicles and Federal Communications Commission licensed two-way radio communications system. As used in this paragraph, "plainly audible" means any sound for which the information content of that sound is unambiguously communicated to the listener including, but not limited to, understandable spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or normal or comprehensible musical rhythms or vocal sounds. 
(4)  It is unlawful any person to sell, peddle or offer for sale any good, liquids, edibles for human consumption, or any goods, wares, services or merchandise or to solicit for a charitable contribution in a park unless that person has been granted a concession or a park permit by the Community Services Director or by the City Council and then only in conformance with applicable state and county regulations. 
(5)  Motor vehicles shall be operated and parked only on roads and in parking areas designated for motor vehicle use. Said roads and parking areas are intended for the use of the general public for vehicles and subject to all City, county and state ordinances and regulations. No operator shall park and no owner shall allow a vehicle to be parked within a park for the principle purpose of repairing or servicing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. No motor vehicle, off-road vehicle, motorcycle, trailer, bicycle, skates, skateboards, or other vehicle shall be permitted on any trail or in any part of a park not designated for such use, or on any road or trail posted as closed to the public. Provided, however, this subsection shall not apply to those motor vehicles used in connection with City maintenance, fire and emergency medical vehicles or police patrol, or as permitted by the Community Services Director. 
(6)  Except for fire and emergency medical response and police patrols, no person shall operate any motor vehicle within a park at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour unless the roadway is posted otherwise. 
(7)  Except for those animals which a significant number of park users have cooperatively adopted and cared for and which become attached to or associated with particular park buildings, such as the Juanita Pohl Center, no dog, cat or other animal of any kind shall be brought into or kept in a park area unless confined, or in a vehicle, or on a leash not longer than six feet without the express consent of the Community Services Director or as allowed in TMC 5-2-040(29). It shall be unlawful for any individual to leave an unattended animal in a poorly ventilated, confined area or a vehicle for a period of time which would be an act of cruel mistreatment as defined in Tualatin Ordinance 702-86, as amended. The authority of the Community Services Director includes the authority to require the person keeping the animal to undertake any measures (including removal of the animal from the park) deemed by the Community Services Director as necessary to prevent interference by the animal with the safety, comfort, and wellbeing of the park users, or the appearance or sanitary conditions of the park area. Persons in possession or control of an animal in a park shall be responsible for the removal and disposal of all waste material of such animal in waste receptacles. No animals, other than seeing-eye or hearing ear dogs, shall be allowed in any building. 
(8)  No person shall ride, drive, lead or keep a horse or other livestock in any park, except on such roads, trails, or areas designated for that purpose. No horse or other such animal shall be hitched or tied in such a manner that may cause damage to such tree, shrub, improvement or structure. 
(9)  Any form of gathering for special events or use of a park area at special times or for special uses or events shall be unlawful without specific authorization from the Community Services Director and shall be in accord with state law, City and county ordinance and regulations as may now or hereafter exist. During any gathering for special events or use of a park area authorized under this section, no person shall use, possess or consume alcoholic beverages in any location other than a location designated by the Community Services Director or the City Council in the permit authorizing such gathering. 
(10)  No person shall wash any clothing or other materials, or deposit any material or other substance, or clean any fish, or introduce or place polluting substance, waste or litter in a stream, fountain or river in or along a park. 
(11)  It shall be unlawful for any person to camp out or sleep in any park area at such time when the park is closed, except by specific permission of the Community Services Director and only in areas designated for such purpose. 
(12)  Certain activities, including but not limited to, swimming, picnicking, group picnicking, boating, water-skiing, fishing, camping, group camping, hiking, and driving of vehicles, and riding of bicycles, skates, skateboards and horses may be restricted by the Community Services Director to designated zones or areas, and such designations shall be observed. 
(13)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in any park or part thereof from sunset to sunrise, except as provided below: 
(a)  A gathering for a special event or use of a park area at special times or for special uses or events which are authorized under subsection (9). 
(b)  The following persons, when engaged in the course of their duties: the Community Services Director, City employees, law enforcement officers, fire and emergency medical personnel, and those persons authorized by the Parks and Recreation Director. 
(c)  Persons attending activities and events sponsored by the Community Services Department or authorized by the Parks and Recreation Director, or the use of park facilities designed for night use such as lighted sports fields or tennis courts. 
(14)  It is unlawful for any person to climb any tree, or walk, stand, climb or sit upon a monument, vase, railing, or fence in any park. It is unlawful for any person to walk, stand or sit upon any fountain where posted. 
(15)  It is unlawful for any person to injure, deface, or destroy any notice of the rules and regulations for the government of the parks, or other official notice which has been posted or permanently affixed by order or permission of the Community Services Director. 
(16)  No male person, other than a child with its mother, or a park or law enforcement employee in the discharge of such employee's regular duties, shall enter a public restroom or portable toilet, marked "women", or loiter about the entrances of such restroom or portable toilet facility. 
No female person, other than a child with its father, or a park or law enforcement employee in the discharge of such employee's regular duties, shall enter a public restroom or portable toilet, marked "men", or loiter about the entrances of such restroom or portable toilet facility. 
(17)  It is unlawful for any person to blow, spread, or place any nasal or other bodily discharge or waste or to spit, urinate or defecate on the floors, walls, partitions, furniture, fittings, or on any portion of any public restroom or portable toilet or in any place in such facility, excepting directly into the particular fixture provided for that purpose. Nor shall any person place any bottle, can, cloth, rag, or metal, wood, or stone substance in any of the plumbing fixtures in any such station. 
(18)  It is unlawful for any person to stand or climb on any toilet fixture, toilet seat, basin, partition, or other furniture, fixture or fitting, or to push, crowd, or otherwise act in a disorderly manner, or to interfere with any attendant in the discharge of his or her duties. 
(19)  It is unlawful for any person to cut, deface, mar, destroy or break, or write on or scratch any wall, floor, ceiling, partition, fixture, or furniture, or use towels in any improper manner, or waste soap, toilet paper, or any of the facilities provided in any public restroom or portable toilet facility. 
(20)  It is unlawful for any person to willfully mark, scratch, disfigure, deface, or in any manner injure any public drinking fountain in the City, or throw, place, or deposit in any cup or basin of same any cigar or cigarette stub, or any other matter or refuse whatever, or obstruct the regular flow of water thereof in any manner whatever. 
(21)  In case of an emergency, or in case where life or property are endangered, all persons, if requested to do so by the Community Services Director, a peace officer or other park employee, shall depart from the portion of the grounds specified by such officer or employee, and shall remain off the same until permission is given to return. 
(22)  No person shall engage in activity prohibited by any state, county, or municipal law of Oregon while in a park or while engaged in Parks and Recreation Department activities. 
(23)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, promote, instigate, encourage or cause fighting or similar violent conduct which would threaten the physical well-being of the public. 
(24)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fish from the banks of the Tualatin River in a park area except in those areas designated for such purpose. 
(25)  In accordance with Oregon's Clean Air Act, ORS 433.835 to 433.875, no person shall smoke or carry any lighted smoking device in a park building except in designated smoking areas. 
(26)  Boaters shall comply with park regulatory signs posted in boat launching and moorage areas. Boats moored shall be secured in a manner that will not cause personal injury or damage to private property or park resources. There shall be no swimming or water skiing in the immediate area of or from boat ramps or facilities. 
(27)  All articles found in park areas shall be turned over to a park employee and disposed of in accordance with ORS 98.005 and Parks and Recreation Department Administrative Policies and Procedures. 
(28)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcohol, to possess an open container holding alcohol, or to open a container holding alcohol while in any park, except pursuant to a permit issued by the Community Services Director under this subsection and in accordance with terms and conditions attached to such permit. In addition to any other penalties provided by this ordinance, a person found to have violated this section shall forfeit for disposal the alcoholic beverage. The following conditions shall apply to permits concerning alcohol in the park: 
(a)  Alcohol shall not be allowed in any children's playground, on any boat ramp or docking facility or in any vehicular parking lot. 
(b)  An alcohol permit shall be kept and maintained at all times in the possession of the person to whom it is issued, shall not be transferable and shall be limited in duration. 
(c)  A person shall not be issued an alcohol permit unless they can satisfactorily demonstrate the following: 
(A)  That they are at least 21 years of age; 
(B)  That they have paid applicable fees associated with such permit; 
(C)  That they have agreed in writing to be responsible for any injuries or damage arising from the consumption of alcohol; 
(D)  That they have completed the appropriate application form for administrative purposes; 
(E)  That, if required, they have submitted satisfactory insurance, a security deposit and other documentation to demonstrate compliance with applicable Oregon (OLCC) laws and other security measures which may be required by the Community Services Director; and 
(F)  That they are not otherwise disqualified from obtaining a permit under this Section. 
(d)  A person who within 12 months immediately prior to submitting their application for an alcohol permit or prior to consuming alcohol or possessing an open alcohol container in a park under some other valid alcohol permit has been found by a court to have violated a park rule (civil infraction or state law violation) or has been officially excluded from any park for a period longer than one day (and the exclusion was upheld, if appealed) is prohibited from exercising any park alcohol privilege. 
(e)  A person who is denied an alcohol permit or other park alcohol privilege under paragraphs (c) or (d) of this subsection may take the matter up with the Community Services Director whose decision on the matter shall be final. Unless otherwise determined by the Community Services Director, however, the denial of the permit or other such privilege shall take effect from the initial point of decision. 
(f)  Except for a person whose alcohol permit or privileges are denied under paragraph (e), in addition to any other penalties provided by this ordinance or other law, a person who is found to have violated a park rule (civil infraction or state law violation) or any condition under which an alcohol permit has been issued, shall forfeit their alcohol permit and all park alcohol privileges for a period of one year. The forfeiture shall commence on the date notice of violation is delivered to the person. A person who disputes such violation under this paragraph may contest such determination pursuant to this chapter, unless the violation has been litigated or finally determined in a separate proceeding. 
(g)  A person who has been issued an alcohol permit in association with a Group Facility or Special Event Permit shall not allow, pursuant to their permit, a person known to be disqualified from receiving an alcohol permit or exercising any park alcohol privilege to consume alcohol or possess an open alcohol container in a park. 
(h)  The privilege of receiving an alcohol permit or exercising any park alcohol privilege shall include and carry the following consequences: 
(A)  The person will be responsible for any damages, injuries and/or costs which result from the consumption of alcohol in a park pursuant to such permit; 
(B)  The person shall indemnify and, if requested, defend the City from any action brought to recover for such damages, injuries and/or costs; and 
(C)  The City or any other injured person shall have a cause of action and may seek recovery for such damages, injuries and/or costs incurred from such permittee or their insurer. 
(i)  Nothing contained herein is intended to authorize the consumption, possession, distribution or use of alcohol in any manner which is prohibited under Oregon law, or to modify the provisions of the Oregon Tort Claims Act (ORS 30.260 to 30.400). 
(29)  A dog's owner, complying with the regulations set forth in TMC 5-2-040, may have a dog off leash in designated off-leash areas. A person in possession, custody or control of dogs in an off-leash area shall: 
(a)  Ensure dogs are wearing a tag showing proof of current dog licensure; 
(b)  Promptly remove and dispose of dog waste in appropriate receptacle; 
(c)  Not leave dogs in off-leash area unattended; 
(d)  Stay within command distance and keep dogs under control; 
(e)  Remove aggressive dogs from the off-leash area immediately; 
(f)  Not tie a dog to any tree, shrub, fence, railing, or other structure or facility; except to such structures or facilities as are designated for that purpose; 
(g)  Not allow dogs to damage facilities; 
(h)  Be age 12 or older unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; 
(i)  Not bring a puppy younger than six months of age into an off-leash area; 
(j)  Not allow a female dog in heat to use the off-leash area; and 
(k)  Not have more than two dogs in the off-leash area at one time. 
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Director to terminate, alter, or amend the designation of any off-leash area or off-leash hours; or to modify, add to, or subtract from these rules. 
(Ord. 852-91 §4, 11-25-91; Ord. 889-93 §2, 3-22-93; Ord. 908-93, 11-22-93; Ord. 1316-10 §1, 12-13-10)  
TMC 5-2-050 - Fees. 
Fees, as established by the City Council or the Parks and Recreation Director, may be charged for certain services and privileges, and for the use of designated areas, buildings or facilities. It shall be unlawful to enter or use such areas, buildings, services or facilities or to be granted those privileges unless the appropriate fee or fees have been paid. 
(Ord. 852-91 §5, 11-25-91)  
TMC 5-2-060 - Rules of Conduct. 
(1)  The Parks and Recreation Department shall adopt administrative rules for the conduct of persons using parks and recreation facilities, for the administration of special events and for participation in City programs in park areas. All persons participating in City programs shall be registered. The rules of conduct shall be administered by the Parks and Recreation Director, park employees, or persons employed by the City of Tualatin. Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, appeals from the application of such rules shall be conducted in the manner provided by the general ordinances of the City. 
(2)  Where authorized to issue permits for certain activities in a park, the Parks and Recreation Director may establish special procedures, including general permitting rules, for the efficient administration of such permits. 
(3)  The City Council, City Manager, and the Parks and Recreation Director shall have the authority to close a park or a portion of a park to the public at any time and without notice for any reasonable and necessary circumstance including but not limited to construction and maintenance, and for all fire hazards. 
(4)  The Parks and Recreation Director, park employees designated by the Parks and Recreation Director, and City police officers are hereby authorized to obtain compliance by the public with these rules and to issue reasonable directions in furtherance thereof. If any individual fails to obey or disregards the provisions of this ordinance or an order or instruction given to obtain compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, that individual shall be subject to ejection and temporary suspension of park use privileges. An individual who fails to leave or remain off of park premises or designated portions thereof after being so lawfully directed shall be subject to criminal trespass charges. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the foregoing regulations, upon prior request the Park Director may allow temporary, minor deviations from the strict requirements of this ordinance where the harm to park facilities and the risk to park users is negligible or non-existent. 
(Ord. 852-91 §6, 11-25-91)  
TMC 5-2-090 - Remedies. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided, a violation of this Chapter is a civil infraction and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each violation of a provision of this Chapter shall constitute a separate offense, and each day that a violation of this Chapter is committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  In addition to other remedies provided by this Chapter or other law, the Parks and Recreation Director is authorized to revoke the permit or approval given or issued to a person who violates any rule or regulation set forth in this Chapter or any condition under which the permit was issued. Such determination shall be in writing and delivered to the person to whom the permit was issued. Any person aggrieved by the revocation of such permit may appeal such determination to the City Manager, or designee. 
(3)  The remedies provided by this Chapter for violations thereof are cumulative and the pursuit of one remedy shall not preclude the use of another. In addition, where an offense defined under this Chapter is also punishable under State law or other provisions of the Tualatin Municipal Code, the use of a remedy or remedies provided by this Chapter shall not be construed as an election of remedies or otherwise preclude the use of additional or alternative remedies or penalties provided by law. 
(4)  Where a person has been refused a permit or authorization for use of a park by order of the Parks and Recreation Director and such refusal is not in connection with a Civil Exclusion under TMC Chapter 5-10, an aggrieved person may petition in writing to the City Manager, or designee, for reconsideration of such refusal. 
(Ord. 852-91 §9, 11-25-91; Ord. 1386-15, 11-23-2015)  
CHAPTER 5-03 - TUALATIN COMMONS REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
TMC 5-3-010 - Policy. 
The City of Tualatin may develop, construct, improve, operate, and maintain public spaces and facilities within Tualatin Commons in a manner which will best afford the public with necessary conveniences and accommodations. In order to protect such areas, protect the health, safety, and wellbeing of the public, and insure the greatest use and enjoyment for all Tualatin Commons users of the benefits from such areas, it is necessary to make regulations and provisions the City Council deems necessary. More specifically this ordinance and any rules promulgated hereunder are intended to reduce congestion, promote business development, lessen unfair competition, and minimize the City's liability. Due to the difficulty in administering permits, especially individual permits, for various activities which can be incompatible with other activities occurring simultaneously in the same area, this ordinance requires for certain listed activities TMC 5-3-040(1) that a minimum threshold of interested persons be involved before a permit is issued. The cost of evaluation, coordination, and planning for such activities can then justify the potential intrusion on other permittees and Commons users. 
(Ord. 928-94 §1, 6-13-94)  
TMC 5-3-020 - Short Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the City of Tualatin "Commons Rules." 
(Ord. 928-94 §2, 6-13-94)  
TMC 5-3-030 - Definitions. 
Tualatin Commons or Commons includes the area as depicted in Exhibit "A", which is incorporated into this chapter, and the City's buildings and facilities located within Tualatin Commons which are subject to City or Tualatin Development Commission jurisdiction, regardless of whether the areas have been opened to the public. 
Alcohol or Alcoholic Beverage means any form of alcohol containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, including but not limited to malt and fermented beverages, whether or not licensed by the state. 
Alcohol Privilege means the sale, distribution, or consumption of alcohol in accordance with state and City regulations. 
City Employee means any regular employee of the City who has been assigned to administer or maintain Tualatin Commons. 
City Sponsored Activity means an activity which the City directly coordinates, funds, and operates, or an activity authorized by the City Council to use the City's name as a sponsor. 
City Co-Sponsored Activity means an activity in which the City expressly agrees to assist in one or more of the following ways: coordination, funding, planning, or other in-kind service; or an activity authorized by the City Council to use the City's name as a co-sponsor. 
Commercial Pursuits means activities related to or connected with trade, commerce, or fund raising involving the receipt of money or property, such as, but not limited to: advertising, displaying, distributing, selling, taking orders, or offering to sell or take orders for goods or services; providing a place for customers to sit; fundraising activities; and entertainment events where admission is charged or donations are directly or indirectly solicited. "Commercial pursuits" does not include activities which are otherwise prohibited by law. 
Concession means a business operating in Tualatin Commons under contract with the City. 
Conduct Business means the act of selling, offering, or attempting to sell services, or edible or non-edible items. 
Council or City Council means the City Council of the City of Tualatin, Oregon. 
Director means the individual designated by the City Manager to administer Commons Rules or the person designated by the Director to perform some or all of the functions of the Director. 
Farmers Market means an activity located within the plaza, fountain, or community center area in which a single organization obtains a permit issued with the express approval of the City Council and pursuant to that permit solicits, receives, schedules, organizes, manages, and sponsors a variety of commercial pursuits on a regular and periodic basis between late spring and late summer. If allowed by the Council, the permittee may limit the types of commercial pursuits to activities which the permittee finds are mutually compatible, i.e., farm or garden producers. 
Permit means a limited privilege granted by the City to use all or a portion of the Tualatin Commons public areas. Permits are not intended to transfer or convey a real or personal property interest. 
Promenade means the public walkway surrounding and directly adjacent to the lake and the two southern accesses to the lake as depicted in Exhibit "B", which is incorporated into this chapter. For purposes of mobile food and flower vending the Promenade shall not be considered a sidewalk. 
Resident Business means a business located on a parcel of real property which has a legal boundary adjacent to the Promenade, where the building owner is a member of the Tualatin Development Association. 
Request for Proposal means a solicitation process initiated by the City of Tualatin where interested parties submit proposals to provide amenities for public consumption within the Tualatin Commons. 
Special Use means an activity or proposed activity which uses a designated portion of the Tualatin Commons, is likely to attract a gathering of 20 or more people at any one time, and exhibits one or more of the following characteristics: (a) creates an unusual demand for public services such as planning, facilities, staffing, environmental protection measures, parking, cleaning, power, or water; (b) requires coordination with other permits or permittees under this ordinance, or the City; (c) precludes the use of an area or restricts passive use of an area by the general public; (d) utilizes public facilities in a different manner than their ordinary use; (e) constitutes conducting business; (f) involves advance promotion or advertisement; (g) uses sound amplification equipment; or (h) serves alcohol. 
Tualatin Development Association means an association of owners of parcels located within or adjacent to the boundaries of the Tualatin Commons. 
(Ord. 928-94 §3, 6-13-94)  
TMC 5-3-040 - General Rules and Regulations. 
The general rules and regulations for the Tualatin Commons are as provided in this section. Although commission of a civil infraction requires no proof of conscious wrongdoing, any legally sufficient state of consciousness, such as intentional, knowing, reckless, or criminal negligence, as defined by ORS 161.085, may be alleged and proved in order to show culpability. The custodial parent or parents of an unemancipated minor child shall be liable for any injury or damage to persons or property and responsible for the acts committed by the child. 
(1)  The following activities require a permit. A permit for these activities may be issued provided the activity is likely to attract a gathering of 20 or more people at any one time. Unless an activity listed in this subsection is likely to attract or involve a gathering of 20 or more people at any one time, a permit shall not be issued and the activity is prohibited. Failure to obtain a permit which would allow such activities is unlawful. 
(a)  Consumption of alcohol or possession of an open container of alcohol; 
(b)  Building an open fire; 
(c)  Flying a kite; 
(d)  Sound amplification, except for emergencies; 
(e)  Conducting business; 
(f)  Operating, parking, or storing a motor vehicle, off-road vehicle, motorcycle, trailer, or other vehicle; However, this subsection does not apply to motor vehicles used in connection with maintenance, fire, emergency medical, law enforcement, public utility, or private security patrol; 
(g)  Skateboarding, roller skating, or inline skating; 
(h)  Fishing or casting; 
(i)  Boating or ice skating; 
(j)  Erecting a table, stand, sign, marker, poster, or inscription; 
(k)  Bicycle riding except by police and authorized security patrol; 
(l)  Any activity which constitutes or creates a special use; 
(m)  Bringing any animal, except for the following: 
(i)  Dogs that are under the control of the person in possession of the dog and currently licensed; 
(ii)  Seeing eye or hearing ear dogs by persons with disabilities; 
(iii)  Trained law enforcement dogs by authorized police officers during a law enforcement activity; or Animals allowed under this paragraph shall be confined or on a leash not longer than six feet at all times except when the Director has established a temporary off-leash exemption for permitted events. The person in possession or control shall prevent the animal from interfering with other Tualatin Commons' users and remove and properly dispose of the animal's waste material. 
(2)  Except as otherwise specifically authorized by the Director, the following acts are unlawful: 
(a)  The removal, destruction, or breaking of a structure, fixture, tree, plant, or other property; 
(b)  Interference with a structure or facility; 
(c)  The digging, defacing, or removal of dirt, stones, rock or other substance, or the excavation, quarrying, or rolling of stones, or the picking up, throwing, or dropping of rocks, stones, or other debris into the lake; 
(d)  The possession, discharge or causing to be discharged of a firecracker, explosive, torpedo or rocket, propelled by either water pressure or combustible materials, or fireworks as defined by ORS 480.110; 
(e)  The obstruction of the use and enjoyment of the Tualatin Commons, the placement of straw, grass clippings, dirt, chips, paper, ashes, refuse or debris, or the leaving or abandonment of a vehicle or part of a vehicle in or upon Tualatin Commons; however, the foregoing prohibition does not apply to the landscaping and other maintenance activities of City employees and agents; and 
(f)  Standing or walking within the area encompassed by the walls of the lake, whether such area is wet or dry. 
(3)  It is unlawful to: 
(a)  Use an animal, weapon, or other device which causes or tends to result in injury or molestation of any wild fowl or fish, or its habitat, except for City employees or agents in the discharge of their duties; 
(b)  Give or offer, or attempt to give an animal a known noxious substance. 
(c)  Discharge a firearm, as defined by , except the authorized use by law enforcement officers, or other device capable of injuring a person, bird, or animal. However, this paragraph does not apply to the use of officially-approved weapons by law enforcement officers of a city, county, the State of Oregon, or the federal government acting in the performance of their duties; 
(d)  Use golf equipment or any projectile; 
(e)  Use self-propelled, remote controlled model boats, or other model vehicles powered by gasoline or other liquid fuel; 
(f)  Swim, bathe, wash, or wade in the lake water; 
(g)  Feed birds or other wildlife; 
(h)  Wash clothing or other materials, deposit any substance, clean fish, or introduce or place animals, fish, polluting substance, waste, or litter in the fountain, lake, or anywhere else; except that waste shall be deposited in containers provided for that purpose; 
(i)  Sleep between sunset and sunrise; 
(j)  Camp; 
(k)  Climb a tree or walk, stand, climb, or sit upon a sign, light standard, fence, building, or the wave rail; 
(l)  Deface or destroy an official notice which has been posted by order or direction of the Director; 
(m)  Blow, spread, or place a nasal or other bodily discharge or waste or to spit, urinate, or defecate on the floors, walls, partitions, furniture, fittings, or on any portion of a public restroom or portable toilet or in any place in such facility, excepting directly into the particular fixture provided for that purpose. Nor shall any person place a bottle, can, cloth, rag, or metal, wood, or stone substance in any of the plumbing fixtures in such restroom, toilet, or facility; 
(n)  Stand or climb on a toilet fixture, seat, basin, partition, or other furniture, fixture, or fitting, or push, crowd, or otherwise act in a disorderly manner or interfere with an attendant in the discharge of his or her duties; 
(o)  Deface, destroy, or damage a wall, floor, ceiling, partition, fixture, or furniture or use towels in an improper manner or waste soap, toilet paper, or any of the facilities provided in a public restroom or portable toilet facility, or willfully obstruct the regular flow of water within a toilet facility; 
(p)  Deface, destroy, or damage a public drinking fountain or throw, place, or deposit in a cup or basin of same any cigar or cigarette stub, or other matter or refuse, or obstruct the regular flow of water thereof in any manner; 
(q)  Smoke or carry a lighted smoking device in a public building, in accordance with Oregon's Clean Air Act (ORS 433.835 to 433.875); 
(r)  Engage in an activity prohibited by a governmental entity that has jurisdiction; 
(s)  Engage in, promote, instigate, encourage, or cause fighting or similar violent, intimidating act as defined in ORS 166.155 or 166.165, or menacing conduct as defined in ORS 163.190; 
(t)  No male person, other than a child with its mother or guardian, or a city employee, private maintenance worker, or private security officer in the discharge of such employee's regular duties, shall enter a public restroom or portable toilet marked "women," or loiter about the entrances of such restroom or portable toilet facility. No female person, other than a child with its father or guardian, or a city employee, private maintenance worker, or private security officer in the discharge of such employee's regular duties, shall enter a public restroom or portable toilet marked "men," or loiter about the entrances of such restroom or portable toilet facility; 
(u)  Interfere with an authorized activity by doing one or more of the following: 
(i)  Enter in or upon and use an area of the Promenade which has been reserved for a resident business for a purpose other than in accordance with the Resident Business Permit; 
(ii)  Engage in conduct which imminently threatens to cause or causes a speaker or performer to cease speaking or performing, or threatens to cause or causes an audience to be unable to hear the speaker or performers; 
(iii)  Except when viewing or participating in an authorized activity, engages in conduct within 20 feet of an authorized activity which prevents reasonable people with normal sensitivities participating in the properly authorized activity from carrying on a normal conversation; 
(v)  Ride a bicycle within the area encompassed by the walls of the lake whether such area is wet or dry; or 
(w)  Possess or control an animal and, 
(i)  Fail to confine the animal in a container or keep the animal on a leash not longer than six feet; 
(ii)  Fail to prevent such animal from interfering with Tualatin Commons users or resident businesses; 
(iii)  Fail to remove and properly dispose of such animal's waste material; or 
(iv)  Fail to prevent the animal from entering or remaining in the area encompassed by the walls of the lake. 
(Ord. 928-94 §5, 6-13-94; Ord. 1315-10 §1, 12-13-10)  
TMC 5-3-050 - Permits. 
(1)  A permit is required when engaging in any activity listed in this section or identified in TMC 5-3-040(1). The areas for which permits may be issued are depicted on Exhibit "B", which is incorporated into this ordinance and identified as follows: 
(a)  Lake; 
(b)  Plaza, fountain, and community center area; 
(c)  East bank; 
(d)  Promenade; and 
(e)  East Seneca Plaza. 
(2)  There are five types of permits: Residential Business Permit, Concession Permit, Event Permit, Alcohol Permit, and Farmers Market Permit. Permit applicants shall satisfy the qualifications for the permit. 
(a)  Permits are not assignable or transferable in whole or in part. 
(b)  Insurance. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this ordinance, upon approval of an application for a permit, but prior to issuance, the applicant shall furnish to the City public liability, food products liability if applicable, and property damage insurance. Such insurance shall: 
(i)  Protect the permittee and the City from all claims for damage to property or for bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operations under or in connection with the permit; 
(ii)  Provide bodily injury and property damage insurance in an amount sufficient to cover the maximum insurance requirements for cities under the Oregon Tort Claim act; 
(iii)  Be without prejudice to other existing coverage; 
(iv)  Name as additional insureds the City, its officers, agents, and employees; and 
(v)  Provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration of the permit term without 30 days written notice to the City. 
(c)  Hold Harmless. The permittee shall furnish to the City a signed statement that the permittee shall hold harmless the City, its officers, agents, and employees and shall indemnify the City, its officers, agents, and employees for any claim or injury to property or persons that may arise as a result of any activity carried on by the permittee. The agreement shall be approved by the City Attorney before it will be accepted by the City. 
(d)  Permittees shall comply with applicable state, City, and county ordinances and regulations as may now or hereafter exist. Permits may be suspended, revoked or preempted at any time for any reason deemed by the Director or the City Council to be in the best interest of the City. Permittees are not entitled to compensation, costs, damages, or reimbursement of all or any portion of applicable fees due to suspension, revocation, or preemption. 
(3)  A Resident Business Permit is available only to a resident business. The applicant shall satisfy the following requirements: 
(a)  A Resident Business Permit may be issued only for activities allowed by the underlying planning district, according to the Tualatin Development Code and the Urban Renewal Plan, and may occur only in that portion of the Promenade adjacent to the building where the resident business has frontage. 
(b)  An application and site plan detailing the proposed use shall be submitted not less than 30 days in advance of the proposed date of the use. There is no fee for a Resident Business Permit. The Director is authorized to approve the method, if any, by which the permittee reserves space for the exclusive use of customers. 
(c)  Resident Business Permits shall be valid for not more than one year. For permits which have been issued for a full year, the resident business shall reapply for a permit prior to the expiration of the permit. 
(d)  A resident business shall not sell or provide alcohol in a public space area unless it first obtains an Alcohol Permit. 
(e)  The permit applicant shall comply with conditions for approval of the permit as determined by the Director. In issuing a Resident Business Permit the Director may establish reasonable conditions which are necessary to protect public areas and the general public. Conditions may include, but are not limited to the following: 
(i)  Maintenance of the public space area to be used by the resident business; 
(ii)  Clean-up requirements; and 
(iii)  Prescribe the areas for resident business activities to assure a minimum eight feet of unobstructed passage along the Promenade. 
(4)  A Concession Permit is available only for those activities which are determined by the City Council to be in the public interest. Concession activities will be selected and any associated fees, charges, and conditions will be established by the Council. A Concession Permit for a particular activity or area may be issued exclusively to a single permittee or non-exclusively to multiple permittees. The City Council shall approve the criteria and standards used to evaluate proposals and make the final decision on the award of a Concession Permit. The City Council may determine prior to the issuance of a Concession Permit and by resolution declare that specified activities otherwise allowed under Event Permits will be prohibited unless and until the Council issues a Concession Permit. Prior to issuing a Concession Permit or prohibiting specified Event Permit activities the Council shall hold a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given in advance by publication in the Oregonian or Tualatin Times and by regular first class mail to permittees whose permits are proposed to be preempted or revoked by action of the Council. Interested persons shall have an opportunity to address the City Council as a part of such public hearing. Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, the City's issuance of a Concession Permit shall result in the revocation of any other inconsistent, competing, or conflicting event permit, as determined by the Council. Concessions include activities authorized by the Tualatin Development Commission prior to the adoption of this ordinance, subject to the provisions of any agreement entered into with the permittee. 
(5)  An Event Permit is required for activities defined in TMC 5-3-040(1) and which are not otherwise allowed under a Resident Business Permit, Concession Permit, or Farmers Market Permit. The applicant shall satisfy the following requirements: 
(a)  An application shall be completed and submitted not less than 30 days prior to the requested event. Except for deposits determined by the Director, all fees and charges for an Event Permit as established by Council resolution, shall be paid. 
(b)  Event Permits shall be valid for not more than one year and may be issued up to one year in advance. Event Permits will be issued on a first come, first serve basis, except as follows: 
(i)  Annual events will have the first "option" on the event date and location for the next year for up to 45 days after the current year's event. Conflicting applications which are submitted during 45-day period will be delayed for processing until the 45-day option expires. 
(ii)  Except as provided in subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, where more than one application is submitted at the same time for an event on the same date and location, the priority for approval will be as follows: 1) City sponsored, 2) City co-sponsored, 3) Tualatin Development Association, 4) non-profit organizations primarily serving Tualatin residents,5) Tualatin residents and businesses, 6) all others. 
(iii)  For those areas along the Promenade which are available for use by a resident business, a resident business which qualifies and applies for a permit shall have priority over and preempt event permits in the same space other than events sponsored or co-sponsored by the City or the Tualatin Development Association. 
(iv)  Issuance of an Event Permit shall be subject to preemption or revocation by the City Council pursuant to subsections (4) or (7) of this section. 
(c)  The Director may approve, approve with conditions, or deny an Event Permit based on the following criteria: 
(i)  Availability of the space and time requested given previously authorized or anticipated permits, scheduled maintenance functions, and activities allowed without a permit; 
(ii)  The event is consistent with activities that are allowed under this ordinance; 
(iii)  The event is consistent with Concession Permits issued by the City; 
(iv)  The event will not exceed facility carrying capacity, including but not limited to, available parking, restrooms, or utilities, nor will it endanger public health or safety. The fact that non-participants may themselves react to and create a public health or safety risk is not cause for denial of the application; 
(v)  The event shall comply with applicable City, county and state policies, rules, ordinances and laws; 
(vi)  The event will be open to public participation or observation and thus not constitute an exclusive or private use; 
(vii)  The event will not unreasonably interfere with general public access to or use of Tualatin Commons facilities or adjacent businesses, with residences, or with maintenance or emergency access; 
(viii)  Past experience has shown that the applicant has complied with applicable City, county, and state policies, rules, ordinances, laws, and previously issued event permits; 
(ix)  The event will not injure or destroy wildlife; 
(x)  Except for City sponsored or co-sponsored events, a permittee shall not sell or provide alcohol; and 
(xi)  A permittee shall not sell or provide food for public consumption unless he or she first obtains a Washington County Food Handler's Permit. 
(d)  The Director may require a cash deposit from the applicant which shall be available in the Director's discretion to cover the cost of one or more of the following expenses: turf, shrub, and flower restoration, including overhead and administrative costs, litter and trash can service, hard surface clean-up, irrigation repairs, water/power usage, traffic control, portable toilets, sound monitoring, and supervision of set-up, disassembly and the event. 
The deposit shall be paid in advance of the event. Actual costs incurred by the City shall be charged first against such deposit. Should the City's costs attributed to such event exceed the deposit, the permittee is liable for the deficiency. Excess deposit over costs shall be returned to the permittee. Preemption or revocation of the permit shall not affect the availability or use of the deposit to satisfy costs incurred by the City as part of the permittee's activities. 
All deposits, charges, and proofs of insurance shall be submitted at least five days prior to issuance of an Event Permit. 
(e)  The Director may waive the requirement that the permittee obtain and maintain liability insurance or may require such insurance on such terms and policy limits as are considered appropriate. 
(f)  Sound amplification shall not be allowed unless an Event Permit, which specifically allows such activity is issued by the Director. Sound amplification may be allowed, subject to the following conditions: 
(i)  Sound amplification equipment may be used only during the following hours and days of the week: 
(A)  Between 11:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., Monday through Friday; 
(B)  Between 5:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Friday; and 
(C)  Between 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Saturday, Sunday, and on holidays recognized by the State of Oregon. 
(ii)  The sound amplification shall not exceed an L-max of 75 dBA when measured ten feet from the nearest commercial or residential property line, which may be exceeded only with the Director's approval. In determining whether to allow such volume to be exceeded, the Director may require the applicant to obtain written permission from affected commercial and residential properties located up to 600 feet from the sound source. 
(iii)  Sound measurement procedures shall conform to those approved by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. Persons conducting sound level measurements shall have training in the techniques of sound measurement and the operation of sound measuring instruments from a competent body or can demonstrate competence to the Director's satisfaction. Sound measurement tests shall occur at the same location and time of day as the event. 
(iv)  Sound measurements shall be made with a calibrated sound level meter in good operating condition, meeting the requirements of a Type I or Type II meter, as specified in ANSI Standards, Section 1.4 - 1971. A sound level meter shall contain at least an "A" weighting network, and both fast and slow response capability. 
(v)  The Director may refuse to issue an Event Permit, which includes approval to exceed a particular decibel level. 
(6)  Alcohol Permit. Alcohol shall not be sold or served unless an Alcohol Permit has first been obtained from the City. Alcohol Permits may be issued, subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  The permittee has obtained a Resident Business Permit, Concession Permit, a Farmers Market Permit, or a City sponsored or co-sponsored Event Permit; 
(b)  Alcohol service shall be confined to the area designated by the Alcohol Permit; 
(c)  An Alcohol Permit shall not be transferable and shall be limited in duration; 
(d)  An Alcohol Permit shall not be issued unless the applicant can satisfactorily demonstrate the following; 
(i)  OLCC has issued a permit to the permittee for the activity; 
(ii)  All applicable fees and charges associated with the Alcohol Permit have been paid; and 
(iii)  The applicant has agreed in writing to be responsible for any injuries or damage arising from the alcohol consumption under the Alcohol Permit; 
(iv)  If required, the applicant has submitted satisfactory insurance, a security deposit, and other documentation to demonstrate compliance with applicable Oregon (OLCC) laws and other security measures which may be required by the Director. 
(e)  An applicant who is denied an Alcohol Permit may take the matter up with the City Council, through the City Manager, whose decision on the matter shall be final. Unless otherwise determined by the City Council, however, the denial of the permit or other such privilege shall take effect from the initial point of decision. 
(f)  The privilege of receiving an Alcohol Permit or exercising any Tualatin Commons alcohol privilege includes and carries the following consequences: 
(i)  The permittee shall be responsible for any damages, injuries, and costs which result from the consumption of alcohol in Tualatin Commons pursuant to such permit; 
(ii)  The permittee shall indemnify and, if requested, defend the City from any action brought to recover for such damages, injuries, and costs; 
(iii)  The City or other injured person shall have a cause of action and may seek recovery for such damages, injuries, and costs incurred from such permittee or the permittee's insurer; 
(g)  Nothing contained in this ordinance is intended to authorize the consumption, possession, distribution, or use of alcohol in any manner which is prohibited under Oregon law or to modify the Oregon Tort Claims Act (ORS 30.260 to 30.400). 
(7)  Farmers Market Permit. The Community Services Director may authorize issuance of a Farmers Market Permit in accordance with this subsection. The permit authorized under this subsection may be approved with conditions determined by the Director to be in the public interest. In approving such a permit or imposing conditions the Director will consider the interests of persons attending and promoting activities associated with the farmers market as well as members of the public using the Commons for other unrelated purposes. Failure of the permittee to satisfy any conditions attached to the permit or rules established by the Director pursuant to this subsection shall be sufficient reason for the City to revoke the permit. Conditions of approval of the permit may be based on any or all of the following criteria: 
(a)  Availability of the space and time requested given previously authorized or anticipated permits, scheduled maintenance functions, and activities allowed without a permit; 
(b)  The activities allowed under the permit are consistent with Concession Permits issued by the City; 
(c)  The permit activities will not exceed the facility carrying capacity, including but not limited to, available parking, restrooms, or utilities, nor will it endanger public health or safety; 
(d)  The permit activities shall comply with applicable City, county, and state policies, rules, ordinances, and laws; 
(e)  The permit activities will be open to public participation or observation and thus not constitute an exclusive or private use; 
(f)  The permit activities will not unreasonably interfere with general public access to or use of Tualatin Commons facilities or adjacent businesses, with residences, or with maintenance or emergency access; 
(g)  Past experience has shown that the applicant has complied with applicable City, county, and state policies, rules, ordinances, laws, and previously issued permits; 
(h)  A separate Alcohol Permit under subsection (6) of this section shall also be obtained if alcohol is to be dispensed; 
(i)  Food for immediate public consumption shall not be sold or provided unless a Washington County Food Handler's Permit has first been obtained; 
(j)  Sound amplification shall comply with the standards set forth in paragraph (f) of subsection (5) of this section; 
(k)  Subject to conditions set forth in the permit, the Farmers Market may occur any day of the year; 
(l)  The permittee shall comply with the general permit conditions set forth in subsection (2) of this section; 
(m)  The Director is authorized to determine and establish necessary rules for clean-up, crowd control, toilet facilities, setup and disassembly, and clear space between commercial pursuits associated with the permittee and unrelated activities. The Director may require a cash deposit from the applicant which shall be available in the Director's discretion to cover the cost of one or more of the following expenses: turf, shrub, and flower restoration, including overhead and administrative costs, litter and trash can service, hard surface clean-up, irrigation repairs, water/power usage, traffic control, portable toilets, sound monitoring, and supervision of set-up, disassembly and the event. Such deposit shall be paid in advance of the event. Actual costs incurred by the City shall be charged first against such deposit. Should the City's costs attributed to such event exceed the deposit, the permittee shall be liable for the deficiency. Excess deposit over costs shall be returned to the permittee. 
All deposits, charges, and proofs of insurance shall be submitted at least five days prior to issuance of a Farmers Market Permit. 
(Ord. 928-94 §5,6-13-94; Ord. 1298-10 §1, 4-12-10)  
TMC 5-3-060 - Fees. 
Fees and charges, as established by the City Council or Director, may be charged and collected for certain services and privileges, and for the use of designated areas, buildings, or facilities. Council will adopt fees by resolution. Unless otherwise provided all applicable fees and charges shall be paid in advance of particular services or activities. 
(Ord. 928-94 §6, 6-13-94)  
TMC 5-3-070 - Administration. 
(1)  The Director is responsible for administration of this ordinance. Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, appeals from decisions of the Director shall be submitted in writing to the City Council through the City Manager. Except for Concession and Farmers Market Permits and the potential revocation of inconsistent event permits which the City Council specifically authorizes, the Director is responsible for administration of all permits, including but not limited to issuance, interruption, preemption, conditioning, and revocation of permits and activities authorized under such permits. 
(2)  The City Council, City Manager, any law enforcement officer, and the Director have the authority to close all or any portion of Tualatin Commons to the public at any time under circumstances deemed reasonable and necessary, including but not limited to construction, maintenance, and emergencies. 
(3)  The Director, designated employees of the City, and police officers are authorized to obtain compliance by the public with these rules and to issue reasonable directions in furtherance of the rules. If an individual fails to obey or disregards this ordinance or an order or instruction given to obtain compliance with this ordinance that individual is subject to ejection and temporary suspension of Tualatin Commons use privileges. An individual who fails to leave or remain off Tualatin Commons premises or designated portions after being so lawfully directed is subject to criminal trespass charges. 
(4)  The Director may develop procedures, standards, and forms to administer this ordinance. In addition the Director may promulgate rules designed to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the foregoing regulations, upon prior request the Director may allow temporary, minor deviations from the strict requirements of this ordinance where the harm to Tualatin Commons facilities and the risk to other users is negligible or non-existent and such action is appropriate in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 928-94 §7, 6-13-94)  
TMC 5-3-080 - Excluding a Person from Tualatin Commons. 
(1)  In addition to other measures provided for violation of this ordinance or the laws of the State of Oregon, any police officer, the Director, or authorized City of Tualatin employee may exclude from all or any public part of Tualatin Commons any person who violates this ordinance or a law of the State of Oregon, for a period not to exceed 90 days. 
(2)  A person excluded under this section may not enter or remain upon the area of Tualatin Commons from which the person is excluded during the period of exclusion. An excluded person who enters or remains upon any part of Tualatin Commons from which the person has been excluded is a trespasser and may be arrested and prosecuted for the crime of Criminal Trespass in the Second Degree (ORS 164.245). Areas of exclusion may include areas in which special use permits have been issued. 
(3)  Written notice signed by the issuing party shall specify the reason for exclusion, places and duration of exclusion, and the consequences for failure to comply with the notice. The notice shall be given either by personal delivery or by certified mail return receipt requested. Unless otherwise expressly set forth in the notice, the exclusion shall commence immediately upon delivery of the notice to the excluded person. 
(4)  The Director is authorized to prepare a form of notice to be used in connection with excluding a person from Tualatin Commons and to include such additional material as necessary for administration. 
(5)  Appeal Exclusions. 
(a)  The procedures contained in this subsection shall apply to notices issued by the Director, police officers, authorized private security, or authorized City employees excluding a person from Tualatin Commons or revoking a permit or authorization for use of Tualatin Commons. Failure to follow the procedures in this subsection constitutes a waiver of the person's right to bring an appeal of such notice. 
(b)  Not later than ten days after commencement of a notice revoking a permit or excluding a person, the affected person may appeal in writing to the Tualatin Municipal Court for de novo review of the notice or may petition the Tualatin Municipal Court to rescind or alter the notice, or reduce the duration of exclusion. An appeal shall contain a copy of the notice, a request for a hearing or review without a hearing, and a statement of reasons why the order is invalid, excessive or otherwise improper. Failure to raise an issue with sufficient specificity to afford the Director, police officer, authorized private security, or authorized City employee an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to the Municipal Court on that issue. 
(c)  If, as part of the written appeal, the person requests a hearing, a public hearing will be conducted by the Tualatin Municipal Court or designee, within ten days after receipt of the appeal, and the Municipal Court will render a decision within ten days after the hearing. 
(d)  The procedure to be followed for such hearing shall be as provided in cases of civil infractions. The Municipal Court may question witnesses and review all documentation referred to by the witnesses. Unless the Municipal Court orders otherwise, there shall be no continuance or reopening of the hearing. 
(e)  At any time during an exclusion, an excluded person may petition in writing to the City Manager or designee for a temporary waiver of the exclusion for good reason. 
(Ord. 928-94 §8, 6-13-94)  
TMC 5-3-090 - Remedies. 
(1)  Submitting false information as part of a permit application, failure to comply with or to obtain a required permit, and failure to satisfy any condition on which a permit is issued constitutes a violation of this ordinance. Except as otherwise provided, a violation of this ordinance or a rule promulgated by the Director is a civil infraction and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each violation of this ordinance constitutes a separate offense, and each day that a violation of this ordinance is committed or permitted to continue, constitutes a separate offense. In addition to any other forfeiture, remedy, order, or penalty provided by law or City ordinance, the court, upon a determination of a violation, may order the exclusion of a person from Tualatin Commons or any portion thereof for a period of up to one year. 
(2)  In addition to other remedies provided by this ordinance or other law, the Director is authorized to revoke the permit or approval given or issued to a person who violates a rule or regulation set forth in this ordinance or a condition under which the permit was issued. Such determination shall be in writing and delivered to the person to whom the permit was issued. Any person aggrieved by the revocation of such permit may appeal such determination in accordance with the procedures provided in TMC 5-3-080. 
(3)  The remedies provided for violations of this ordinance are cumulative and the pursuit of one remedy shall not preclude the use of another. In addition where an offense defined under this ordinance is also punishable under state law or Tualatin Ordinance 706-86, the use of a remedy or remedies provided by this ordinance shall not be construed as an election of remedies or otherwise preclude the use of additional or alternative remedies or penalties provided by law. 
(4)  Where a person has been refused a permit or the permit has been conditioned, by order of the Director, and such refusal or condition is not in connection with an notice otherwise appealable to the Municipal Court under TMC 5-3-080, an aggrieved person may petition in writing to the City Council through the City Manager, or designee, for reconsideration of such refusal. 
(Ord. 928-94 §9, 6-13-94) 
EXHIBIT A: 
Tualatin Commons 
 
EXHIBIT B 
Tualatin Commons 
SPECIAL USE AREAS 
  
CHAPTER 5-04 - PROHIBITING SMOKING IN MEETINGS OF PUBLIC BODIES OF THE CITY OF TUALATIN 
Sections: 
 
TMC 5-4-010 - Definitions. 
As used in this ordinance: 
Meeting means any regular or special public meeting, session or hearing of a public body of the City of Tualatin to exercise or advise in the exercise of any power of government in buildings or rooms rented, leased or owned by the City of Tualatin. 
Public Body means the City Council, the Tualatin Planning Advisory Committee, the Architectural Review Board, the Board of Commissioners of the Tualatin Development Commission, the Urban Renewal Agency of the City of Tualatin, the Urban Renewal Advisory Committee, and any other commission, committee, agency or body established, appointed or designated by the City Council. 
(Ord. 358-76 §1, 11-11-76)  
TMC 5-4-020 - Smoking in Meetings. 
No person shall smoke any cigar, cigarette or tobacco in any form at any meeting of any public body. 
(Ord. 358-76 §2, 11-11-76)  
TMC 5-4-030 - Penalty. 
Violation of Section 2 of this ordinance is a violation punishable by a fine of $10.00. 
(Ord. 358-76 §3, 11-11-76)  
CHAPTER 5-05 - SPECIAL EVENTS 
Sections: 
 
TMC 5-5-010 -  Special Events. 
(1)  As used in this ordinance, "special events" includes but is not limited to: home shows, competitions, demonstrations, festivals not covered by TMC Chapter 6-2, and other events not covered by temporary use permits issued under the Tualatin Development Code, that are of limited duration, expected to attract more than 100 people, last more than four hours, and are not held on City or school property. 
(2)  By resolution, the City Council may approve a special event and impose conditions on the event to address issues involving public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 1101-02, 2-25-2002)  
CHAPTER 5-06 - MEMORIALS AND NAMING POLICY 
Sections: 
 
TMC 5-6-005 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this policy is to describe conditions and establish criteria for placement of memorials on City park property, and naming of public park facilities. 
(Ord. 1189-05, 5-23-05)  
TMC 5-6-010 - Definitions. 
Amenity means a smaller support structure located within a larger City park facility, such as benches, picnic tables, conference rooms, playgrounds, drinking fountains, decorative or water play fountains, gardens, gazebos or vegetation. 
City Property means a parcel of land or improvement owned and operated by the City of Tualatin for public purposes. 
Facility means a building or structure located on a City property, including but not limited to libraries, office buildings, utility buildings, recreation centers, community centers, plazas, pathways, sports fields or structures used for specific sports such as tennis courts, basketball courts, and skate parks. 
Memorial means a facility or amenity placed within a City park facility or on City park property in remembrance of a particular person or event. For the purposes of this policy, "memorials" also include features designated for purposes such as celebrations, or other special recognition. Memorials are divided into two categories: 
Minor Memorial means an amenity or facility proposed for use as a memorial with a value of less than $5,000.00. 
Major Memorial means an amenity or facility proposed for use as a memorial with a value of more than $5,000.00. 
The value of a memorial will be determined based on the costs attributable to the project per TMC 5-6-020(4)(a). 
Park means a parcel of land owned and operated by the City of Tualatin for park and recreation purposes. 
Plaque means a marker used to identify an amenity or facility as a memorial. 
Resident means a person residing or owning land within the Tualatin city limits, or a business located within the Tualatin city limits. 
(Ord. 1189-05, 5-23-05)  
TMC 5-6-020 - Process; Exemption. 
(1)  The Tualatin Commons is specifically exempted from this policy. 
(2)  All requests to place memorials on City property shall be submitted in writing to the Community Services Director. Major memorial requests may be made after a two-year waiting period following an event, activity or occurrence that has generated the desire to create a memorial. 
(3)  Requests shall be evaluated as follows: 
(a)  Minor Memorials. The Community Services Director shall decide whether to approve or deny any minor memorial request in consultation with other City staff or individuals, as necessary. 
(b)  Major Memorials. Staff shall make a recommendation to the Tualatin Park Advisory Committee (TPARK), who shall review all major memorial requests. TPARK will forward a recommendation to the City Council for approval, or issue a denial, which can be appealed to the City Council. The decision of the City Council is final. 
(4)  The criteria to be used to evaluate a minor or major memorial request shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  Whether the request for memorial includes the direct cost of the amenity or facility including design, purchase of the amenity or facility, installation, and whether any special maintenance requirements are being borne by the requesting party. Staff time to coordinate the memorial and minor levels of effort to assist with design and installation may be borne by the City. 
(b)  Whether the memorial will interfere with the existing or planned design, function or intended user experience of the area in which it is to be located. 
(c)  Whether the placement of the memorial will create a condition in which a significant number of amenities or facilities within a City facility or park are used for memorial purposes. The intent is to assure that placement of memorials will not detract from the overall design, intended experience, vision or appeal of any park facility or property. 
(d)  Whether the placement of the memorial is proposed to replace a facility or amenity currently serving as a memorial for another purpose. Only under extremely rare and unusual circumstances shall existing memorials be replaced by another memorial. 
(e)  Whether the design of the memorial makes use of equipment, structures, vegetation, or features that are of similar quality and design to existing or planned standards for amenities or facilities within the City. 
(f)  Whether any identifying plaque associated with the memorial is constructed of heavy duty, high quality bronze material, and no more than five inches × seven inches in size. 
(g)  Whether the placement of the memorial will create an increased maintenance or long-term replacement burden. 
(h)  Whether the installation or construction of the memorial will be completed or overseen by trained individuals in consultation with City staff, in accordance with all applicable master plans, codes, rules and regulations at the local, state and federal level. 
(i)  Whether the requesting party agrees and understands that all memorials become the property of the City, and the City shall not be required to replace any memorial or portion of a memorial that is vandalized, damaged or stolen. The requesting party must also agree that the memorial may be removed, at the City's sole discretion, if the Community Services Director finds the removal to be in the public's best interest. 
(Ord. 1189-05, 5-23-05)  
TMC 5-6-030 - Naming of City Park Properties, Amenities or Facilities. 
(1)  Consideration of the following in naming city park properties, amenities or facilities is strongly encouraged: 
(a)  Historical significance; 
(b)  Geographical identifiers; and 
(c)  Natural characteristics, including flora and fauna that are characteristic of the Tualatin area. 
(2)  All requests to name or rename a City park property, amenity or facility shall be made in writing to the Community Services Director. Such requests may be submitted after a two-year waiting period following an event, activity or occurrence that has generated the desire to name a City property, park, amenity or facility. 
(3)  Requests to name or rename a City park property, amenity or facility shall be evaluated by TPARK, along with a staff recommendation. TPARK shall make a recommendation to the City Council for approval of the name. A denial by TPARK may be appealed to the City Council. The decision of the City Council is final. 
(4)  Generally, the naming of a City park property, amenity or facility shall occur before or during development, and be the product of a public participation process. 
(5)  For purposes of evaluation and recommendation, the naming of a City park property, amenity or facility shall be divided into two categories: 
(a)  Service and Non-monetary Contribution. A City park property, amenity or facility may be named to honor a person, living or deceased, in recognition of that person's extraordinary volunteerism, employment, leadership or similar service or non-monetary contributions to the mission and purpose of parks and recreation in the City of Tualatin. The applicant should submit a letter providing a summary and examples of the significant contributions to the mission and purpose of parks and recreation in Tualatin, with supporting documentation such as newspaper clippings, letters of support, or other relevant information. 
(b)  Financial Contributions. TPARK may consider naming a city park property, amenity or facility for a resident, Tualatin organization or business that has given or offered to give an appropriate and significant financial contribution to acquire, construct or otherwise enhance a park and recreation facility. A significant contribution means a donation of at least 51 percent (or $300,000.00, whichever is greater) of the cost of the acquisition, construction or improvement of the City property, park, amenity or facility requested for naming. 
(6)  Renaming of City Park Properties, Facilities or Amenities. The City of Tualatin intends that the name on a facility be the permanent designation. Only under extreme or extraordinary circumstances shall facilities be renamed. 
(7)  An application to rename a facility shall comply with and be evaluated in accordance with the procedures set out in TMC 5-6-020. 
(Ord. 1189-05, 5-23-05)  
TMC 5-6-040 - Deviations from Policy. 
The Community Services Director may allow minor deviations from this ordinance if he or she finds that such deviation will further the goals and intent of this ordinance and will help further the mission of parks and recreation in the Tualatin community. 
(Ord. 1189-05, 5-23-05)  
CHAPTER 5-07 - PARKS CHARTER AMENDMENT 
Sections: 
 
TMC 5-7-005 - Purpose and Intent. 
(1)  Whereas, on March 8, 2011, Tualatin voters approved an amendment to the City Charter that would require a vote of City electors before a "major change in use" of parkland could occur; and 
(2)  Whereas, while the amendment gives examples of what would constitute a major change in use, including certain activities of public and franchised utilities, it does not clearly set out what activities of the utilities would not constitute as a major change; and 
(3)  Whereas, the chief petitioners of the amendment, the City Council and the utility companies have agreed on a number of activities utilities must perform that would not constitute a major change in use; 
(4)  Therefore, the City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the public to adopt an ordinance to identify some of these activities to provide a level of certainty both to the utilities and to Tualatin residents. 
(Ord. 1337-12, 1-09-12)  
TMC 5-7-010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
De minimus or Slight or Minor, as a slight increase in size, means up to, but no more than twice the current size. 
Emergency means any situation that causes or could cause an unintended loss of service, threat, hazard, or endangerment of public health, safety, or welfare. 
Maintenance by Utilities means any regular or periodic work conducted to maintain operational capacity or function of an existing utility, structure, or facility. 
Temporary means an installation, development, or change to a park intended to remain in place for no more than 12 months, until it can be removed or a permanent installation can be constructed in compliance with any applicable Charter requirements. 
(Ord. 1337-12, 1-09-12)  
TMC 5-7-020 - Activities Allowed Without A Vote. 
Some activities that do not constitute a major change in use under the City's Charter Chapter XI include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  All emergency repair or construction required under existing agreements, which are temporary in nature, to restore services by utilities, including cable companies, that may not be required to have a permit or may not have to have a permit until after the work is completed. 
(2)  Construction requiring a permit in advance for any of the following if they do not require additional right-of-way or easement over parkland and the parkland is returned to its original park purpose and condition or better: 
(a)  Addition to an existing pole of a new power line, cable line, communication line, or transformer; 
(b)  Replacing an existing pole with a taller pole; 
(c)  Replacing a wood pole with a steel pole; 
(d)  Replacing a pole with an identical or slightly larger pole, as defined as a de minimus change; 
(e)  Adding a larger capacity or diameter line to an existing pole; 
(f)  Adding a guy wire between the pole and the ground; 
(g)  Manhole covers not interfering with a park use or purpose, including those with an above-ground raised profile placed in wetlands that have been landscaped in a manner consistent with the surroundings; 
(h)  Above-ground control units or cabinets for underground utilities located in an existing easement and not interfering with park use or purpose; 
(i)  Small, above-ground control units, such as utility vaults and valves for underground utilities or minor anchoring facilities, such as guy wires, located on parkland that do not convert park use; 
(j)  New construction projects for underground utilities that may disrupt the use of the park during construction but do not do so after construction is complete; 
(k)  Relocation of an existing utility easement on parkland when required by the City; 
(l)  Installation of a new guy wire on an existing utility pole, so long as the guy wire does not interfere with any existing use of the park. 
(Ord. 1337-12, 1-09-12)  
CHAPTER 5-10 - CIVIL EXCLUSION 
Sections: 
 
TMC 5-10-010 - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter, the following terms have the following meanings, unless the context otherwise requires: 
Arrest means to place a person under actual or constructive restraint, or to take a person into custody, for the purpose of charging that person with the commission of any enumerated offense that is a misdemeanor or felony. 
Cite means to issue a citation to appear in court to a person for commission of an enumerated offense. 
City Property means any property or physical structure owned or managed by the City, including but not limited to buildings, greenways, libraries, parks, and parking lots. 
Enforcement Officer means a peace officer as defined by ORS 133.005, or any other person with authority to enforce the Tualatin Municipal Code. 
Enumerated Offense means any of the following: 
(a)  Felony: any crime under Oregon law classified as a Class A, Class B, or Class C felony; 
(b)  Misdemeanor: 
(i)  Any crime under Oregon law classified as a Class A, Class B, or Class C misdemeanor; or 
(ii)  Any violation of the Tualatin Municipal Code that classifies the offense as a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Violation or Infraction: 
(i)  Any violation of Oregon law that classifies the offense as a violation; 
(ii)  Any violation of the Tualatin Municipal Code that classifies the offense as a violation or infraction; or 
(iii)  Any violation of the Library Rules, Park Rules, Commons Regulations, or any other administrative rule adopted by the City. 
Essential Needs means food, physical care, and medical attention. 
Travel means the movement on foot or within or upon a vehicle from one point to another without delay other than to obey traffic control devices. 
(Ord. 1386-15, 11-23-2015; Ord. 1410-18, 6-25-18)  
TMC 5-10-020 - Civil Exclusion for Committing Enumerated Offense on City Property. 
(1)  Any person arrested or cited, based upon probable cause to believe that the person has committed an enumerated offense on City Property, will be prohibited from being present at the City Property where the conduct occurred, except to travel to or from and be present for: 
(a)  Attendance at a City Council meeting, or other meeting of a city committee or board; 
(b)  Compliance with obligations ordered by a court or corrections department; 
(c)  Contact with criminal justice personnel at a criminal justice facility; 
(d)  Attendance at Municipal Court hearing relating to: 
(i)  An appeal of that person's Notice of Exclusion; 
(ii)  The denial, revocation, or amendment of that person's variance; 
(iii)  A violation proceeding against that person; or 
(iv)  Pursuant to a validly issued subpoena. 
(e)  Obtaining, or attempting to obtain, an essential need by accessing the public building that provides an essential need or service when the essential need cannot reasonably be satisfied without the excluded person entering the public building; 
(f)  Performance of work directly related to lawful employment; 
(g)  An activity, place, or event as specified by a variance issued by the Municipal Court pursuant to TMC 5-10-070. 
(2)  The issuance of a civil exclusion is in addition to any other remedy provided by law. 
(3)  This section is to be enforced to emphasize voluntary compliance with laws and City rules, and so that inadvertent minor violations that would fall under this Chapter can be corrected without resort to an Exclusion Notice. 
(Ord. 1386-15, 11-23-2015)  
TMC 5-10-030 - Exclusion Notice. 
(1)  The Exclusion Notice must be issued by the enforcement officer at the time the person is arrested or cited for the commission of the enumerated offense. 
(2)  The Exclusion Notice must be in writing and must specify the following: 
(a)  The enumerated offense; 
(b)  The City building or facility excluded from or geographical extent of exclusion; 
(c)  The date exclusion takes effect and the date it ends; 
(d)  The procedure for filing an appeal; and 
(e)  A statement indicating the availability of a variance. 
(3)  If the Exclusion Notice is related to the conduct of a minor, the Exclusion Notice must be: 
(a)  Issued to the parent, guardian, or custodian of the minor; or 
(b)  Issued to the minor with a copy of the Exclusion Notice provided to the minor's parent, guardian, or custodian in person or by first class mail. 
(Ord. 1386-15, 11-23-2015)  
TMC 5-10-040 - Period of Exclusion. 
(1)  The period of exclusion for a person issued an Exclusion Notice is: 
(a)  Thirty days if the enumerated offense is a violation or infraction. 
(b)  Ninety days if the enumerated offense is a misdemeanor. 
(c)  One year if the enumerated offense is a felony. 
(2)  The period of exclusion established in subsection (1)(a) and (b) is doubled if the person previously received an Exclusion Notice within one year from the date of receipt of the Exclusion Notice related to the current violation. 
(3)  The period of exclusion established in subsection (1)(a) and (b) is tripled if the person previously received two or more Exclusion Notices within one year from the date of receipt of the Exclusion Notice related to the current violation. 
(Ord. 1386-15, 11-23-2015)  
TMC 5-10-050 - Commencement of Exclusion. 
The period of exclusion will commence upon the issuance of the Exclusion Notice, but will be stayed immediately upon the person excluded filing a Notice of Appeal under TMC 5-10-060, which stay will remain in place until the Municipal Court issues a decision on the appeal. 
(Ord. 1386-15, 11-23-2015)  
TMC 5-10-060 - Notice of Appeal; Appeal to Municipal Court. 
(1)  A person may appeal the issuance of an Exclusion Notice by filing a Notice of Appeal with the Municipal Court. Failure to file a Notice of Appeal waives the right to appeal the exclusion. 
(2)  A Notice of Appeal must be filed within ten business days of receipt of the Exclusion Notice. The Notice of Appeal must contain a copy of the exclusion notice, a request for a hearing or request for written review without a hearing, and a statement setting forth the reason(s) that the Exclusion Notice is invalid, otherwise improper, or why it should be modified. 
(3)  If, as part of the written appeal, the person requests a hearing, a hearing will be conducted by the Municipal Court, within ten business days after the Notice of Appeal is filed with the Municipal Court, unless otherwise ordered by the Municipal Court. The Municipal Court will render a decision within ten business days after the hearing, unless otherwise ordered by the Municipal Court. 
(4)  The City must prove by a preponderance of evidence standard that the enumerated offense occurred as alleged in the Exclusion Notice. If the City fails to prove the enumerated offense occurred as alleged in the Exclusion Notice, the Exclusion Notice must be dismissed by the Municipal Court. 
(5)  The determination of facts made by the Municipal Court under this section does not have any collateral estoppel effect on a subsequent criminal prosecution or civil proceeding and does not preclude litigation of those same facts in a subsequent criminal prosecution or civil proceeding. 
(Ord. 1386-15, 11-23-2015)  
TMC 5-10-070 - Variance from Exclusion. 
(1)  The Municipal Court may grant a variance to an excluded person at any time during the period of exclusion upon a showing by the excluded person of a plausible need to grant the variance, which may include but is not limited to the following: 
(a)  To conduct valid city business. 
(b)  To obtain goods or services not otherwise reasonably available; 
(c)  To obtain social services needed for the health or well-being of the person; 
(d)  To obtain educational services or to attend classes; 
(e)  To take the person's immediate family to a location for the benefit of the person's immediate family as provided in subsection (a) through (e). For the purposes of this paragraph, the term "immediate family" means the person's spouse or domestic partner, parents, in-laws, stepparents, siblings, grandparents, children, or grandchildren. 
(2)  A request for a variance must be in writing, must state the purpose for which the variance is sought, and the period of time during which the variance is requested to be effective. 
(3)  The Municipal Court will either grant or deny the variance request. If granted, the variance decision must be in writing and clearly state the terms of the variance. The variance decision allows relief from exclusion only to the extent provided in the variance decision. 
(4)  A copy of the variance decision must be carried by the excluded person while within the area of exclusion, and be presented to any enforcement officer upon request. 
(5)  A person excluded who is present within the area of exclusions has the burden to demonstrate, by clear and convincing evidence, that the person is present consistent with the purposes specified in the variance decision. 
(6)  A variance is effective upon issuance; a revocation of a variance is effective upon the fifth business day after the date of the mailing of notice of revocation to the excluded person. 
(7)  A person may request a variance regardless of whether the person previously filed a Notice of Appeal. 
(Ord. 1386-15, 11-23-2015)  
TMC 5-10-080 - Revocation of Variance. 
The Municipal Court may revoke a variance upon finding that: 
(1)  The request for the variance contained false information; 
(2)  There is probable cause to believe the excluded person has committed another enumerated offense; or 
(3)  Circumstances upon which the variance was granted no longer exist. 
(Ord. 1386-15, 11-23-2015)  
TMC 5-10-090 - Hearing Procedures. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the civil infraction procedures in TMC Chapter 7-1 apply to hearings on appeals and variances conducted under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1386-15, 11-23-2015)  
TMC 5-10-100 - Violation of Exclusion Notice. 
(1)  No person may enter or remain on City Property in violation of an Exclusion Notice issued to the person. 
(2)  If a person enters or remains on City Property in violation of the Exclusion Notice, the person may be arrested on criminal trespass charges. 
(3)  In addition to criminal trespass, the person violating an Exclusion Notice may be liable for civil trespass and other civil liability under City or state law. 
(Ord. 1386-15, 11-23-2015)  
TITLE 6 - GENERAL OFFENSES AND NUISANCES 
Chapters:  
CHAPTER 6-01 - PROSCRIBING GENERAL OFFENSES AND PROVIDING PENALTIES 
Sections: 
 
TMC 6-1-010 - Title. 
This ordinance shall be referred to as the "Offenses Ordinance of the City of Tualatin" and may be referred to herein as "this ordinance." 
(Ord. 706-86 §1, 9-22-86)  
TMC 6-1-020 - Application of the Oregon Criminal Code. 
Except as otherwise provided, the provisions of the Oregon Criminal Code of 1971, as constituted on the date this ordinance takes effect, relating to offenses, burden of proof, general principles of criminal liability, definitions, attempts, conspiracy, defenses, parties, process, general principles of justification, classification of offenses and penalties apply to offenses defined and made punishable by the offenses ordinances of the City of Tualatin. Criminal conduct as defined in this ordinance which occurs in conjunction with or as part of an episode otherwise involving a civil infraction may be prosecuted in a single proceeding in Municipal Court. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all acts or conditions existing or occurring on or after the effective date of this ordinance. It is intended that the adoption of this ordinance shall have no effect on the prosecution or enforcement of any offense, violation or crime committed or made punishable under the laws existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance. Conditions which arose or acts which occurred prior to the effective date of this ordinance, for which no complaint or other official action has been filed shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance. 
ORS 164.115, relating to proof of value for certain offenses as enacted by the Oregon Legislature of 1987 under Chapter 907, Section 6, is adopted and incorporated by reference. 
As enacted by the Oregon Legislature of 1987, Oregon Laws Chapter 783, is adopted and incorporated by reference, except where reference in ORS 161.565 is made to "district attorney," the provision shall instead mean the City Attorney or City Prosecutor. 
The provisions of Chapter 2 of the Oregon Laws 1987, Sections 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 17, and 18 relating to the rights of crime victims are by this reference incorporated herein. 
The provisions concerning the crime of telephone harassment, as enacted by the Oregon Legislature of 1987, Oregon Laws Chapter 806, are adopted and incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. 706-86 §2, 9-22-86; Ord. 733-87 §§5, 7, 8, 9 9-28-87)  
TMC 6-1-030 - Definitions. 
Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the definitions appearing in the definitional and other sections of particular chapters of the Oregon Criminal Code of 1971 as constituted on date this ordinance takes effect are applicable to this ordinance. Abbreviated reference to the Oregon Revised Statutes is "ORS." 
(Ord. 706-86 §3, 9-22-86)  
TMC 6-1-040 - Obstructing Governmental Administration. 
The following sections of the Oregon Criminal Code of 1971, as constituted on the date this ordinance takes effect, are adopted and incorporated by reference in the offenses ordinance of the City of Tualatin. 
(1)  ORS 162.075 False swearing; 
(2)  ORS 162.085 Unsworn falsification; 
(3)  ORS 162.145 Escape; 
(4)  ORS 162.195 Failure to appear; 
(a)  The underlying offense, alleged against the person may be a misdemeanor, violation or civil infraction. 
(5)  ORS 162.235 Obstructing governmental administration; 
(6)  ORS 162.295 Tampering with physical evidence; 
(7)  ORS 162.305 Tampering with public records; 
(8)  ORS 162.315 Resisting arrest; 
(9)  ORS 162.355 Simulating legal process; 
(10)  ORS 162.365 Criminal impersonation; 
(11)  ORS 162.375 Initiating a false report; 
(12)  ORS 162.385 Giving false information to police officer for a citation; 
(13)  ORS 133.075 Failure to appear on citation. 
(Ord. 830-91, §1; 4-22-91)  
TMC 6-1-050 - Offenses Against Persons. 
The following sections of the Oregon Criminal Code of 1971, as constituted on the date this ordinance takes effect, are adopted and incorporated by reference in the offenses ordinance of the City of Tualatin. 
(1)  ORS 163.160 Assault in the fourth degree; 
(2)  ORS 163.208 Assaulting a public safety officer; 
(3)  ORS 163.190 Menacing; 
(4)  ORS 163.195 Recklessly endangering another person; 
(5)  ORS 163.200 Criminal mistreatment in the second degree; 
(6)  ORS 163.465 Public indecency; 
(7)  ORS 163.545 Child neglect; 
(8)  ORS 163.575 Endangering the welfare of a minor . 
(Ord. 706-86 §5, 9-22-86)  
TMC 6-1-060 - Theft; Trespass. 
The following sections of the Oregon Criminal Code of 1971, as constituted on the date this ordinance takes effect, are adopted and incorporated by reference in the offenses ordinance of the City of Tualatin. 
(1)  ORS 164.045 Theft in the second degree; 
(2)  ORS 164.065 Theft of lost, mislaid property; 
(3)  ORS 164.085 Theft by deception; 
(4)  ORS 164.095 Theft by receiving; 
(5)  ORS 164.125 Theft of services; 
(6)  ORS 164.235 Possession of burglar's tools; 
(7)  ORS 164.243 Criminal trespass in the second degree by a guest; 
(8)  ORS 164.245 Criminal trespass in the second degree; 
(9)  ORS 164.255 Criminal trespass in the first degree; 
(10)  ORS 164.265 Criminal trespass while in possession of firearms; 
(11)  ORS 164.043 Theft in the third degree; 
(12)  ORS 164.140 Criminal possession of rented or leased personal property. 
(Ord. 706-86 §6, 9-22-86; Ord. 733-87, §3, 9-28-87, adopted and incorporated by reference the provisions as enacted by the Oregon Legislature of 1987, Oregon Laws Chapter 907, §2, 3, 8, 9)  
TMC 6-1-070 - Offenses Against Property. 
The following sections of the Oregon Criminal Code of 1971, as constituted on the date this ordinance takes effect, are adopted and incorporated by reference in the offenses ordinance of the City of Tualatin. 
(1)  ORS 164.335 Reckless burning; 
(2)  ORS 164.345 Criminal mischief in the third degree; 
(3)  ORS 164.354 Criminal mischief in the second degree; 
(4)  ORS 164.755 (1), (2), (3) and (6) Deposit of trash within 100 yards of waters or in waters; 
(a)  For the purposes of this subsection and subsection (5), waters shall include any of the following: the Tualatin River, the Oswego Canal, Hedges Creek, Nyberg Creek, Saum Creek, or the Wetlands Protection Area, as defined in the Tualatin Development Code. 
(5)  ORS 164.785(1), (2), (3) and (4) Offensive substances in waters, on highways or other property prohibited; 
(6)  ORS 164.805 Offensive littering. 
(Ord. 706-86 §7, 9-22-86)  
TMC 6-1-080 - Offenses Involving Fraud, Deception, or Communication. 
The following sections of the Oregon Criminal Code of 1971, as constituted on the date this ordinance takes effect, are adopted and incorporated by reference in the offenses ordinance of the City of Tualatin. 
(1)  ORS 165.007 Forgery in the second degree; 
(2)  ORS 165.047 Unlawfully using slugs; 
(3)  ORS 165.055 Fraudulent use of a credit card; 
(4)  ORS 165.065 Negotiating a bad check; 
(5)  ORS 165.805 Misrepresentation of age by a minor. 
(Ord. 706-86 §8, 9-22-86; Ord. 733-87, §4, 9-28-87, adopted and incorporated by reference the definitions, delineations, and elements as enacted by the Oregon Legislature of 1987, Oregon Laws Chapter 907, §11)  
TMC 6-1-090 - Offenses Against Public Order, Firearms, Animals. 
The following sections of the Oregon Criminal Code of 1971, as constituted on the date this ordinance takes effect, are adopted and incorporated by reference in the offenses ordinance of the City of Tualatin. 
(1)  ORS 166.025 Disorderly conduct; 
(2)  ORS 166.065 Harassment; 
(3)  ORS 166.075 Abuse of venerated objects; 
(4)  ORS 166.095 Misconduct with emergency telephone calls; 
(5)  ORS 166.240 Carrying of concealed weapons; 
(6)  ORS 166.250 Unlawful possession of weapons; 
(7)  ORS 166.370 Possession of destructive device or firearm in a public building; exceptions; 
(8)  ORS 167.315 Animal abuse in the second degree; 
(9)  ORS 167.320 Animal abuse in the first degree; 
(10)  ORS 167.325 Animal neglect in the second degree; 
(11)  ORS 167.330 Animal neglect in the first degree; 
(12)  ORS 167.355 Involvement in animal fighting; 
(13)  ORS 166.270(2) Felon in possession of a restricted weapon. 
(Ord. 830-91, §2; 4-22-91)  
TMC 6-1-100 - Controlled Substances and Alcohol. 
The following sections of the Oregon Criminal Code of 1971, as constituted on the date this ordinance takes effect, are adopted and incorporated by reference in the offenses ordinance of the City of Tualatin. 
(1)  ORS 475.005 Definitions; 
(2)  ORS 471.410 Furnishing of liquor to persons under 21 year of age or to intoxicated person; mandatory minimum penalties; 
(3)  ORS 471.430 Purchase or possession of liquor by person under 21 years of age; 
(4)  ORS 475.992 Prohibited Acts involving controlled substances (1)(d), (1)(e), (2)(b), (4)(c), (4)(d), (4)(e) and (4)(f); 
(5)  ORS 475.995 Penalties for distribution of controlled substances to minors, sections (3) and (4); 
(6)  ORS 167.222 Frequenting a place where controlled substances are used; 
(7)  ORS 475.999(1)(6) Delivery of less than five grams of marijuana in a public place within 1,000 feet of a school attended primarily by minors to a person 18 years or older; 
(8)  ORS 475.999(2) Possession of less than one ounce of marijuana in a public place within 1,000 feet of a school attended primarily by minor. 
(Ord. 706-86 §7, 9-22-86; Ord. 845-91, §1, 10-14-91)  
TMC 6-1-110 - Interfering with a Peace Officer. 
(1)  A person commits the crime of interfering with a peace officer if such person refuses to leave the area of an arrest, custody or stop, or, having left that area, to reenter it, after being directed to leave that area by an individual whom the person knows to be a peace officer. 
(2)  For the purpose of the crime of interfering with a peace officer, the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  Arrest means to place a person under actual or constructive restraint for the purpose of charging such person with an offense. 
(b)  Custody means to place a person under actual or constructive restraint pursuant to a court order or for other lawful purposes. 
(c)  Peace officer means any member of the Oregon State Police, a sheriff or deputy sheriff and a city police officer. 
(d)  Stop means a lawful temporary restraint of a person's liberty, by a peace officer 
(i)  When such officer reasonably suspects that such person is committing, or has committed, an offense, 
(ii)  When such officer reasonably believes that such person is in need of attention pursuant to ORS 426.215 or ORS 426.460, or 
(iii)  When such officer reasonably believes that such person is the subject of service of a warrant or court order. 
(e)  To leave the area of an arrest, custody or stop means to physically move to a location not less than ten feet extending in a radius from where a peace officer is engaged in effecting an arrest, taking a person into custody, or stopping a person; the radius may be extended beyond ten feet when a peace officer reasonably believes that such extension is necessary because there exists a substantial risk of physical injury to any person. 
(Ord. 706-86 §11, 9-22-86)  
TMC 6-1-120 - Obeying Peace Officer at Assembly. 
(1)  At any assembly of five or more persons, when there is reasonable cause to believe that a disturbance of the peace or a danger to public safety is imminent if the assembly continues, a peace officer may order persons present at the assembly to abandon any weapons, to disperse, or both, if the officer finds that two or more persons present: 
(a)  Are threatening bodily harm to another or damage to property with immediate power to carry out that threat; or 
(b)  Have committed an unlawful act of violence during the course of assembly. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person present at the scene of an assembly of five or more persons to disobey an order of a peace officer authorized by this section. 
(Ord. 706-86 §12, 9-22-86; Ord. 733-87, §6, 9-28-87)  
TMC 6-1-130 - Violating the Privacy of Another. 
No person other than a peace officer performing a lawful duty shall enter upon land or into a building used in whole or in part as a dwelling not his own without permission of the owner or person entitled to possession thereof and while so trespassing look through or attempt to look through a window, door or transom of the dwelling or that part of the building used as a dwelling with the intent to violate the privacy of any other person. 
(Ord. 706-86 §13, 9-22-86)  
TMC 6-1-140 - Discharge of Weapons. 
Except at firing ranges approved by the Council, no person other than a peace officer shall fire or discharge a gun, including spring or air-actuated pellet guns, air guns or BB guns, or other weapon which propels a projectile by use of gunpowder or other explosive, jet or rocket propulsion. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the firing or discharging of a weapon by a person in the defense or protection of his property, person or family. 
(Ord. 706-86 §14, 9-22-86)  
TMC 6-1-150 - False Information; False Certification. 
(1)  No person shall knowingly make or file with the police department or with the City attorney or a police officer engaged in his official duties a false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the violation or alleged violation of a City ordinance or the commission or alleged commission of a crime. 
(2)  No person shall, in connection with the issuance of civil infraction citation ("Uniform Citation and Complaint") or filing of a complaint, knowingly certify falsely to the matter set forth in the citation or complaint. 
(Ord. 706-86 §15, 9-22-86)  
TMC 6-1-160 - Removing Public Notices. 
No person shall knowingly deface, alter or tear down any official notice or bulletin. 
(Ord. 706-86 §16, 9-22-86)  
TMC 6-1-170 - Tampering with Public Property. 
No person shall knowingly tamper with, injure, deface, destroy or remove any marker, fire alarm box, fire hydrant, topographic survey monument, motor vehicle sign, signs regulating parking, motor vehicle directional control devices or any other personal property or fixture erected or maintained by or at the direction of the City, county, or the State of Oregon. 
(Ord. 706-86 §17, 9-22-86)  
TMC 6-1-180 - Police and Fire Communications. 
No person shall operate any generator or electromagnetic wave or cause a disturbance of such magnitude as to interfere with the proper functioning of any police or fire department radio communication system. 
(Ord. 706-86 §18, 9-22-86)  
TMC 6-1-190 - Posted Notices. 
No person shall affix a placard, bill or poster upon personal or real property, private or public, without first obtaining permission from the owner thereof or from the proper public authority. 
(Ord. 706-86 §19, 9-22-86)  
TMC 6-1-200 - Disorderly Conduct at Fires. 
(1)  No person at or near a fire shall obstruct of impede the fighting of the fire, interfere with fire department personnel or fire department apparatus, behave in a disorderly manner, or refuse to observe promptly an order of a member of the fire or police department. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, members of the fire department are endowed with the same power of arrest as are conferred upon peace officers for violations of City ordinances. 
(Ord. 706-86 §20, 9-22-86)  
TMC 6-1-210 - Other Offenses as Civil Infractions. 
The following offenses constitute civil infractions: 
(1)  Begging. No person shall accost or detain another in a public place for the purpose of soliciting alms. 
(2)  Lodging. No person shall lodge in a car, outbuilding or other place not intended for that purpose without permission of the owner or person entitled to the possession thereof. 
(3)  Horses on Sidewalks and Bike Paths. 
(a)  No person shall ride, walk, lead or allow a horse to be on a sidewalk or bike path. 
(b)  A penalty imposed for the violation of this section shall not exceed $50.00. 
(4)  Dumping Garbage. No person shall knowingly deposit or cause to be deposited any trash, refuse, garbage, grass clippings, yard debris, or any form of solid waste, as defined in Ordinance 698-86 onto the property of another without the approval of the owner of such property, or upon any public right-of-way. 
(5)  Public Nudity Display. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly and publicly display their person in such a manner that it becomes nudity display. 
(b)  "Nudity" means uncovered or less than opaquely covered adult, human genitals or pubic areas, the adult human female breast, or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(c)  "Publicly" means in a public place or in view of a public place. 
(d)  This subsection shall not be applied to conduct which taken as whole has serious educational, artistic, dramatic, political or scientific value. 
(6)  Purchase or Possession of Alcoholic Beverages by Person Under 21. Except as otherwise allowed by ORS 471.430, it is unlawful and a civil infraction for a person who owns or controls premises to knowingly or negligently allow a person on such premises to violate ORS 471.430. For purposes of this subsection in multiple family residential structures, premises means the individual living unit or apartment. For purposes of this subsection a person negligently allows violation if in the exercise of reasonable diligence the person should have known that a violation of ORS 471.430 would occur. 
(Ord. 706-86 §21, 9-22-86; Ord. 836-91, §§ 1 & 2, 7-8-91; Ord. 925-94, §1, 5-9-94; Ord. 1074-01 §1, 5-29-01; Ord. 1074-01, 05-29-01; Ord. 1074-01, 03-29-01; Ord. 1361-13; §2, 10-14-13)  
TMC 6-1-220 - Fireworks. 
The following sections of Oregon Revised Statutes as constituted on the date this ordinance takes effect are adopted and incorporated by reference and the violation of which are declared civil infractions. 
(1)  The following sections of the Oregon Fireworks Law, together with all acts and amendments applicable to cities which are now or hereafter enacted, are adopted by reference and made a part of this ordinance: ORS 480.110, 480.120, 480.130, 480.140(1), and 480.150 and 480.170. Violation of these provisions are declared civil infractions. 
(Ord. 706-86 §22, 9-22-86)  
TMC 6-1-230 - Offenses Outside City Limits. 
Where permitted by Oregon law, an act made unlawful by this ordinance shall constitute an offense when committed on any property owned or leased by the City, even though outside the corporate limits of the City. 
(Ord. 706-86 §23, 9-22-86)  
TMC 6-1-240 - Penalties. 
(1)  Where particular offenses, defined in the Oregon Criminal Code of 1971 as incorporated herein, are referred to and specifically incorporated in this ordinance and such crimes are differentiated as to degree, that is Class A, B, or C "misdemeanor" or "violation," then the maximum penalties corresponding thereto under state law are hereby incorporated herein as maximum penalties for violations of corresponding provisions of this ordinance. 
(2)  Unless an offense is defined and made punishable as a civil infraction or unless otherwise provided, a violation of this ordinance is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 706-86 §24, 9-22-86)  
CHAPTER 6-02 - CONDUCT OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES; ESTABLISHING PERMIT PROCEDURE AND APPLICATION; PROVIDING FOR ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT; PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES 
Sections: 
 
TMC 6-2-010 - Definitions. 
As used in this ordinance, unless the context requires otherwise: 
Person in Charge of Property means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser or person other than the owner, having possession or control of property. 
Public Assembly means all assemblies of people reasonably anticipated to number more than 150, for a continuous period of eight hours or more, more than ten percent of which will assemble outdoors or in structures specially constructed, erected or assembled for the assembly, whether or not an admission fee is charged. 
Sponsor means any natural person, association, partnership, firm, corporation, joint venture or any other legal entity whatsoever, who initiates, organizes, promotes, permits, conducts or causes to be advertised, a public assembly. 
(Ord. 182-70 §1, 7-13-70)  
TMC 6-2-020 - Policy. 
Assemblies of people numbering more than 150 people for a continuous period of eight hours or more, and more than ten percent of which will assemble outdoors or in structures specially constructed, erected or assembled for the assembly, are hereby declared to create a hazardous condition to the health and safety of the residents and inhabitants of the City, including but not limited to, traffic, solid waste disposal, sanitation, sewage disposal, public health, fire protection, and noise; and the Council therefore finds and determines that this ordinance which prescribes the procedure and rules and regulations for conducting public assemblies is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Tualatin. This ordinance shall be liberally construed to accomplish this purpose. 
(Ord. 182-70 §2, 7-13-70)  
TMC 6-2-030 - Basic Clause. 
It shall be unlawful for any sponsor, owner of property or person in charge of property to initiate, organize, promote, permit, conduct, or cause to be advertised a public assembly, unless a permit has been obtained pursuant to this ordinance. A separate permit shall be required for each public assembly for the period of time designated by the permit. 
(Ord. 182-70 §3, 7-13-70)  
TMC 6-2-040 - Permit Requirement. 
No public assembly may be held unless the sponsor, the owner of property and the person in charge of property upon which the assembly will be conducted, jointly apply for and be granted a permit as herein provided. 
(1)  No permit shall be available for an extent of more than 60 hours duration unless application and permit specifically allow for an extension of that period. 
(2)  No applicant shall be under 21 years of age. 
(3)  No permit may be transferred or assigned. 
(4)  In case of dispute over the number of people reasonably anticipated to attend a public assembly, the decision of the City Council shall control. 
(Ord. 182-70 §4, 7-13-70)  
TMC 6-2-050 - Application. 
(1)  Written application for each public assembly shall be made to the City Council 40 days or more prior to the first day upon which the public assembly is to commence. 
(2)  Application shall be made on forms specified by the Council and shall contain at least the following information: 
(a)  The full legal names and addresses of all sponsors. 
(b)  The full legal name and address of the owner and person in charge of the property to be utilized for the public assembly. 
(c)  If the sponsor-applicant is a partnership or joint venture, then all parties thereto shall sign as applicants. If the sponsor-applicant is a corporation, copies of the articles of incorporation, bylaws, and resolution authorizing the application may be required. 
(d)  The location and address of the property to be utilized for the public assembly. 
(e)  The program for the public assembly or, if no program is prepared, a narrative statement as to the purpose for which the public assembly is to be conducted. 
(f)  If facilities are to be constructed, assembled or erected on the premises, or food services are to be provided, a written legible and comprehensive plan of the location and manner of construction, assembly or erection of said facilities. 
(g)  Evidence that all permits and licenses as required by state statutes and rules and regulations enacted thereunder have been obtained. 
(h)  Those additional plans, drawings and information required to meet the provisions of Sections 6 and 7 of this ordinance. 
(i)  Applicants' statement that they shall abide by the terms and provisions of this ordinance, and all laws, rules and regulations of the State of Oregon and Washington County. 
(3)  Each applicant for permit shall be subject to fingerprinting and photographing by the City Department of Police and the fingerprints and photographs submitted with the application for permit. Applicants shall be subject to a police records review. Record of conviction of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude of the applicants may be grounds for denial of the permit. 
(4)  Each application shall be accompanied with a cash fee to cover the cost of inspection, investigation, issuance, and administration of the permit in the following amounts: 
Persons Reasonably Anticipated 	Amount of Fee 
150 to 500 	$150.00 
500 to 1,000 	$500.00 
1,000 to 5,000 	$1,000.00 
over 5,000 	$1,500.00 
 
No part of the permit fee is refundable. 
(5)  The City Council shall either grant or deny the permit not less than 25 days prior to the commencement of the proposed public assembly. 
(Ord. 182-70 §5, 7-13-70)  
TMC 6-2-060 - Bond of Indemnity; Insurance. 
The applicants shall submit with their application a corporate bond of indemnity in a form approved by the City Attorney or cash deposit to save and protect City streets, pavements, bridges, road signs and all other City property from any and all damages that might be caused by vehicles, employees or participants in the public assembly and to be used, if necessary, to restore the premises where such public assembly is held to a sanitary condition and pay all charges and losses to the City for damages to the streets, pavement, bridges and all other City property. 
(1)  Should the permitted public assembly necessitate that the City deploy personnel or employ additional personnel as a direct result of the public assembly, such added expense shall be recoverable from the principal and/or their indemnitor. The cash deposit or its balance will be returned to the applicants upon final audit of the City as to what damages, if any, occurred and what deployment and employment of personnel, if any, was necessitated. 
(2)  The corporate bond of indemnity or cash deposit shall be in the following amounts: 
Persons Reasonably Anticipated 	Cash deposit or Bond Amount 
150 to 500 	$150.00 
500 to 1,000 	$500.00 
1,000 to 5,000 	$1,000.00 
over 5,000 	$1,500.00 
 
(3)  The property owner or person in charge of the property making application shall sign as an additional indemnitor to insure against damage to streets, pavement, bridges, road signs, and all other City property, and to insure that the property will be restored to a sanitary condition. The amount of the bond becomes a lien against the property and may be levied against if the indemnification bond is not sufficient to meet the costs incurred and any cost of the City for deploying or employing personnel directly attributable to the conduct of the public assembly. The procedure for assessment and enforcement shall be as stated in ORS 223.505 through 223.650, as applicable. 
(Ord. 182-70 §6, 7-13-70)  
TMC 6-2-070 - Conditions of Approval. 
No permit shall be issued by the City Council unless all of the conditions recited herein have been satisfactorily concluded, towit: 
(1)  Sanitary Facilities. Written approval of the Washington County Health Department indicating that applicants' plan for water supply, toilet facilities, washing facilities, and food preparation and service, if applicable, the type of food preparation and food facilities to be provided, conform with applicable state law, rules and regulations relating to the public health. 
(2)  Fire Protection. Written approval of the Tualatin Valley Rural Fire Protection District affirming that there are approved fire protection devices and equipment at or near the property upon which the public assembly is to be conducted. 
(3)  Public Safety. Written approval of the City Department of Police indicating that plans have been made to meet the following conditions: 
(a)  Applicants have provided for adequate traffic control and crowd control personnel; i.e., one traffic control officer for each 150 persons reasonably anticipated to be in attendance and one crowd control officer for each 150 persons reasonably anticipated to be in attendance. 
(b)  A list of those officers must be presented to the City department of police with the application. The proposed officers shall be subject to fingerprinting and photographing by the police department and a records check. No person may serve as a crowd control or traffic control officer if he has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(c)  Crowd control and traffic control officers must be qualified to be certified as police officers of the State of Oregon. 
(d)  Crowd control and traffic control officers shall report any violations of law to the police department. 
(4)  Medical Services. Written approval by the Washington County Health Department indicating that sufficient medical service has been provided by the applicant. Each public assembly shall have as a minimum, one ambulance and a first-aid station staffed by two adult individuals trained in first aid techniques in attendance at all times. 
(5)  Parking Facilities. Written approval of the police department indicating that parking is available within or adjacent to the premises upon which the public assembly is to be conducted as herein provided. 
(a)  Such parking facilities shall provide parking space for one vehicle for every four persons reasonably anticipated to be in attendance at the public assembly. 
(b)  Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided from such parking area to facilitate the movement of any vehicle at any time to or from the parking area; provided however, that should buses be used to transport the public to the public assembly, it shall be shown that public parking, as described above, is available at any site from which buses are scheduled to pick up persons to transport them to the public assembly. 
(6)  Structures. Written approval by or permit from the planning committee of the Council that facilities to be constructed, assembled, erected or utilized are in conformance with the City zoning ordinances and building code. 
(a)  All facilities to be specially assembled, constructed or erected for the public assembly must be in place two days before the commencement of the public assembly and be approved by the planning committee. 
(Ord. 182-70 §7, 7-13-70)  
TMC 6-2-080 - Conduct of Public Assembly. 
(1)  No permittee, or persons having control of the public assembly, shall permit any person to bring onto the property any intoxicating liquor, nor permit intoxicating liquor to be consumed on the property; and no person during the public assembly shall take or carry onto the property, or drink thereon, intoxicating liquor, except as licensed or permitted by state law. 
(2)  The burden of preserving order during the public assembly is upon the permittees of the public assembly. Any violations of the laws of the State of Oregon, state rules and regulations, or of the terms and conditions of this ordinance, or the permit granted hereunder, may be cause for immediate revocation of the permit by the Council. Upon revocation of any permit, the permittees of the public assembly shall immediately terminate the assembly and provide for the orderly dispersal of those in attendance. 
(3)  The Council, its authorized agents and representatives, and the representatives of the state and county departments having responsibility for approval under this ordinance shall be granted access to the public assembly at all times for the purpose of inspection and enforcement of the terms and conditions imposed herein. 
(4)  No musical entertainment, either live or recorded, utilizing sound amplification equipment shall be operated in a location which is less than 1,000 feet from any school house, church, dwelling unit, or any other place of permanent human habitation, and there will be no programmed entertainment provided between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(5)  If, at any time during the conduct of the public assembly, the number of persons in attendance exceeds by ten percent the number of persons represented by the applicants for the permit, the Council or the Washington County Health Officer shall have the authority to require the applicants to limit further admissions until all conditions and provisions recited herein are met. 
(6)  Any applicant with more than ten percent proprietary interest, if any, in the public assembly, and the owner of property or person in charge of the property, shall be required to be in attendance at the public assembly and shall be responsible for insuring that no person shall be allowed to remain on the premises who is violating any state, county or City laws, ordinances, rules or regulations. 
(7)  Public assemblies operating without a permit under this ordinance based on a reasonable anticipation of less than 150 persons in attendance shall limit attendance therein to 149 persons, and printed tickets, if utilized, cannot number more than 149. 
(Ord. 182-70 §8, 7-13-70)  
TMC 6-2-090 - Penalties. 
Any person who initiates, organizes, promotes, permits, conducts, or causes to be advertised a public assembly, or the owner of property, or person in charge of property upon which a public assembly is conducted, without obtaining the permit provided in this ordinance, or who conducts or allows a public assembly with a permit but in violation of the terms and provisions of this ordinance and of the permit granted, or who shall counsel, aid, or abet such violation or failure to comply, shall be punished, upon conviction, by imprisonment for not more than one year in the City jail and/or by fine of not more than $1,000.00 or both. A failure from day-to-day to comply with this ordinance shall be a separate offense for each such day. 
(Ord. 182-70 §9, 7-13-70)  
TMC 6-2-100 - Conformance With Other Laws. 
This ordinance shall in no way be a substitute for, nor eliminate the necessity of, conforming with any and all state laws, rules and regulations, and other county ordinances which are now, or may be in the future, in effect which pertain to the conduct of public assemblies. 
(Ord. 182-70 §10, 7-13-70)  
TMC 6-2-120 - Exceptions. 
(1)  Where a public assembly has been programmed and property leased, rented or otherwise committed for a public assembly, the commencement of which would occur within 24 days from the enactment of this ordinance, the sponsors, property owner and person in charge of property may apply for an emergency permit. The application must be made within ten days from the date of the enactment of this ordinance. 
(a)  The Council may waive those conditions of approval which are impractical or would result in severe hardship to the applicants; provided, however, that the provisions of Section 6, herein, cannot be waived. 
(2)  The terms and provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to festivals, celebrations or public assemblies which have been conducted within the corporate limits of the City annually during the next preceding or during the five years next preceding the effective date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. 182-70 §12, 7-13-70)  
CHAPTER 6-03 - DOG CONTROL REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
TMC 6-3-010 -  Washington County Dog Control Ordinance Adopted. 
Washington County Dog Ordinance Chapter 6.04 of the Washington County Code is adopted and incorporated into this Code by reference and included in Appendix 4 of the TMC. This ordinance shall be referred to as "The City of Tualatin Dog Control Ordinance". Violation of Washington County Ordinance Chapter 6.04, shall be an offense against the City of Tualatin. 
(Ord. 702-86 §1, 7-14-86.Ord. 1126-03, 1-13-03; Ord. 1329-11 §1, 8-22-11)  
CHAPTER 6-04 - NUISANCES 
Sections: 
In General 
Animals 
Nuisances Affecting Public Health 
Nuisances Affecting Public Safety 
Nuisances Affecting Public Peace 
Unenumerated Nuisances 
Abatement Procedure 
Penalties  
IN GENERAL 
 
TMC 6-4-010 - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter the following definitions apply: 
Person means a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation. 
Person in Charge of Property means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser or other person having possession or control of property or the supervision of any construction project. 
Person Responsible means the person responsible for abating a nuisance shall include: (a) the owner; (b) the person in charge of property, as defined in this section; (c) the person who caused to come into or continue in existence a nuisance as defined in this ordinance or another ordinance of this City. 
Public Place means a building, way, place or accommodation, whether publicly or privately owned, open and available to the general public. 
Rodent means a mouse or rat. 
Undeveloped Property means property left or maintained in its natural state. 
Vector means any insect organism, including but not limited to flies, fleas, lice, ticks, fly maggots and mosquito larvae capable of bearing or carrying a disease transmittable to human beings. 
(Ord. 501-80 §1, 3-10-80; Ord. 1341-12 §1, 1-23-12)  
ANIMALS 
 
TMC 6-4-020 - Dangerous Animals. 
No owner or person in charge of an animal shall permit an animal which is dangerous to the public health or safety to be exposed in public. If the animal is exposed in public, it may be taken into custody by the City and disposed of in accordance with the procedures provided by ordinance for the impoundment of dogs; except that before the animal is released by the City, the municipal judge must find that proper precautions will be taken to insure the public health and safety. 
(Ord. 501-80 §2, 3-10-80)  
TMC 6-4-030 - Removal of Carcasses. 
No person shall permit an animal carcass owned or controlled by him to remain upon public property, or to be exposed on private property, for a period of time longer than is reasonably necessary to remove or dispose of the carcass. 
(Ord. 501-80 §3, 3-10-80)  
TMC 6-4-040 - Animals at Large. 
No owner or person in charge of an animal shall permit the animal to be at large. Animals at large may be taken into custody by the City and disposed of in accordance with the procedures provided by ordinance for the impoundment of dogs. 
(Ord. 501-80 §4, 3-10-80)  
TMC 6-4-045 - Dog Waste Removal. 
(1)  It is a violation for any person, with the exception of a sightless person, who is responsible for any dog off the premises of the owner to: 
Fail to promptly remove excrement or other solid waste deposited by a dog in any area not designated to receive such wastes, including but not limited to, public areas such as streets, sidewalks, parking strips, public parks and any private property owned by a person or persons other than the property of the keeper of the dog. 
(2)  The penalty for a violation of this section is a $50.00 fine. 
(Ord. 1336-11 §1, 11-28-11)  
NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH 
 
TMC 6-4-050 - Nuisances Affecting Public Health. 
No person shall cause or permit on property owned or controlled by him a nuisance affecting public health. The following are nuisances affecting public health and may be abated as provided in this ordinance. 
(1)  Privies. Open vaults or privies constructed and maintained within the City, except those constructed or maintained in connection with construction projects in accordance with the health division regulations. 
(2)  Debris. Accumulations of debris, rubbish, manure and other refuse that are not removed within a reasonable time and that affect the health of the City. 
(3)  Stagnant Water. Stagnant water which affords a breeding place for mosquitoes and other insect pests. 
(4)  Water Pollution. Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream or drainage ditch by sewage, industrial wastes, water quality facilities or other substances placed in or near the water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water. 
(5)  Food. Decayed or unwholesome food which is offered for human consumption. 
(6)  Odor. Premises which are in such a state or condition as to cause an offensive odor or which are in an unsanitary condition. 
(7)  Surface Drainage. Drainage of liquid wastes from private premises. 
(8)  Cesspools. Cesspools or septic tanks which are in an unsanitary condition or which cause an offensive odor. 
(Ord. 501-80 §11, 3-10-80; Ord. 1319-11 §3, 3-28-11)  
NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC SAFETY 
 
TMC 6-4-060 - Creating a Hazard. 
No person shall create a hazard by: 
(1)  Maintaining or leaving in a place accessible to children a container with a compartment of more than one and one-half cubic feet capacity and a door or lid which locks or fastens automatically when closed and which cannot be easily opened from the inside; or 
(2)  Being the owner or otherwise having possession of property upon which there is a well, cistern, cesspool, excavation, or other hole of a depth of four feet or more and a top width of 12 inches, or more, fail or refuse to cover or fence it with a suitable protective construction. 
(3)  Uncontrolled or uncultivated growth of weeds, brush, poison oak, poison ivy, tansy, ragwort, blackberry bushes, or grasses on developed, partially developed, or undeveloped property, which offer vector or rodent harborage, contribute noxious pollens to the atmosphere, constitute a fire hazard or unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of abutting public or private property. Uncontrolled or uncultivated growth on public land or designated private conservation areas specifically for the purpose of providing native wildlife habitat shall not constitute a nuisance. Refer to TMC 6-4-090 for additional Noxious Vegetation regulations. 
(Ord. 501-80 §15, 3-10-80; Ord. 1341-12 §2, 1-23-12)  
TMC 6-4-070 - Attractive Nuisances. 
(1)  No owner or person in charge of property shall permit thereon: 
(a)  Unguarded machinery, equipment or other devices which are attractive, dangerous and accessible to children. 
(b)  Lumber, logs, or piling placed or stored in a manner so as to be attractive, dangerous and accessible to children. 
(c)  An open pit, quarry, cistern or other excavation without safeguards or barriers to prevent such places from being used by children. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to authorized construction projects with reasonable safeguards to prevent injury or death to playing children. 
(Ord. 501-80 §16, 3-10-80)  
TMC 6-4-080 - Snow and Ice. 
No owner or person in charge of property, improved or unimproved, abutting on a public sidewalk shall permit: 
(1)  Snow to remain on the sidewalk for a period longer than the first two hours of daylight after the snow has fallen. 
(2)  Ice to remain on the sidewalk for more than two hours of daylight after the ice has formed unless the ice is covered with sand, ashes or other suitable material to assure safe travel. 
(Ord. 501-80 §17, 3-10-80)  
TMC 6-4-090 - Noxious Vegetation. 
(1)  The term "noxious vegetation" does not include: 
(a)  Vegetation that constitutes an agricultural crop, unless that vegetation is a health hazard or a fire or traffic hazard within the meaning of TMC 6-4-060(3) of this section; or 
(b)  Vegetation on undeveloped commercial or industrial property that has been left or maintained in its natural, primarily grass-covered, meadow-like state, so long as the property: 
(i)  Does not become overrun with poison oak, poison ivy, knotweeds, or blackberry bushes; 
(ii)  Is mowed annually as soon as practicable after August 1 to avoid creating a fire, health or traffic hazard; 
(iii)  Does not constitute a fire hazard within the meaning of TMC 6-4-060(3); and 
(iv)  Maintains a ten-foot-wide mowed corridor along any public right-of-way. 
(2)  The term "noxious vegetation" includes, at any time between March 1 and October 31 of any year: 
(a)  Weeds more than ten inches high. 
(b)  Grass more than ten inches high and not within the exception stated in Subsection (1) of this section. 
(c)  Poison oak. 
(d)  Poison ivy. 
(e)  Blackberry bushes that extend into a public thoroughfare or across a property line. 
(f)  Knotweeds: Giant, Himalayan and Japanese. 
(g)  Vegetation that is: 
(i)  A health hazard. 
(ii)  A fire hazard because it is near other combustibles; or 
(iii)  A traffic hazard because it impairs the view of a public thoroughfare or otherwise makes use of the thoroughfare hazardous. 
(iv)  Impeding stormwater flows into or through a stormwater quality facility. 
(v)  Affecting treatment capacity and/or altering designed drainage paths in a water quality facility. 
(vi)  Offering vector or rodent harborage. 
(vii)  Unreasonably interfering with the use and enjoyment of abutting public or private property. 
(viii)  Hindering the view necessary for the safe operations of vehicles at or near intersections. 
(3)  Between March 1 and October 31 of any year, no owner or person in charge of property may allow noxious vegetation to be on the property or in the right-of-way of a public thoroughfare abutting on the property. It shall be the duty of an owner or person in charge of property to cut down or to destroy grass, shrubbery, brush, bushes, weeds or other noxious vegetation as often as needed to prevent them from becoming unsightly, from becoming a fire hazard, or in the case of weeds or other noxious vegetation, from maturing or from going to seed. 
(4)  Between January 15 and February 28 of each year, the City Recorder may cause to be published three times in a newspaper of general circulation in the City a copy of Subsection (3) of this section as a notice to all owners and persons in charge of property of their duty to keep their property free from noxious vegetation. The notice shall state that the City intends to abate all such nuisances ten or more days after the date of the final publication of the notice and to charge the cost of doing so on any particular parcel of property to the owner thereof, the person in charge thereof or the property itself. 
(5)  If the notice provided for in Subsection (4) of this section is used, it shall be in lieu of the notice required by Section 6-4-170. 
(Ord. 501-80 §18, 3-10-80; Ord. 910\94, §1, 1-10\94; Ord. 1319-11 §4, 3-28-11; Ord. 1341-12 §3, 1-23-12)  
TMC 6-4-100 - Scattering Rubbish. 
No person shall deposit upon public or private property any kind of rubbish, trash, debris, refuse or any substance that would mar the appearance, create a stench or fire hazard, detract from the cleanliness or safety of the property, or would be likely to injure a person, animal or vehicle traveling upon a public way. 
(Ord. 501-80 §19, 3-10-80)  
TMC 6-4-110 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. 1183-05, adopted March 28, 2005, repealed § 6-4-110.  
TMC 6-4-120 - Fences. 
(1)  No owner or person in charge of property shall construct or maintain a barbed-wire fence thereon, or permit barbed-wire to remain as part of a fence along a sidewalk or public way; except such wire may be placed above the top of other fencing not less than six feet, six inches high. 
(2)  No owner or person in charge of property shall construct, maintain or operate an electric fence along a sidewalk or public way or along the adjoining property line of another person. 
(Ord. 501-80 §21, 3-10-80)  
TMC 6-4-130 - Surface Waters, Drainage. 
(1)  No owner or person in charge of a building or structure shall suffer or permit rainwater, ice or snow to fall from the building or structure onto a street or public sidewalk or to flow across the sidewalk. 
(2)  The owner or person in charge of property shall install and maintain in proper state of repair adequate drainpipes or a drainage system, so that any overflow water accumulating on the roof or about the building is not carried across or upon the sidewalk. 
(3)  No owner or person in charge of a private water quality facility shall: 
(a)  Allow the condition of the facility to degrade to the extent that it is not functioning as designed. 
(b)  Neglect to carry out the actions outlined in the maintenance plan submitted to the City by the developer as a provision to receiving an approved architectural review, water quality permit, or public works permit. This includes; but is not limited to, structural components, plantings, invasive vegetation, grading, erosion, sedimentation, rutting from or holes from animals, debris or trash accumulation, or fencing. 
(Ord. 501-80 §22, 3-10-80; Ord. 1319-11 s§5, 3-28-11)  
NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC PEACE. 
 
TMC 6-4-140 - Radio and Television Interference. 
(1)  No person shall operate or use an electrical, mechanical or other device, apparatus, instrument or machine that causes reasonably preventable interference with radio or television reception by a radio or television receiver of good engineering design. 
(2)  This section does not apply to devices licensed, approved and operated under the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. 
(Ord. 501-80 §31, 3-10-80)  
TMC 6-4-150 - Junk. 
(1)  No person shall keep any junk outdoors on any street, lot or premises, or in a building that is not wholly or entirely enclosed, except doors used for ingress and egress. 
(2)  The term "junk" as used in this section includes all old motor vehicles, old motor vehicle parts, abandoned automobiles, old machinery, old machinery parts, old appliances or parts thereof, old iron or other metal, glass, paper or discarded material. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to junk kept in a duly licensed junkyard or automobile wrecking house. 
(Ord. 501-80 §32, 3-10-80)  
TMC 6-4-155 - Derelict Fences. 
(1)  Fences. All fences located within ten feet of, and approximately parallel with, a property line abutting a public street right-of-way designated as a major or minor collector, a major or minor arterial, or an expressway, by the Tualatin Functional Classification Plan, shall be erected in a skilled manner and maintained in a structurally sound condition in good repair, in conformance with all applicable Tualatin Development Code standards. A fence shall be considered derelict and a nuisance when one or more of the following conditions are found to exist: excessive physical decay or rot; cracked, crumbling, peeling, or rusting surfaces indicative of lack of maintenance; broken, bent, disfigured, or missing components or elements; left in a state of partial construction for longer than six months. 
(Ord. 1243-07, 7-9-07)  
UNENUMERATED NUISANCES 
 
TMC 6-4-160 - Unenumerated Nuisances. 
(1)  The acts, conditions or objects specifically enumerated and defined in Sections 6-4-020 to 6-4-150 are declared public nuisances; and such acts, conditions or objects may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in Sections 6-4-170 to 6-4-220. 
(2)  In addition to the nuisances specifically enumerated within this ordinance, every other thing, substance or act which is determined by the Council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the City is declared a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this ordinance. 
(Ord. 501-80 §45, 3-10-80)  
ABATEMENT PROCEDURE 
 
TMC 6-4-170 - Notice. 
(1)  Upon determination by the Council that a nuisance exists, the Council shall cause a notice to be posted on the premises or at the site of the nuisance, directing the person responsible to abate the nuisance. 
(2)  At the time of posting, the City Recorder shall cause a copy of the notice to be forwarded by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the person responsible at his last known address. 
(3)  The notice to abate shall contain: 
(a)  A description of the real property, by street address or otherwise, on which the nuisance exists. 
(b)  A direction to abate the nuisance within ten days from the date of the notice. 
(c)  A description of the nuisance. 
(d)  A statement that, unless the nuisance is removed, the City may abate the nuisance and the cost of abatement will be charged to the person responsible. 
(e)  A statement that failure to abate a nuisance may warrant imposition of a fine or jail sentence. 
(f)  A statement that the person responsible may protest the order to abate by giving notice to the City Recorder within ten days from the date of the notice. 
(4)  Upon completion of the posting and mailing, the persons posting and mailing shall execute and file certificates stating the date and place of the mailing and posting, respectively. 
(5)  An error in the name or address of the person responsible shall not make the notice void, and in such case the posted notice shall be sufficient. 
(Ord. 501-80 §46, 3-10-80)  
TMC 6-4-180 - Abatement by the Person Responsible. 
(1)  Within ten days after the posting and mailing of such notice, as provided in Section 6-4-170, the person responsible shall remove the nuisance or show that no nuisance exists. 
(2)  A person responsible, protesting that no nuisance exists, shall file with the City Recorder a written statement which shall specify the basis for so protesting. 
(3)  The statement shall be referred to the City Council as a part of its regular agenda at its next succeeding meeting. At the time set for consideration of the abatement, the person protesting may appear and be heard by the Council; and the Council shall determine whether or not a nuisance in fact exists; and the determination shall be entered in the official minutes of the Council. Council determination shall be required only in those cases where a written statement has been filed as provided. 
(4)  If the Council determines that a nuisance does in fact exist, the person responsible shall, within ten days after the Council determination, abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. 501-80 §47, 3-10-80)  
TMC 6-4-190 - Joint Responsibility. 
If more than one person is a person responsible, they shall be jointly and severally liable for abating the nuisance or for the costs incurred by the City in abating the nuisance. 
(Ord. 501-80 §48, 3-10-80)  
TMC 6-4-200 - Abatement by the City. 
(1)  If, within the time allowed, the nuisance has not been abated by the person responsible, the Council may cause the nuisance to be abated. 
(2)  The officer charged with abatement of the nuisance shall have the right at reasonable times to enter into or upon property to investigate or cause the removal of a nuisance. 
(3)  The City Recorder shall keep an accurate record of the expense incurred by the City in physically abating the nuisance and shall include therein a charge of $15.00 or 15 percent of those expenses (whichever is the greater) for administrative overhead. 
(Ord. 501-80 §49, 3-10-80)  
TMC 6-4-210 - Assessment of Costs. 
(1)  The City Recorder by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, shall forward to the person responsible a notice stating: 
(a)  The total cost of abatement, including the administrative overhead. 
(b)  That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the property unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice. 
(c)  That if the person responsible objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, he may file a notice of objection with the City Recorder not more than ten days from the date of the notice. 
(2)  Upon the expiration of ten days after the date of the notice, the Council, in the regular course of business, shall hear and determine the objections to the costs assessed. 
(3)  If the costs of the abatement are not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice, an assessment of the costs, as stated or as determined by the Council, shall be made by resolution and shall thereupon be entered in the docket of City liens; and, upon such entry being made, shall constitute a lien upon the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated. 
(4)  The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements are enforced and shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent per annum. The interest shall commence to run from the date of the entry of the lien in the lien docket. 
(5)  An error in the name of the person responsible shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment render the assessment void, but it shall remain a valid lien against the property. 
(Ord. 501-80 §50, 3-10-80)  
TMC 6-4-220 - Summary Abatement. 
The procedure provided by this ordinance is not exclusive, but is in addition to procedure provided by other ordinances; and the chief of the fire department, the chief of police, or any other City official may proceed summarily to abate a health or other nuisance which unmistakably exists and which imminently endangers human life or property. 
(Ord. 501-80 §51, 3-10-80)  
PENALTIES 
 
TMC 6-4-230 - Penalties. 
Any person or persons who shall be convicted of being the author or keeper of a nuisance, or otherwise guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance, commits a civil infraction and shall be fined not less $10.00, nor more than $50.00 for the first offense, and for the second and all subsequent offenses, not less than $25.00, nor more than $500.00. 
(Ord. 501-80 §52, 3-10-80; Ord. 699-86, 6-23-86)  
TMC 6-4-240 - Separate Violations. 
(1)  Each day's violation of a provision of this ordinance constitutes a separate offense. 
(2)  The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violating this ordinance, but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person of the duty to abate the nuisance; however, abatement of a nuisance within ten days of the date of notice to abate, or if a written protest has been filed, then abatement within ten days of Council determination that a nuisance exists will relieve the person responsible from the imposition of any fine under Section 6-4-230 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. 501-80 §53, 3-10-80; Ord. 699-86, 6-23-86)  
CHAPTER 6-05 - CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
TMC 6-5-010 - Chronic Nuisance Property Prohibited. 
Chronic nuisance property shall be prohibited in the City as follows: 
(1)  It is unlawful for a property to be a chronic nuisance property within the City of Tualatin. If property is found to be used or employed as such, it is subject to closure for a period of up to one year. 
(2)  It is unlawful for an owner to employ, use, maintain, or suffer the employment, use or maintenance of property as a chronic nuisance property. If an owner is found in violation of this subsection, he or she may be subject to civil penalties of up to $500.00 per day for each day the property is a chronic nuisance property after such person either knows the property is a chronic nuisance property or has been given notice pursuant to TMC 6-5-030. 
(3)  It is unlawful for a person to remove, deface or otherwise destroy a notice which is posted at any property under TMC 6-5-030. 
(4)  An occupant who fails to voluntarily cease the use or occupancy of a structure as required by subsection (2) of this section may be removed only pursuant to a court order after notice and an opportunity to be heard by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 823-91 §1, 1-28-91; Ord. 1217-06, 8-14-06)  
TMC 6-5-020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter these terms have following meaning: 
Chief of Police means the City of Tualatin Chief of Police or any person designated by the Chief of Police. 
Chronic Nuisance Property means a property on which or within 200 feet of which three or more nuisance activities have been reported to have occurred during any 90-day period. 
Owner means any person, as defined below, having a legal or equitable interest in the property, including: 
(a)  A mortgagee in possession in whom is vested according to public records 
(i)  All or any part of the legal title to the property; or 
(ii)  All or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of property; and 
(b)  A lessee or other permitted occupant of the property. 
Person means a natural person, association, partnership or corporation capable of owning or using property in the City of Tualatin. 
Nuisance Activities means any of the following activities, behaviors or conduct (the following references to the Oregon Revised Statutes and to the Tualatin Municipal Code are to those codes as they may be amended from time to time): 
(a)  Harassment as defined in ORS 166.065(1)(a). 
(b)  Intimidation as defined in ORS 166.155 through 166.165. 
(c)  Disorderly conduct as defined in ORS 166.025. 
(d)  Violation of TMC Chapter 6-10 relating to graffiti. 
(e)  Assault or menacing as defined in ORS 163.160 through ORS 163.190. 
(f)  Public indecency as defined in ORS 163.465. 
(g)  Prostitution or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.007 through ORS 167.017. 
(h)  Provision of alcohol to a minor or to a person visibly intoxicated as defined in ORS 471.410. 
(i)  Offensive littering as defined in ORS 164.805. 
(j)  Criminal trespass as defined in ORS 164.245 through ORS 164.265. 
(k)  Theft by receiving as defined in ORS 164.095. 
(l)  Arson or related offenses as defined in ORS 164.315 through 164.335. 
(m)  Possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as defined ORS 475.906 through 475.912 and 475.940 through 475.979. 
(n)  Illegal gambling as defined in ORS 167.122 through ORS 167.127. 
(o)  Criminal mischief as defined in ORS 164.345 through 164.365. 
(p)  Any attempt to commit (as defined in ORS 161.405), and/or conspiracy to commit (as defined in ORS 161.450), any of the above activities, behaviors, or conduct. 
(q)  Fire or discharge of a firearm as defined in TMC 6-1-140. 
(r)  Creating unnecessary noise as defined by TMC 6-1-210(4). 
(s)  Public Nudity Display as defined by TMC 6-1-210(7). 
(Ord. 823-91 §2, 1-28-91; Ord. 1217-06, 8-14-06)  
TMC 6-5-030 - Procedure. 
(1)  When the Chief of Police determines that a property has been or is being used or maintained in violation of TMC 6-5-010 the Chief of Police may commence proceedings on behalf of the City of Tualatin to cause the closure of the property and the imposition of civil penalties against any or all of its owners as follows: 
(a)  The Chief of Police shall notify the owner of record in writing that the property is a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following information: 
(i)  The street address and a tax assessor's map and tax lot number; and 
(ii)  A statement that the Chief of Police has found the property to be a chronic nuisance property, with a description of the conditions leading to the findings. 
(iii)  A demand that the owner respond to the Chief of Police within ten days to propose a course of action that the Chief of Police agrees will abate the nuisance activities. 
(iv)  A statement of the penalties that may be imposed upon a finding that a property is a chronic nuisance property. 
(b)  A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at least thirty days prior to commencement of any judicial action. Service shall be made either personally or by mailing a copy of the notice by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, or by express mail, to the owner at his or her address as it appears in the county assessment records and also by mailing a copy of the notice by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the same address. A copy of the notice shall be mailed first class, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at the address of the property believed to be the chronic nuisance property. Service shall be complete on the day on which the recipient signs for it, three days after the date of mailing if mailed to an address within the state, or seven days after the mailing if mailed to an address outside the state, whichever first occurs. 
(c)  A copy of the notice shall also be served not less than ten days prior to the commencement of any judicial proceeding on the occupant of the structure if that person is different than the owner as listed on the tax rolls, either personally or by mailing a copy of the notice by first class mail, postage prepaid to the occupant at that property. 
(d)  A copy of the notice shall also be posted on the property. 
(e)  The failure of a person or owner to receive actual notice of the determination by the Chief of Police shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this chapter. 
(f)  The Chief of Police shall substantiate in an affidavit the service of notice as required under this subsection. 
(2)  If the owner responds to the Chief of Police with a course of action that the Chief of Police agrees will abate the nuisance activities, the Chief of Police may postpone referring the matter to the city attorney. If an agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of the nuisance activities within 30 days or if no agreement concerning abatement is reached within 30 days, the Chief of Police may refer the matter to the city attorney as provided in TMC 6-5-040. 
(3)  When an owner makes a response to the Chief of Police to propose a course of action, any conduct or statements made in connection with the furnishing of that response shall not constitute an admission that any nuisance activities have occurred or are occurring on the property. This subsection does not require the exclusion of any evidence that is otherwise admissible or offered for any other purpose. 
(Ord. 823-91 §3, 1-28-91; Ord.1217-06, 8-14-06)  
TMC 6-5-040 - Commencement of Actions; Burdens of Proof; Defenses, Mitigation of Civil Penalty. 
(1)  The Chief of Police may refer the matter to the city attorney to commence legal proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction to abate the chronic nuisance property and seek closure, for the imposition of civil penalties against the owner, and any other relief deemed appropriate. 
(2)  A proceeding other than one pursuant to TMC 6-5-050 may not be commenced unless at least ten days have elapsed between the service of the notice under TMC 6-5-030 and the filing of that action. For purposes of this subsection service shall be effective as of the date of posting and mailing of the notice. 
(3)  In an action seeking the closure of a property, the City has the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the structure is a chronic nuisance property. 
(4)  In an action seeking civil penalties from an owner, the City has the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the owner had knowledge of activities or conditions at the property constituting a violation of this chapter. 
(5)  In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the court may consider the following factors, if appropriate, and shall cite those found applicable: 
(a)  The actions taken by the owner to mitigate or correct the problem; 
(b)  The financial condition of the owner; 
(c)  Whether the problems were repeated or continuous; 
(d)  The magnitude or gravity of the problem; 
(e)  The economic or financial benefit accruing to the owner from the property; 
(f)  The cooperativeness of the owner with the City; 
(g)  The cost to the City of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the condition; and 
(h)  Any other factor deemed by the court to be relevant. 
(6)  Except in a proceeding under TMC 6-5-050, if after the commencement, but prior to trial of an action brought by the City pursuant to this chapter, an owner specifically stipulates with the City that he or she will pursue a course of action as the parties agree will necessarily abate the nuisance activities, the City shall agree to stay proceedings for a period of not less than ten nor more than 45 days. If the terms of the stipulation are being adhered to, the owner or the City may thereafter petition the court for such additional like periods of time as may be necessary to complete the abatement actions contemplated by the stipulation. However, if the City reasonably believes the owner is not diligently pursuing the actions contemplated by the stipulation, it may then apply to the court for a release from the stay seeking some relief as is deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. 823-91 §4, 1-28-91; Ord. 1217-06, 8-14-06)  
TMC 6-5-050 - Closure During Pendency of Action. 
If it is determined that the property is an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the City may apply to the court for interim relief deemed by the City to be appropriate. In such an event, the notification procedures set forth in TMC 6-5-030 need not be complied with. 
(Ord. 823-91 §5, 1-28-91; Ord. 1217-06, 8-14-06)  
TMC 6-5-060 - Enforcement of Closure Order; Costs and Civil Penalty as Lien. 
(1)  If a court finds that a property constitutes chronic nuisance property, the court may order that the owner close all structures on the property for any period of up to one year and that the owners pay to the City a civil penalty of up to $500.00 for each day the owner had knowledge of nuisance activities constituting a violation of this chapter. The court may also authorize the City to physically secure all structures against use or occupancy if the owner fails to do so within ten days. 
(2)  If the City is authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the City to effect the closure shall, and any civil penalty imposed may, be made an assessment lien upon the property subject to the order. 
(a)  "Costs" means those costs actually incurred by the City for the physical securing of the structures on the property and any attorneys fees awarded by the Court. 
(b)  The department effecting the closure shall prepare a statement of costs and the City shall thereafter submit that statement to the court for its review. If no objection to the statement is made within the period prescribed by Oregon Rule of Civil Procedure 68, or if after objection an award of such costs is entered, the City will docket a lien against the property. 
(c)  Liens imposed by this chapter shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per year from the entry of the judgment. 
(3)  Unless otherwise specifically ordered by the Court, all persons who are assessed a civil penalty by the Court shall be jointly, severally and personally liable for the payment to the City. 
(Ord. 823-91 §6, 1-28-91; Ord. 1217-06, 8-14-06)  
TMC 6-5-070 - Relief from Closure Order. 
An owner of a structure determined to be chronic nuisance property may obtain relief from the Court's order if: 
(1)  The owner appears and pays all costs associated with proceedings under this ordinance; 
(2)  The owner files a bond in such a place and form as the Court may by order direct in an amount not less than the tax-assessed value of the property, and maintain said bond in force for a period of not less than one year or for such period as the Court directs; and 
(3)  The owner enters into a stipulation with the City that he or she will immediately abate the conditions giving rise to the chronic nuisance property and prevent the same from being established or maintained for a period of one year thereafter. The stipulation will then be made part of the Court's order. 
If the owner violates the terms of the stipulation, the City may apply to the Court for an order awarding up to the entire amount of the bond to the City as a penalty and such other relief, including closure for an additional period of up to one year. 
(Ord. 823-91, Jan. 28, 1991; Ord. 1217-06, 8-14-06)  
TMC 6-5-080 - Attorneys Fees. 
In an action seeking closure of the property under this ordinance, the Court may, in its discretion, award attorneys fees to the prevailing party. 
(Ord. 823-91 §8, 1-28-91; Ord. 1217-06, 8-14-06)  
TMC 6-5-090 - Cumulative Remedies. 
The rights and penalties provided in this chapter are cumulative and not exclusive, and are in addition to any other rights, remedies and penalties available to the City under other provision of law. The City's actions in pursuit of remedies under this chapter shall not be construed as an election of remedies and such other remedies as may be available by law may also be pursued. 
(Ord. 823-91 §9, 1-28-91; Ord. 1217-06, 8-14-06)  
CHAPTER 6-06 - ALARM SYSTEMS REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
TMC 6-6-010 - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the "Alarm System Control Ordinance" for the City of Tualatin. 
(Ord. 776-89 §1, 6-12-89)  
TMC 6-6-020 - Purpose, Construction and Scope. 
(1)  The occupants of numerous residential, commercial, and industrial establishments within the corporate limits of the City of Tualatin have found it desirable to make provisions for the installation upon their premises, at their own cost and expense, of alarm systems for emergencies requiring police response. 
(2)  There is a growing number of private enterprises that have embarked upon the business of selling or leasing such alarm systems, entering into contract with such occupants for the installation, operation, and maintenance of such alarm systems, and providing, either individually or in concert with other private business enterprises an alarm device or devices installed in various alarm monitoring centers. Likewise, there is a growing number of private enterprises that have embarked upon the business of selling such alarm systems where the installation is completed by the purchaser or the user. 
(3)  The proliferation of the number of private enterprises engaged in the distribution of alarm systems, and the number of commercial and residential users of such systems has resulted in conditions that, if not remedied, will lead to an unnecessary drain on the manpower, time, space, facilities, and finances of the City and its police services, and a deterioration of the quality of police service to the City's residents. 
(4)  The public interest, therefore, requires the enactment of rules, regulations, standards, and procedures to regulate and control the private alarm business within the corporate limits of the City of Tualatin for the following purposes: 
(a)  The Tualatin Police Department may efficiently and economically coordinate its functions with the various alarm services to which the public within the City may subscribe; 
(b)  The quality of the alarm services rendered to the public may be improved and maintained at a high level; 
(c)  The excessive number of false alarms which require expenditure of police resources must be reduced so that those limited resources may be more efficiently utilized; 
(d)  Those private enterprises engaged in the alarm business and persons who utilize alarm systems should help support the administration of the alarm system, and where alarm users are responsible for an excessive number of false alarms, they should pay additional charges, which relate to the additional responses by the police and motivate alarm users to reduce the number of false alarms; 
(e)  Those alarms users who are responsible for excessive false alarms and who fail or refuse to remedy the cause of excessive false alarms demonstrate their indifference to limited police resources being devoted to unnecessary emergency responses, and such users should be treated by punitive measures. By the time an alarm user's system has generated ten false alarms within a permit year, the police response by way of notices will have provided the user with ample warning of the consequences and, therefore, it is presumed the alarm user has failed to take adequate steps to remedy the problem and maintain the alarm system. 
(5)  The purpose of this ordinance is to encourage alarm users and alarm businesses to assume increased responsibility for maintaining the mechanical reliability and the proper use of alarm systems to prevent unnecessary police emergency responses to false alarms and thereby protect the emergency response capability of the City from misuse. 
(6)  Except where otherwise expressly provided, this ordinance governs all alarm systems eliciting a police response, requires annual permits, establishes fees and charges, and provides for the enforcement of violations. 
(Ord. 776-89 §2, 6-12-89)  
TMC 6-6-030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following definitions apply: 
Alarm Business means a person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity, engaged in the profit-oriented selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing of an alarm system in or on a building, structure, facility. 
Alarm System means an assembly or equipment, mechanical or electrical, or both, designed and used to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or attempted entry or other illegal activity on the premises of the alarm user, which requires or solicits urgent attention and to which the police are expected to respond. 
Alarm User means a person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity in control of a building, structure, facility, or portion thereof within the City of Tualatin in which an alarm system is used. 
Automatic Dialing Device means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and to transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response. An automatic dialing device is an alarm system. 
Coordinator means the individual, designated by the Chief of Police for the Tualatin Police Department to issue permits and administer this ordinance. 
Council means the Tualatin City Council, the governing body of the City of Tualatin, Oregon. 
Excessive False Alarm means a false alarm which occurs following two previous false alarms within one permit year. More than one false alarm in a 24-hour period, beginning with the first alarm in that 24-hour period, is counted as one false alarm. 
False Alarm means a signal or activation by an alarm system which elicits a response by the Tualatin Police Department when a situation requiring a response by the police does not in fact exist. "False alarm" does not include an alarm signal by an alarm system, which is caused by violent and extraordinary conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably anticipated or subject to control by the alarm business operator or the alarm user. 
Governmental Political Unit means any tax supported public agency. 
Handicap means a physical or mental impairment which for the individual constitutes or results in a functional limitation to one or more major life activities. 
Interconnect means to connect an alarm system including an automatic dialing device, to a telephone line either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a telephone for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system. 
Monitoring Center means a facility used to receive emergency and general information from an alarm user and to direct an emergency response. 
Primary Trunk Line means a telephone line serving the Police Dispatch Center that is designated to receive police calls. 
Permit means an alarm user permit, issued by the City of Tualatin under this ordinance. 
Permit Renewal means the act of applying for a new permit to take the place of an expired permit, where the alarm system under both permits is designed and used for substantially the same building, structure, or facility. 
(Ord. 776-89 §3, 6-12-89. Amended Ord 1166-04, §1, 7-12-04)  
TMC 6-6-040 - Alarm User Permits Required, Payment of Permit Fees Required. 
(1)  Except as provided in TMC 6-6.120, every alarm user shall obtain an alarm user permit for each alarm system proposed to be used by the alarm user from the Coordinator within 30 days after July 12, 1989, or at the time an alarm system is activated. 
(2)  Every alarm user shall complete and submit an application form and pay all required fees and charges as established by the City Council by resolution. 
(3)  The Chief of Police shall prescribe the form of the permit application, but it shall consist of at least the following parts. Additional parts may be inserted for administrative purposes: 
(a)  The name of the alarm user; 
(b)  The address of the alarm user and the address where the alarm system has been or will be installed and used; 
(c)  The name of the current emergency notification persons and their telephone numbers; 
(d)  The justification, if any, for requesting a waiver of application and renewal fees; and 
(e)  The name of the current alarm business responsible for operating a monitoring center for the alarm system, if any. 
(4)  Each permit shall bear the signature of the Chief of Police and shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. The permit will show the date of expiration on its face. 
(5)  The permit shall be physically kept upon the premises where the alarm system is located and shall be available for inspection by the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee upon request. An alarm permit is valid only for the permittee and is not transferable from one person to another or from one address to another. 
(6)  A residential alarm user who lives on the premises, who owns or is the named lessee on the property in which the alarm system is located, who conducts no profit-oriented business on the premises, and who is 65 years of age or older or is handicapped shall be entitled to a waiver of application and renewal fees, but not excessive alarm and late charges. An alarm user permit shall be obtained. 
(7)  It is unlawful and a civil infraction for a person, firm, or corporation to use, operate or maintain an alarm system within the City without obtaining and maintaining a current, valid alarm user permit, paying all required fees, and charges and complying with all provisions of this ordinance. 
(8)  Except as otherwise provided in TMC 6-6.120, a late charge in an amount adopted by Council resolution will be imposed and added to the permit fee and paid by an alarm user who fails to obtain a permit within 30 days after such permit is required or by an alarm user who fails to renew a permit within 30 days after a permit has expired. 
(9)  An alarm user which is a governmental political unit shall obtain and maintain a permit and is subject to the requirements of this ordinance; however, permit application and renewal fees shall be waived, but not excessive false alarm and late charges. 
(Ord. 776-89 §4, 6-12-89)  
TMC 6-6-050 - User Instructions. 
Every alarm business, which operates as such on behalf of alarm users within the City, shall furnish the user with instructions which enable the user to operate the alarm system properly without false alarms and to obtain service for the alarm system. 
(Ord. 776-89 §5, 6-12-89)  
TMC 6-6-060 - Automatic Dialing Device; Certain Interconnections Prohibited. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, it is unlawful for a person to program an automatic dialing device to select a primary trunk line or any 911 trunk line, capable of signaling a need for police response; and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram an automatic dialing device which is programmed to select a primary trunk line within 12 hours of receipt of written notice from the Tualatin Police Department, directing that such disconnection or reprogramming occur. 
(2)  Within 60 days after July 12, 1989, all existing automatic dialing devices programmed to select a primary trunk line shall be reprogrammed or disconnected. 
(3)  Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, it is unlawful for a person to program an automatic dialing device which selects a telephone line assigned to the City of Tualatin; and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram such a device within 12 hours of receipt of written notice from the Tualatin Police Department that such automated dialing device should be disconnected or reprogrammed. 
(4)  The City of Tualatin and other governmental providers of emergency and critical municipal services, including but not limited to water, sewer, and streets are exempt from this section. 
(Ord. 776-89 §6, 6-12-89)  
TMC 6-6-070 - False Alarms, Hearing, Determination. 
(1)  When an officer responds to a reported alarm and establishes that the alarm is a false alarm, the officer shall conspicuously affix a notice of false alarm response on the premises. The notice shall contain the address of the premises, the date and time of the response, and the officer's name and identification number. 
(2)  After the first false alarm during a permit year, the alarm coordinator shall send by regular mail a notice of false alarm to the alarm user at the address listed on the user's permit application. The notice shall advise the alarm user of the date and time of the false alarm and that it is the first false alarm recorded by the coordinator for the alarm system during the permit year. The notice shall also advise that upon the occurrence of a third false alarm during the permit year, the alarm user will be charged a fee upon renewal of the permit for each excessive false alarm. 
(3)  If the Police Department responds to a second false alarm during the permit year, the alarm coordinator shall send by regular mail a notice to the alarm user at the address listed on the user's permit application that the police have responded to two false alarms at the address where the alarm system is located. This notice shall also advise that the occurrence of any additional false alarms at the address where the alarm system is located during the permit year, the alarm user will be charged a fee upon renewal of the permit for excessive false alarms. 
(4)  If the Police Department responds to a third or subsequent false alarm during a permit year, the alarm coordinator shall forward by regular mail a notice to the alarm user at the address listed on the alarm user's permit a notice which advises the alarm user that the police have responded to excessive false alarms at the alarm location, and as a result the alarm user shall upon renewal of the alarm system permit be charged in accordance with a schedule of charges for excessive false alarms. 
An alarm user, whose alarm system has three or more false alarms within a permit year shall be subject to and pay at or before permit renewal in addition to any other charges a charge for excessive false alarms in an amount established by City Council resolution. Excessive false alarm charges shall be established in an amount to encourage correction in an alarm system or in operation of an alarm system, to discourage false alarms and to reimburse the City for the use of its police resources. No permit for substantially the same alarm system or for a different alarm system which is designed and used for substantially the same building, structure, facility, or portion thereof, shall be issued or renewed for the same alarm user unless such excessive false alarm charge is first paid. Excessive false alarm charges are the responsibility of the alarm user notwithstanding an agreement or claim of liability which holds an alarm business responsible for such charges. 
(5)  The Police Chief shall prescribe the form of the notices to be used in this section. The notices provided by this section may be used for purposes of complying with the Uniform Civil Infractions Procedure, TMC Chapter 7-1. For purposes of determining which form of mailing and notice to use, any alleged false alarm, which is disputed as provided in this section and for which a final determination has not been made, shall be treated as having occurred. The Police Chief shall provide for the supervision of the coordinator to insure that adequate records of notices being sent to alarm users and alarm businesses are maintained by the Police Department. Failure of a person to receive a notice shall not invalidate any proceeding in connection with a false alarm or in the imposition of additional charges upon license renewal resulting therefrom. 
(6)  An alarm user or alarm business who is aggrieved by the determination that a particular false alarm has occurred may request a hearing. The request shall be made in writing, and filed with the Chief of Police and the Municipal Court within ten days of the date on which the alarm user is sent the notification of false alarm for which a hearing is requested. Unless a request for a hearing is made in accordance with this section, an alarm user or alarm business shall have waived any right to challenge the decision whether a particular false alarm occurred and the false alarm shall thereafter be treated as having occurred on the date and time alleged. If a hearing is requested in accordance with this subsection, the Municipal Court shall notify by regular mail the person requesting the hearing of the time and place of the hearing. 
(7)  Every hearing to determine whether a false alarm has occurred shall be held before the Tualatin Municipal Court without a jury. The court may, in the interest of justice, consolidate hearings which involve the same alarm user or alarm system and false alarms within the same permit year. In addition, the hearing provided by this subsection may be consolidated with a hearing on an alleged civil infraction, provided the parties in each proceeding are the same, or the alarm system in each case is the same. The person requesting the hearing may be represented by counsel, but counsel shall not be provided at public expense. If counsel is to appear, written notice shall be provided to the Municipal Court and Chief of Police not less than five business days prior to the hearing date. The Chief of Police, or the City's designated representative and the person requesting the hearing shall have the right to present written and oral evidence. Oral testimony shall be taken only on oath or affirmation and shall be subject to the right of cross-examination. If the person requesting a hearing wishes that witnesses be ordered to testify, he or she must request the court to order the desired witness subpoenaed, which request shall be at least five business days prior to the scheduled hearing. A deposit for each witness shall accompany the request and such deposit shall be refunded, if it is determined the alleged false alarm did not occur. The deposit for subpoenas shall be in an amount equal to witness fees provided by statute in other courts of this State. At the hearing any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. However, irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. The City has the burden of proving that a false alarm occurred by a preponderance of the evidence. Within 30 days after the hearing, the Municipal Court shall determine whether the alleged false alarm has occurred and shall so advise the parties. The decision of the Municipal Court is final. 
(8)  If a request for a hearing or a decision by the Municipal Court is pending at the time a permit expires and is subject to renewal, the alarm user shall pay the appropriate permit renewal and other charges owing at the time renewal is required, together with any then required charges for excessive false alarms. If the Court should determine that a false alarm within the prior permit year has occurred and such determination would have resulted in a higher fee upon renewal than was paid by the alarm user or applicant due to an excessive false alarm, the alarm user shall pay an appropriate additional false alarm charge upon being notified of the Court's determination. 
(Ord. 776-89 §7, 6-12-89; Ord. 919-94 §1, 3-14-94; Ord 1166-04 §2, 7-12-04)  
TMC 6-6-080 - Confidentiality, Statistics. 
(1)  Except as otherwise required by law, if an alarm user requests that information submitted by the user as part of an application be kept in confidence, such information shall be held in confidence and shall be deemed a public record exempt from disclosure under Oregon law. The Police Department shall be responsible for maintenance of records created under this ordinance. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection (1) the Police Department shall develop and maintain statistics for purposes of evaluating alarm systems. 
(Ord. 776-89 §8, 6-12-89)  
TMC 6-6-090 - Allocation of Revenues. 
All fees and charges collected pursuant to this ordinance shall be deposited in the general fund in the City of Tualatin, and are nonrefundable. 
(Ord. 776-89 §9, 6-12-89)  
TMC 6-6-100 - Duty to Maintain Alarm System, Permit Information. 
(1)  An alarm user shall maintain its alarm system in good operating condition and free of false alarms. In addition the alarm user shall insure that all persons with access to the premises have an adequate understanding of the alarm system so as to prevent unintended activation of the alarm system. 
(2)  The alarm user shall provide the coordinator with complete current information on the permit application. On each permit application alarm users must provide names of at least two persons other than the alarm user who have access to keys to the premises and would be available to assist the police to secure the premises or reset a malfunctioning alarm. Any changes in the information contained on the permit application shall be promptly submitted to the coordinator within ten days of any such change. 
(3)  An alarm user whose alarm system generates ten or more false alarms within a permit year is considered an excessive number of false alarms and is prima facie evidence of a violation of this ordinance. 
(Ord. 776-89 §8, 6-12-89; Ord. 919-94 §2, 3-14-94)  
TMC 6-6-110 - Violation of Ordinance, Penalties. 
(1)  A violation of this ordinance is a civil infraction, punishable in accordance with the civil infractions ordinance of the City of Tualatin. Every day that a violation is found to exist constitutes a separate civil infraction. 
(2)  An alarm user shall not permit the user's alarm system to disturb, injure, or endanger the peace, quiet, comfort, repose, health, or safety of the public or any person by continuous activation or reactivation due to false alarms. The following are examples of disturbing alarm noises: 
(a)  The continuous sounding of a false alarm which is audible for a distance of 100 feet or more from the source of the alarm, for more than 15 minutes duration; or 
(b)  The sounding of a false alarm which is audible for a distance of 100 feet or more from the source of the alarm, for more than 20 minutes within a one hour period. The sounding in this instance need not be continuous. 
(3)  It is a violation of this ordinance if there is no representative of the alarm user available to assist the police to secure the premises or reset a malfunctioning alarm. 
(4)  Violation of this ordinance shall be punishable upon conviction by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 per violation. Penalties or forfeitures imposed as a result of civil infraction proceedings shall be in addition to any fees and charges required to obtain a permit. 
(Ord. 776-89 §10, 6-12-89; Ord. 919-94, §3, 3-14-94)  
TMC 6-6-120 - Administration. 
Alarm user permits which have been issued under Ordinance 601-83 shall continue in effect until such permits expire in accordance with their term pursuant to Ordinance 601-83.1, and shall thereafter upon expiration be renewed in accordance with this ordinance. Except as otherwise provided in this section, all other provisions of this ordinance shall become operative on the effective date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. 776-89 §12, 6-12-89)  
CHAPTER 6-07 - TOBACCO USE IN PUBLIC PLACES 
Sections: 
 
TMC 6-7-010 - Definitions. 
As used in TMC chapters 6-7, 6-8 and 6-9, the following definitions apply: 
Bar means an area that is devoted to serving alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. A "bar" does not include an establishment where minors are allowed at any time, whether the minor is a patron or employee, or an establishment in which tobacco smoke can filter into areas where smoking is prohibited through a passageway, ventilation system, or other means. 
Business means sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold, professional corporations and other entities where professional services are delivered. 
Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity. 
Employer means a person or entity that employs the services of one or more individuals. 
Enclosed Area means all space between a floor and a ceiling that is exposed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doors or passageways) that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including all the internal space screened by partitions that do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid, "office landscaping" or similar structure. 
Minor means a person under the age of 18 years. 
Place of Employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer where employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges and rest rooms, conference and class rooms, cafeterias and hallways. A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Public Place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted including but not limited to banks, education facilities, health facilities, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a "public place" unless it is used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Restaurant means a coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich stand, private or public school cafeteria, and any other eating establishment that gives or sells food to the public, guests, or employees, including kitchens where food is prepared on the premises for service elsewhere, catering facilities. "Restaurant" does not include a cocktail lounge or tavern if the cocktail lounge or tavern is a "bar" as defined above. 
Retail Tobacco Store means a retail store used primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental and no minors are allowed on the premises at any time. 
Service Line means an indoor line, or portion of an indoor line that extends out of doors, at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving services of any kind, whether or not such services involves the exchange of money. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant, or other tobacco-like product or substance in any manner or in any form. 
Sports Arena means a sports pavilion, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller and ice rinks, and other places where members of the general public assemble, either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports events. 
Tobacco Product includes any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe, smokeless tobacco, chewing tobacco, or other form of tobacco that may be used for smoking, chewing, inhalation, or other means of ingestion. 
Vendor-Assisted means that only a store employee has access to the tobacco product and assists the customer by supplying the tobacco product; the customer does not take possession of the tobacco product until after it is purchased. 
(Ord. 1075-01 §1, 05-29-01)  
TMC 6-7-020 - Smoking Prohibited in Public Places. 
(1)  Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed public places within the City or located on City-owned property, including, but not limited to the following places: 
(a)  Elevators; 
(b)  Rest rooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common use areas; 
(c)  Buses, taxicabs, and other means of public transportation under the authority of the City; 
(d)  Service lines, or within ten feet of a service line that extends out of doors; 
(e)  Retail stores; 
(f)  All areas available and customarily used by the general public located in all businesses patronized by the public, including non-profit and public businesses. Affected businesses include, but are not limited to, professional offices, banks, laundromats, hotels and motels; 
(g)  Restaurants; 
(h)  A facility that is primarily used for exhibiting a motion picture, stage or drama production, lecture, music recital or other similar performances, except in performances when smoking is part of a stage or drama production; 
(i)  Sports arena, including convention halls; 
(j)  Every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings under the control of a board, council, commission, committee, or agency of the City during the time a public meeting is in progress, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the City; 
(k)  Waiting rooms, hallways, wards, and semi-private rooms of health care facilities, including but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctor's and dentist's offices; 
(l)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities; and 
(m)  Polling places. 
(2)  An owner, operator, manager, or other person who controls an establishment or facility may declare the entire establishment or facility as a non-smoking establishment. 
(Ord. 1075-01 §2, 05-29-01)  
TMC 6-7-030 - Smoking Prohibited in Places of Employment. 
(1)  Employers are responsible for providing a smoke-free work place for all employees, but employers are not required to incur expense to make structural or other physical modifications to the work places. 
(2)  Within 90 days of the effective date of this ordinance, each employer having an enclosed place of employment located within the City shall prohibit smoking in all enclosed facilities within a place of employment without exception, including common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities. 
(Ord. 1075-01 §3, 5-29-01)  
TMC 6-7-040 - Smoking Prohibited Outside Entrances. 
No person shall smoke within a reasonable distance, not less than ten feet, of an entrance of an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited or of a service line that extends out of doors. 
(Ord. 1075-01 §4, 5-29-01)  
TMC 6-7-050 - Places Where Smoking is Not Regulated. 
(1)  The following areas are not subject to any smoking restrictions contained within this section: 
(a)  Bars that meet the definition in TMC 6-7-010 of this ordinance; 
(b)  Retail tobacco stores; 
(c)  Private residences, unless the private residence is used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility during hours of operation for those uses; 
(d)  Rented motel/hotel rooms that are designated in some manner as smoking allowed rooms by the owners of the establishment renting the rooms; 
(e)  Private rooms rented for an occupancy that exceeds one month and that are not located in a private residence used as a childcare, adult day care or health care facility. 
(f)  Rooms or halls being used by a charitable, fraternal or religious organization to conduct bingo games under a license issued pursuant to ORS 464.270. 
(Ord. 1075-01 §5, 5-29-01; Ord. 1093-01 §1, 10\22-01)  
TMC 6-7-060 - Posted "No Smoking" Signs. 
(1)  The owner or person having control of a building or area where smoking is prohibited shall post "no smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across the cigarette) clearly, sufficiently, and conspicuously in every building or other area where smoking is prohibited in this chapter, including private residences used as a child care, adult day care or health care facility. 
(2)  A conspicuous sign stating that smoking is prohibited shall be posted at every entrance at every place where smoking is prohibited by this chapter. 
(Ord. 1075-01 §6, 5-29-01)  
TMC 6-7-070 - Non-Retaliation. 
It is a violation of this chapter for a person or employer to discharge, refuse to hire, or retaliate in any manner against an employee, applicant for employment, or customer because the employee, applicant, or customer reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this ordinance. 
(Ord. 1075-01 §7, 5-29-01)  
TMC 6-7-080 - Smoking in or Near Entrances to Publicly Owned Buildings. 
(1)  No person shall smoke anywhere within a publicly-owned building 
(2)  No person shall smoke within ten feet of an entrance to a publicly owned building. 
(3)  A violation of this section is a Class B infraction. 
(Ord. 1075-01 §8, 5-29-01)  
TMC 6-7-090 - Other Violations and Penalties. 
(1)  It is a violation of this chapter for every day a person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of premises subject to regulation under this chapter, fails to comply with the provisions in this chapter. 
(2)  It is a violation of this chapter for a person to smoke in an area where smoking is prohibited by this chapter. 
(3)  A person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine: 
(a)  One hundred dollars for a first violation within a 12-month period; 
(b)  Not less than $100.00 nor more than $200.00 for a second violation within a 12-month period; 
(c)  Not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00 for each additional violation of this chapter within a 12-month period. 
(4)  An employer or private citizen may file a citizen complaint to enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. 1075-01 §9, 5-29-01)  
TMC 6-7-110 - Other Laws. 
This chapter shall not be interpreted to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. 1075-01 §11, 5-29-01)  
CHAPTER 6-08 - TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND ADVERTISING 
Sections: 
 
TMC 6-8-010 - Display of Tobacco Products Prohibited. 
(1)  It is unlawful for a person, business, tobacco retailer or other establishment subject to this chapter to sell, permit to be sold, or offer for sale any tobacco product by means of self-service displays or by any means other than vendor-assisted sales. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to tobacco vending machines regulated by Oregon state law, tobacco retail stores, or to a business, retailer, or establishment that is licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission for a dispensing license and required to be posted preventing minors from access to the premises. 
(Ord. 1075-01 §12, 05-29-01)  
TMC 6-8-020 - Non-Retaliation. 
No person or employer may discharge, refuse to hire or retaliate in any manner against an employee, an applicant for employment, or customer because such employee, applicant, or customer reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1075-01 §13, 5-29-01)  
TMC 6-8-030 - Responsibility For Sale to Minors. 
A person who owns, operates, manages or is in charge of a business commits a civil violation if an employee or agent of the business violates this chapter by distributing, selling, or causing to be sold, tobacco in any form to a person less than 18 years of age. 
(Ord 1075-01 §14, 5-29-01)  
TMC 6-8-035 - Advertising Placement. 
(1)  No tobacco product advertising shall be placed below 36 inches, as measured from the establishment's natural floor. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to a tobacco retail store or business, retailer, or establishment that is presently licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission for a dispensing license, and required to be posted preventing minors from accessing the premises. 
(Ord. 1075-01§ 15, 05-29-01, Ord. 1388-16, 05-31-2016)  
TMC 6-8-040 - Other Violations and Penalties. 
(1)  It is a separate violation for each day a person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of premises, subject to regulation under this chapter, fails to comply with the provisions in this chapter. 
(2)  A person who violates this chapter is guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(3)  An employer or private citizen may file a citizen complaint to enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. 1075-01 §14, 5-29-01)  
CHAPTER 6-09 - PROHIBITING TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND INHALANT DELIVERY SYSTEMS ON CITY PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
TMC 6-9-010 - Definitions. 
Inhalant Delivery System means any noncombustible product that employs mechanical heating element, electronic element, battery, circuit, cartridge, or other system and that is capable of being used to ingest tobacco, nicotine, or other drug or plant solution, and includes electronic cigarettes, devices or products. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, grass, plant, liquid, vapor or any other tobacco or tobacco-like product or any substance in any manner or any form. This includes the use of any inhalant delivery system, electronic smoking device, or other delivery devices, which creates smoke, vapor, aerosol or any other byproduct, in any manner or in any form. 
Tobacco Product means any product that contains tobacco or nicotine, or is derived from tobacco or nicotine. This includes all combustible, smokeless and electronic products and devices, and includes smokeless tobacco products such as dips, snuffs, and chewing tobacco. 
Tobacco Use means smoking, inhaling, exhaling, vaping, use of an inhalant delivery system, use of an electronic cigarette or other smoking device, the use of smokeless tobacco products, dips, snuffs, chewing tobacco, and any other ingestion or consumption of a tobacco product. 
(Ord. 1388-16, 05-31-2016)  
TMC 6-9-020 - Tobacco Use and Use of Inhalant Delivery Systems Prohibited on City Premises. 
(1)  Tobacco use, smoking, and the use of any inhalant delivery system is prohibited in the following areas: 
(a)  All property owned or managed by the City of Tualatin or the Tualatin Development Commission, including but not limited to libraries, civic facilities, parklands, plazas, commons, open spaces, easements, and greenways; 
(b)  All parking lots owned or managed by the City of Tualatin or the Tualatin Development Commission; and 
(c)  All sidewalks and landscaped areas immediately adjacent to those areas identified in subsections (1)(a) and (1)(b). 
(2)  The City Manager is directed to post signs in appropriate locations to provide public notice of these prohibitions. 
(Ord. 1388-16, 05-31-2016)  
TMC 6-9-030 - Exceptions to Prohibition of Tobacco Use on City Premises. 
The provisions of TMC 6-9-020 do not apply to United States Food and Drug Administration approved tobacco cessation products or other United States Food and Drug Administration approved prescription medications. 
(Ord. 1388-16, 05-31-2016)  
TMC 6-9-040 - Violation is Civil Infraction. 
A person who violates or refuses to comply with this Chapter commits a civil infraction and is subject to a fine. The amount of the fine will be $100.00 for the first violation and $500.00 for each subsequent violation occurring within 12 months of the first violation. Each violation of this Chapter constitutes a separate civil infraction. 
(Ord. 1388-16, 05-31-2016)  
CHAPTER 6-10 - GRAFFITI 
Sections: 
 
TMC 6-10-010 - Definitions. 
Abate means to remove graffiti from the public view. 
Aerosol Paint Container means any aerosol container adapted or made for spraying paint. 
Etching Device means a glass cutter, awl or any device capable of scratching or etching the surface of any structure or personal property. 
Felt Tip Marker means an indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-fourth inch. 
Graffiti means any inscription, word, figure, or design that is marked etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on any surface with paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar substance, regardless of content, which is visible from premises open to the public, such as public rights-of-way or other publicly-owned property, and that has been placed upon any real or personal property, such as buildings, fences, and structures, without authorization from the owner or responsible party. 
Graffiti Implement means an aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker, an etching device, or a graffiti stick. 
Graffiti Nuisance Property means a property upon which graffiti has been placed and such graffiti has been permitted to remain for more than seven days after the property owner of record or occupant has been issued written notification. 
Graffiti Stick means a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-fourth of an inch wide. 
Manager means the Tualatin City Manager or the manager's designee who is responsible for the administration of the graffiti nuisance abatement program under this chapter. 
Occupant means any person, tenant, sub-lessee, successor or assignee that has control over property. 
Owner means any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a property and includes but not limited to a mortgagor in possession, an occupant, or a person, agent, firm or corporation that owns or exercises control over items of property, such as utility poles, drop boxes, postal collection boxes, and other types of containers. 
Permit means to knowingly allow, suffer, acquiesce by a failure, refusal or neglect to abate. 
Premises Open to the Public means all public spaces, including but not limited to streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, rights-of-way and public open space, and private property onto which the public is regularly invited or permitted to enter for any purpose. 
Property means any real or personal property, including but not limited to items affixed or appurtenant to real property or premises, house, building, fence, or structure, and items of machinery, drop boxes, waste containers, utility poles and vaults, and post office collection boxes. 
Responsible Party means an owner, an entity or person acting as an agent for an owner by agreement, that has authority over the property or is responsible for the property's maintenance or management. There may be more than one party responsible for a particular property. 
Unauthorized means without consent of the owner, occupant or responsible party. 
(Ord. 1205-06, 3-13-06)  
TMC 6-10-020 - Graffiti Prohibited. 
(1)  It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to place or put by any means, any drawing, inscription, figure, symbol, mark, or any type of commonly known graffiti on any public or private property without the consent of the owner of the premises on which the property is located, or upon natural surfaces such as rocks, trees or any surface whatsoever. It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to solicit or command another person to apply graffiti or aid or abet another person in applying graffiti. 
(2)  A violation of subsection (1) of this section is a violation punishable by a maximum fine not to exceed $360.00. Each wall or object upon which graffiti is placed constitutes a separate violation. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues is a separate violation. 
(Ord. 1205-06, 3-13-06)  
TMC 6-10-030 - Possession of Graffiti Implement Prohibited. 
(1)  No person may possess, with the intent to unlawfully apply graffiti on any real or personal property of another, any graffiti implement. 
(2)  Unlawful possession of a graffiti implement is a violation of this chapter punishable by a maximum fine not to exceed $90.00. Each day on which a violation occurs is a separate violation. 
(3)  In addition to issuing a citation, a graffiti implement used or possessed in violation of this section may be immediately seized and impounded by the police department. The court, upon disposition of the issued citation, shall determine whether the instrument shall be returned to the defendant or deemed to be contraband subject to destruction under Oregon law. 
(Ord. 1205-06, 3-13-06)  
TMC 6-10-040 - Other Violations. 
(1)  Any property located in the City of Tualatin that becomes a graffiti nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and is subject to its remedies. 
(2)  Every responsible party who permits a property to become a graffiti nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies. 
(Ord. 1205-06, 3-13-06)  
TMC 6-10-050 - Community Service. 
In lieu of a portion of any fine that may be imposed under TMC 6-10-020 and 6-10-030, the court shall order the violator to perform community service, unless the court finds that special circumstances exist that would preclude such service. Reasonable effort shall be made to require the violator to perform a type of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most rehabilitative effect on the person, preferably community service that constitutes in significant part the removal of graffiti. 
(Ord. 1205-06, 3-13-06)  
TMC 6-10-060 - Graffiti Removal; Notice and Procedures. 
(1)  The owner or occupant of any property within the City of Tualatin shall remove any graffiti from that property within seven days of the graffiti's appearance. 
(2)  Whenever the Manager determines that graffiti exists on any property in the City, the Manager may issue an abatement notice. The owner or occupant shall have seven days after the date of service of the notice to remove the graffiti. 
(3)  The notice shall be served by addressing the notice to the owner and occupant and delivering it by personal service or by mailing it as certified mail. Service may also be accomplished by posting the notice in a clearly visible location on the subject property. 
(4)  If the person who was served the notice is unable to remove, or cause to remove, the graffiti within the seven-day period due to a hardship, he or she may apply to the Manager for an extension of time in which to remove the graffiti. For purposes of this subsection, "hardship" includes but is not limited to serious illness or disability, extremely inclement weather that temporarily prevents removal of the graffiti, or other extraordinary circumstance. 
(5)  If graffiti is not removed within seven days after serving notice on the owner and occupant, the Manager may cause a citation to be issued to the owner or occupant or both requiring the person to appear in Tualatin Municipal Court. 
(6)  Failure to remove graffiti as required by this section is a violation punishable by a fine of up to $150.00. Each day the graffiti remains after the notice is sent constitutes a separate offense. 
(7)  The City Manager may adopt rules and procedures to implement this chapter. 
(Ord. 1205-06, 3-13-06)  
CHAPTER 6-11 - TRUANCY 
Sections: 
 
TMC 6-11-010 - Definitions. 
Regular School Hours are the hours of the full-time school that the minor would attend in the school district where the minor resides, on any day that school is in session, or, if the school in the school district of residence is unknown, "regular school hours" are the school hours of the Tigard-Tualatin School District on any day that school is in session. 
(Ord. 1221-06, 8-28-06)  
TMC 6-11-020 - Truancy Prohibited. 
(1)  A minor who is at least seven years of age and under 18 years of age and who has not completed the 12th grade may not be upon any public property or public right-of-way during regular school hours except while attending school as required by ORS 339.010 to 339.065, unless the minor is: 
(a)  Absent from the school with the school's permission, but not including students who have been suspended or expelled; or 
(b)  Engaged in a lawful pursuit or activity that requires the minor's presence somewhere other than school during regular school hours, and which is authorized by the parent, guardian, or other person having legal care and custody of the minor; or 
(c)  Lawfully emancipated pursuant to ORS 419B.550 to 419B.558; or 
(d)  Exempt from compulsory school attendance pursuant to ORS 339.030. 
(2)  If a police officer has reasonable suspicion to believe that a minor is in violation of this section, the officer is authorized to detain the minor and make reasonable inquiry regarding a potential violation of subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  If a police officer has probable cause to believe that a minor is in violation of this section, the officer is authorized to return the minor to the custody of the school. 
(Ord. 1221-06, 8-28-06)  
TMC 6-11-030 - No Limitation of Authority. 
This chapter is not intended in any way to limit the authority of a police officer to take any other action authorized by law, including taking a minor into protective custody. 
(Ord. 1221-06, 8-28-06)  
CHAPTER 6-12 - PROHIBITED PUBLIC BEHAVIORS 
Sections: 
 
TMC 6-12-010 - Definitions. 
Alcoholic Beverage includes beer, wine, ales, alcoholic liquors and all beverages containing alcohol. 
To Camp means to set up or to remain in or at a campsite. 
Campsite means any place where any bedding, sleeping bag, or other material used for bedding purposes, or any stove or fire is placed, established or maintained for the purpose of maintaining a temporary place to live, whether or not such place incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to, shack, or any other structure, or any vehicle or part of a vehicle. 
Downtown Area means the area bounded on the north beginning at 90th and Tualatin Road along the north right-of-way to the access road by the Tualatin Country Club back to the Tualatin River then extending to include the incorporated portion of the City of Tualatin that lies north of the Tualatin River down to the intersection of the railroad tracks with the Interstate Highway 5 right-of-way; on the East by the east side of the Interstate Highway 5 right-of-way; on the South by the south side of the right-of-way of Nyberg Street through its connection with and along Tualatin-Sherwood Road to 90th; and on the West by the west side of the right-of-way of 90th Street up to its intersection with Tualatin Road. (See Map.) 
(Ord. 1238-07 §1 and Ord. 1241-07 §1, 6-11-07)  
TMC 6-12-020 - Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited in Downtown Area. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to possess an open container of alcoholic beverage upon any public street, alley or public way within the downtown area of Tualatin except as provided in subsection (2). 
(2)  The following properties are exempt from the prohibition in subsection (1): 
(a)  Licensed premises that have obtained the appropriate Oregon Liquor Control Commission license; 
(b)  The residential areas located within the Downtown Area; and 
(c)  Premises that have a valid special event permit from the city that allows alcoholic beverage consumption for that period of time. 
(Ord. 1238-07 §2, 6-11-07)  
TMC 6-12-030 - Camping Prohibited on Public Property. 
No person shall camp in or upon any sidewalk, street, alley, lane, or public right-of-way, park or any other publicly owned property or under any bridge or viaduct, unless otherwise specifically authorized by this code or by declaration of the Mayor in emergency circumstances or authorized by a City permit for a special event. 
(Ord. 1241-07 §1, 6-11-07)  
TMC 6-12-040 - Public Nudity Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person eight years of age or older to expose their genitalia while in a public place or a place visible from a public place, if the public place is open or available to persons of the opposite sex or children younger than 12 years of age. 
(Ord. 1240\07 §1, 6-11-07)  
TMC 6-12-050 - Public Urination or Defecation Prohibited. 
No person shall urinate or defecate in, or in view of, a public place, except in a lavatory or restroom. 
(Ord. 1239-07 §1, 6-11-07)  
TMC 6-12-060 - Penalty. 
A violation of a provision of this chapter is a civil infraction and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 per violation. 
(Ord. 1237-07 §1, 6-11-07)  
CHAPTER 6-13 - RENTAL HOUSING MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
TMC 6-13-005 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code is to provide minimum habitability criteria for rental residential properties to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the owners, occupants and users of residential rental buildings; and to protect the health, safety and welfare of neighbors to these properties. 
(Ord. 1264-08 §1, 7-14-08)  
TMC 6-13-010 - Oregon Residential Landlord and Tenant Act. 
This code is intended to supplement the habitability standards of the Oregon Residential Landlord and Tenant Act, ORS 90.100 et seq. 
(Ord. 1264-08 §2, 7-14-08)  
TMC 6-13-020 - Applicability and Exceptions. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, these standards apply to all buildings or portions of buildings that are legally used for human habitation, including manufactured dwelling units, and are covered by a rental agreement. 
(2)  Unless created to avoid the application of this chapter, this chapter does not govern the following arrangements: 
(a)  Residence at a governmentally licensed institution, public or private, if incidental to detention or the provision of medical, geriatric, educational, counseling, religious or similar service; 
(b)  Occupancy of a dwelling unit for not more than 90 days by a purchaser prior to the scheduled closing of a real estate sale or by a seller following the closing of a sale, as permitted under the terms of an agreement for sale of a dwelling unit or the property of which it is a part; 
(c)  Transient occupancy in a hotel or motel; 
(d)  Occupancy by a squatter; 
(e)  Vacation occupancy; 
(f)  Occupancy by an employee of a landlord whose right to occupancy is conditional on employment on the premises; 
(g)  Occupancy by an owner of a condominium unit or a hold of a proprietary lease in a cooperative; 
(h)  Travel trailers and or motor homes in an approved travel trailer or motor home park; 
(i)  A dwelling unit occupied by the owner. 
(Ord. 1264-08 §3, 7-14-08)  
TMC 6-13-030 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
Agent means a person authorized by another to act on his or her behalf. 
Building Code means the currently adopted editions of all State of Oregon Specialty Codes. 
Dwelling Unit means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons including provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Habitable Room means a room used for sleeping, living, cooking or dining purposes, but excludes closets, pantries, bath or toilet room, hallways, laundries, storage spaces, utility rooms and similar spaces. 
Group SR Occupancies means special residences where personal care is administered and that are licensed by, or subject to licensure by, or under the authority of the Oregon Department of Human Resources or other State agency. 
Major Disassembly or Major Disrepair with respect to a vehicle means that the vehicle is missing tires or wheels, body parts, or is otherwise visibly unable to be driven. 
Occupant means a person who has possessory rights in, or control over rental premises or occupies rental premises. 
Owner means the holder of legal or equitable title to real property. 
Public Employee or Public Servant means a person who is an officer or employee of a municipality, county, state or federal agency, or school district or special district. 
Rental Agreement means all agreements, written or oral, concerning the use and occupancy of a dwelling unit and premises. 
Tenant means someone who pays rent or is party to the rent payment to use residential property that is owned by someone else. Pay shall include all forms of compensation. 
Vehicle means any device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway and includes vehicles that are propelled or powered by any means but does not include a manufactured structure. 
(Ord. 1264-08 §4, 7-14-08)  
TMC 6-13-040 - Standards. 
All rental units and buildings subject to this chapter shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Structural Integrity. 
(a)  Roofs, floors, walls, foundations and all other structural components shall be capable of resisting any reasonable stresses and loads to which these components may be subjected. 
(b)  Structural components shall be of materials allowed and/or approved by the Building Code. 
(2)  Plumbing. 
(a)  Plumbing systems shall be installed and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition and shall be free of defects, leaks and obstructions. 
(b)  Plumbing components shall be of materials allowed or approved by the Building Code. 
(3)  Heating. 
(a)  There shall be a permanently installed heat source with the ability to provide a room temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit three feet above the floor, measured in the approximate center of the room, in all habitable rooms. 
(b)  All heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type and maintained for proper working condition. 
(c)  Ventilation for fuel-burning heating appliances shall be as required by the Building Code. 
(4)  Weatherproofing. 
(a)  Roof, exterior walls, windows, gutters, down spouts and doors shall be maintained to prevent water leakage into the living areas that may cause damage to the structure or its contents or may adversely affect the health and safety of an occupant. 
(b)  Repairs must be permanent, not temporary, and shall be through generally accepted construction methods. 
(5)  Electrical. 
(a)  All buildings used for residential purposes shall be connected to an approved source of electric power and every habitable room shall contain at least one operable outlet and one operable light fixture or two operable outlets. 
(b)  Every public hallway and stairway shall be adequately lighted. 
(6)  Ceiling Heights. 
(a)  Habitable rooms shall have a clear ceiling height of seven foot six inches in existing buildings except as provided in (b) of this subsection. 
(b)  In basements, attics and half-stories, ceiling height may be not less than seven foot zero inches. 
(7)  Smoke Detectors. Smoke detectors shall be installed and maintained in working order in each sleeping room, in the immediate vicinity of a sleeping room or area designated for sleeping and on each floor. 
(8)  Overcrowding. No dwelling shall be overcrowded. For purposes of this section square footage of a single-family residential building will be based on the county assessor's office square footage for that building. For multifamily residential buildings, the square footage shall be as shown on the property owner's documents or the City's records. If the property owner disagrees with the square footage of a single family home, including condominiums and town homes, duplex, triplex or quadplex, the property owner must contact the county assessor's office and fill out a square footage correction form. If the property owner disagrees with the square footage of a multi-family apartment complex, the City Manager or designee may measure the dwelling unit for a fee, which is listed on the City fee schedule. To determine a dwelling unit's occupancy load, the City will divide the square footage by 225 and round any fraction to the next higher number. For example, seven occupants would be allowed in a 1,500 square foot residence. 
(9)  Parking. Refer to Section 73.370(2) of the Tualatin Development Code. 
(10)  The exterior of the structure, including lawns and adjacent rights-of-way shall be maintained and be free of nuisances as follows: 
(a)  The property shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage or appliances. Approved containers for rubbish and garbage shall be provided by the owner. All residential rental owners will insure that tenants have trash service within 14 days of occupying the rental property. Rubbish, garbage, recycle and yard debris containers may be placed on the street for pick-up no sooner than 24 hours before pick-up and shall be removed within 24 hours after pick-up. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be kept on the residential property for more than five days in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled, unless it is stored within a permitted structure. 
(c)  All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, window frames, doors, doorframes, cornices, porches, siding and trim shall be maintained in good condition. If rental property is remodeled, receives damage or graffiti the owner must insure that the repair matches the existing exterior of the structure. 
(d)  Tarps or similar material shall not be used as a repair or replacement for a customary building component, such as a roof, siding or door, except for emergency repairs or temporary replacements during construction. However, no such use may exceed 90 days in any 12-month period and cannot violate the Building or Fire Codes. 
(e)  Lawns, shrubbery, and trees (this includes front, side, and backyards along with landscape planters along the street frontage and reverse frontage); lawns (areas containing turf grasses) shall be kept trimmed to a height of not more than the ten inches or below the height at which the generation of pollen and the forming of seeds occurs, excluding ornamental grasses used in landscaping. 
Shrubbery shall be kept trimmed and free from undergrowth of weeds, vines, and saplings, and free from dead or dying branches. Trees shall be kept pruned and free from dead or dying limbs and branches hazardous to persons or property. Landscaped areas may not contain weeds that reach a height of more than ten inches or below the height at which the generation of pollen and the forming of seeds occurs. Dead or decaying organic material from lawns, weeds, trees, or shrubs must be removed regularly. 
(f)  Unsightly items that would normally be stored in a garage or storage shed may not be stored outside of such a garage, shed or sight-obstructing structure for more than seven days. 
(g)  Motor vehicles, trailers, or recreational vehicles parked on the property shall be parked in the driveway or in a paved or graveled area parallel to the driveway farthest from the residence. No additional portion of a landscaped area shall be paved that is in front of the single family or multifamily residence unless specifically allowed in another section of the Tualatin Development Code. 
(h)  Sidewalks, driveways, patios, and other paved surfaces will be kept clean and properly maintained. 
(i)  Fences will be maintained and in good condition. Damage to fences must be repaired within 14 days. 
(j)  Graffiti standards are located in the Tualatin Municipal Code Chapter 6-10, which may be enforced under this section. 
(11)  Enforcement. The City Manager or designee is authorized and directed to enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. 1264-08 §5, 7-14-08; Ord. 1293-09 §1, 11-23-09)  
TMC 6-13-050 - Complaint Processes. 
(1)  Complaint Process—Tenant: 
(a)  Before the City will investigate a complaint made by a tenant, the tenant shall submit his or her written complaint to the owner or agent at least ten days before the complaint is submitted to the City to afford the owner or agent the opportunity to correct the problem. If the owner or agent does not respond or fails to correct the problem the tenant may submit the complaint to the City. 
(b)  A complaint must be in writing and may be filed in person, by mail, by email, or fax. 
(2)  The complaint shall contain at least the following information: 
(a)  The name of the person filing the complaint. No complaints may be submitted anonymously; 
(b)  The name of the owner and/or the owner's resident agent; 
(c)  The address of the alleged violation; 
(d)  A complete description of the alleged violation; 
(e)  A copy of the written notice of the alleged violation that has been sent by the tenant to the landlord. 
(3)  The person who files the complaint must be a party to the current rental agreement covering the property or an agent of this party. 
(4)  The City shall process complaints using the following procedure: 
(a)  Confirm that the complainant has standing to file the complaint; 
(b)  Confirm that the allegation in the complaint, if proven to be true, would be a violation of this chapter; 
(c)  Confirm that the owner or agent has had seven days, plus three days for mailing in accordance with ORS 90.150, since the tenant mailed the written notice to the owner, to respond to the complaint; 
(d)  Once the requirements in subsections (a), (b) and (c) are confirmed, notify the owner that the complaint has been submitted to the City. For purposes of this ordinance, all notices and orders will be sent by first class and certified mail to the address on file at the county assessor's office unless otherwise directed by the owner. 
(5)  Complaint Process—Public Servant or Public Employee: 
(a)  If the City Manager or designee, other public servant or public employee observes apparent violations or has a reasonable belief that violations of TMC 6-13-040 exist on the property, the City Manager or designee may institute an investigation. 
(b)  If the public employee files a complaint, the employee must have been conducting an activity for his or her normal course of work at the time the employee noticed the violation of TMC 6-13-040. 
(6)  Complaint Process—All Others: 
(a)  All persons may file complaints for suspected overcrowding and the exterior standards listed in TMC 6-13-040(9) of these rental housing maintenance standards. 
(b)  A complaint must be in writing and may be filed in person, by mail, by email, or fax. The complaint shall contain at least the following information: 
(i)  The name of the person filing the complaint. No complaints may be submitted anonymously; 
(ii)  The address of the alleged violation; 
(iii)  A complete description of the alleged violation. 
(c)  The City shall process complaints using the following procedure: 
(i)  Confirm that the complaint alleges a violation of an exterior or overcrowding standard; 
(ii)  Confirm that the allegation in the complaint, if proven to be true, would be a violation of this chapter; 
(iii)  Once the requirements of (a) and (b) are confirmed, notify the owner that the complaint has been submitted to the City. 
(Ord. 1264-08 §6, 7-14-08)  
TMC 6-13-055 - Investigations; Notices and Orders. 
(1)  If the City Manager or designee observes apparent violations or has a reasonable belief that violations of this chapter exist on the property, the City Manager may institute an investigation. 
(2)  Investigations. 
(a)  Upon confirmation that the requirements in TMC 6-13-050 have been met, staff will conduct an investigation to confirm the validity of the complaint. 
(b)  If the City determines that the complaint is not valid, the City will close the case and notify all parties of the closure. 
(c)  If the City determines that the complaint is valid, City staff will issue a notice and order. 
(3)  Inspection and Right of Entry. When it may be necessary to inspect to enforce the provisions of this chapter, City staff may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this chapter as follows: 
(a)  If the building or premises are occupied, staff shall present credentials to the occupant and request entry. 
(b)  If the building or premises are unoccupied, staff shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. 
(c)  If entry is refused, staff may follow the procedures to obtain an administrative warrant to inspect the premises. 
(4)  Notices and Orders. 
(a)  For valid complaints, staff shall issue a notice and order to the owner. The notice and order shall include the following: 
(i)  The street address; 
(ii)  A statement that the City staff has found the premises to be in violation of this chapter as alleged in the complaint; 
(iii)  A description of the violation; 
(iv)  A statement advising the owner that if the required repairs are not completed within seven days, plus three days for mailing from the date of the notice and order, then staff will: 
(A)  Record the notice and order against the property; 
(B)  Coordinate the issuance of a citation to the owner to appear in Municipal Court; 
(C)  Initiate action to recover all City costs associated with processing the complaint, investigation and the resolution of the issue. 
(v)  A statement advising the owner that he or she may appeal the final municipal court decision to the circuit court; 
(vi)  The date by which repairs must be completed and a reinspection scheduled. 
(b)  The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be posted on the premises and shall be served on the owner by first class mail. 
(c)  A residential rental property that receives the same complaint within 12 months of a previous complaint that was noticed and ordered may receive a citation without going through subsection 4 of TMC 6-13-055. This does not apply if the ownership of the property has changed by 100 percent. 
(5)  Failure to Comply. If the owner does not comply with the notice and order by the specified date, staff will: 
(a)  Issue a citation to the owner to appear in Municipal Court; 
(b)  Record the notice and order against the property with all recording costs to the responsibility of the owner; 
(c)  Initiate an accounting for all costs associated with processing the complaint, investigation and the resolution of the issue, then proceed with City procedures to collect these costs from the owner. 
(6)  Penalties. 
(a)  A person who is found guilty by the court of violating a provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 per violation. Each day that a violation exists constitutes a separate violation. 
(b)  Upon conviction of a third offense in a 12-month period for a single family rental residence or a duplex, or conviction of a sixth offense in a 12-month period for a multifamily property, the court shall order the owner to appear at a City Council meeting. 
(7)  Appeals. The Municipal Court decision may be appealed to the Circuit Court within ten days of the final order of the Municipal Court. 
(Ord. 1264-08 §7, 7-14-08)  
TMC 6-13-060 - Fees. 
(1)  To offset the costs to the City associated with the enforcement of this code, an owner shall obtain a business license to operate residential rental property from the City and pay an annual fee of $10.00 per dwelling unit covered by a rental agreement. 
(2)  Although the following are subject to the standards, enforcement procedures, and other requirements established in this Chapter, the following unit types are exempt from the fee payment requirements of the section: 
(a)  Rentals with a recorded deed restriction that require units to be rented affordably to households at or below 50 percent of the Area Median Income; 
(b)  Rentals under contract with a public agency that require the rental to be inspected at least annually and verifies that the dwelling is rented to a low income household; and 
(c)  Rentals designated as senior or disabled housing by a public agency. 
(3)  The owner is responsible for paying the annual fee upon written notice. 
(4)  Failure to pay the fee as required will subject the owner to the following actions: 
(a)  A penalty of $100.00 will be assessed to the owner for each unpaid per unit fee if the annual fee is not paid by the date specified in the written request for payment. 
(b)  The City will initiate appropriate action to collect the fees due and all costs associated with the collection process will be assessed to the owner. 
(c)  Appropriate action may include placing a lien on the property. 
(d)  The property owner's residential rental property license may be revoked by the City Council. Until all such fees are paid for the subject property and the license reissued, the property shall not be rented, leased, or occupied. 
(Ord. 1264-08 §8, 7-14-08)  
CHAPTER 6-14 - NOISE ORDINANCE 
Sections: 
 
TMC 6-14-010 - Purpose. 
The City Council finds it is in the public interest to minimize exposure to the potentially negative physiological and psychological effects of excessive noise and to protect, promote and preserve the public health, safety and welfare. The purpose of this Chapter is to control the level of noise in a manner that promotes the health of its citizens, the use, value and enjoyment of property, and the conduct of business in a manner that reduces unnecessary and excessive sound in the environment. 
(Ord. 1361-13 §1, 10-14-13)  
TMC 6-14-020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context specifically requires otherwise, as used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases mean: 
Animals mean any domesticated animal including, but not limited to: dogs, cats, and bird. 
City Manager means the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. 
Dynamic Braking Device means a braking device used primarily on trucks and busses to convert a motor from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purposes of vehicle braking without the use of wheel brakes. 
Motor Vehicle means a vehicle that is self-propelled or designed for self-propulsion. 
Noise Disturbance means any sound that: (a) injures or endangers the health or safety of a person; (b) disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities from enjoying their private real property; or (c) injures or endangers personal or real property. 
Noise Sensitive Property means real property normally used for sleeping, or any real property used as a school, daycare facility, place of worship, hospital, or public library. 
Plainly Audible means the listener can clearly hear the sound produced by a sound source with unaided hearing facilities. Sounds which may be plainly audible include, but are not limited to: musical rhythms, engine noises, spoken words or phrases even though not clearly discernible and other vocal sounds. 
Power Equipment means power tools or equipment including, but not limited to: lawn mowers, leaf blowers, lawn edgers, snow removal equipment, hand tools, saws, drills and/or other similar lawn or construction tools, when used for home or building repair, maintenance, landscaping, alteration, or home manual arts projects. 
Sound Producing, Amplifying, or Reproducing Equipment means any device that produces or amplifies sound, including, but not limited to: musical instruments, radios, televisions, stereos, portable audio devices, amplifiers, or loudspeakers. 
(Ord. 1361-13 §1, 10-14-13)  
TMC 6-14-030 - Noise Disturbance Prohibited. 
No person shall knowingly create, permit, or assist in the creation or continuance of any noise disturbance. 
(Ord. 1361-13 §1, 10-14-13)  
TMC 6-14-040 - Specific Noise Disturbances Prohibited. 
Except when allowed by a permit issued by the City, the following are noise disturbances per se: 
(1)  Sound Equipment. It is unlawful to operate or use, or to permit the operation or use, of sound producing, amplifying, or reproducing equipment in such a manner that the sound produced thereby is plainly audible: 
(a)  Within any noise sensitive property, other than the place where the sound originates; or 
(b)  On public property or public right-of-way located 150 feet from the place where the sound originates. 
(2)  Animals. It is unlawful to keep, or permit the keeping of, any animal that barks, cries, whimpers, crows, clucks, or makes any other sound on a frequent or continuous basis for 15 minutes or longer and that is plainly audible within a noise sensitive property, other than the place where the sound originates. 
(3)  Power Equipment. It is unlawful to operate, or to permit the operation of, any power equipment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(4)  Dynamic Braking Devices. It is unlawful to use a dynamic braking device on any motor vehicle, except to avoid imminent danger to persons or property. 
(5)  Idling Engines on Motor Vehicles. It is unlawful to operate an idling engine for more than 15 consecutive minutes between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(6)  Motor Vehicle Repair and Testing. It is unlawful to repair or test any motor vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner that is plainly audible within a noise sensitive property. 
(Ord. 1361-13 §1, 10-14-13)  
TMC 6-14-050 - Exceeding Decibel Level. 
No person shall knowingly create, permit, or assist in the creation or continuance of any noise from any sound source that exceeds the following decibel levels, measured from the property line of the recipient property: 
(1)  Where the recipient property is a noise sensitive property: 
(a)  Fifty decibels at any time between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day, or 
(b)  Seventy decibels at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(2)  Any other property: 
(a)  Sixty decibels between 10:00 pm. and 7:00 a.m. the following day; or 
(b)  Eighty decibels at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. 1361-13 §1, 10-14-13)  
TMC 6-14-060 - Exceptions. 
The prohibitions of Section 6-14-030 to 6-14-050 do not apply to the following: 
(1)  Government Facilities. Sounds emanating from parks, libraries, or other government facilities that comply with rules or regulations promulgated by the government authority that owns or manages the facility; 
(2)  Community Events. Sounds created by community events, such as: events, parades, public fireworks displays, street fairs, school events, athletic events, and festivals approved by the City or other governmental entity with authority over the location of the community event; 
(3)  Emergency Sounds. Sounds caused by emergency work, emergency equipment, vehicles and apparatus, regardless of whether such work is performed by a public or private agency, or upon public or private property, and emergency warning devices and alarm systems; 
(4)  Industrial, Agricultural, Construction and Demolition. Sounds caused by industrial, agricultural, construction, or demolition activities when performed during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., seven days a week or otherwise under a permit issued by the City or other governmental authority with jurisdiction; 
(5)  Traffic. Sounds caused by regular vehicular traffic emanating from premises open to the public in compliance with state law. Regular vehicle traffic does not include a single vehicle that creates noise or sound in violation of this Chapter; 
(6)  Holiday Sounds. Sounds caused by legal fireworks on the third of July, Fourth of July, and the Friday and Saturday during the weekend closest to the Fourth of July of each year; between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. and sounds made between midnight and 12:30 a.m. on January 1 of each year; and 
(7)  Federal and State Law. Sounds regulated by federal or state law, including: but not limited to, sounds caused by railroads or aircraft. 
(Ord. 1361-13 §1, 10-14-13)  
TMC 6-14-070 - Variances. 
(1)  Any person who owns, controls, or operates any sound source which does not comply with a provision of this chapter may apply for a variance. 
(2)  Any person seeking a variance must submit an application in writing to the City that contains the following: 
(a)  A reference to the provision of this Chapter for which the variance is sought; 
(b)  The reason the variance is necessary; 
(c)  The type and physical characteristics of the sound; 
(d)  The times when the sound will be emitted and its anticipated duration; 
(e)  A site plan sketch showing the area of sound generation and whether the uses in the area within 400 feet of the source of the sound are commercial, industrial, or noise sensitive, or a combination thereof; 
(f)  Any other supporting information related to the variance criteria in TMC 6-14-080; and 
(g)  An application fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 1361-13 §1, 10-14-13)  
TMC 6-14-080 - Variance Criteria. 
(1)  In determining whether to grant or deny the variance, the City Manager must consider the application materials and any other information deemed appropriate by the City Manager. 
(2)  The City Manager may grant a variance when it appears that: 
(a)  There are unnecessary or unreasonable hardships or practical difficulties which can be most effectively relieved by granting the variance; 
(b)  That the public health and safety provisions of the City code, exclusive of this Chapter, will not be violated if a variance is granted; and 
(c)  That granting the variance will not be unreasonable detrimental to the public welfare. 
(3)  In making the decision, the City Manager must consider such factors as the potential impacts on businesses and noise sensitive properties within 400 feet, the time of day, the day of the week, the proposed type and amount of amplification and any secondary noise consequences. 
(Ord. 1361-13 §1, 10-14-13)  
TMC 6-14-090 - Variance Decision. 
(1)  The City Manager shall grant or deny a variance within 30 business days of receipt of a completed variance application. The City Manager may impose such limitations, conditions, and safeguards as deemed appropriate, so that the intent of this Chapter will be met, and the public safety and welfare secured. A violation of any such condition or limitation shall constitute a violation of this Chapter. 
(2)  A decision to grant or deny a variance must be in writing and must state the reasons for the decision. The City Manager must notify the applicant of the decision in writing. 
(Ord. 1361-13 §1, 10-14-13)  
TMC 6-14-100 - Appeal. 
(1)  The applicant may appeal a variance decision to the City Council by submitting a request for appeal within 14 days from the date of the City Manager's decision. 
(2)  To file an appeal, the applicant must submit the following information to the City Recorder: 
(a)  The name of the applicant for the variance; 
(b)  The claimed reasons the City Manager's decision was in error; and 
(c)  The appeal fee, as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(3)  Upon receipt of the completed appeal request, the City Recorder shall place the matter on the agenda for the next regular City Council meeting for hearing. 
(4)  At the hearing, the City Council shall hear from the applicant, the City Manager, and any other person deemed appropriate by the City Council. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Council must decide whether to grant or deny a variance based on the variance criteria in TMC 6-14-080. The City Council may impose such limitations, conditions, and safeguards as deemed appropriate, so that the intent of this Chapter will be met, and the public safety and welfare secured. The City Council's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. 1361-13 §1, 10-14-13)  
TMC 6-14-110 - Evidence of Noise Violation. 
(1)  To establish a violation in an enforcement action based on sections 6-14-030 and 6-14-040 requires the evidence of at least two persons from different households. Any police officer, code enforcement officer, or other city employee who witnessed the violation shall be counted as a witness for purposes of the two witness requirement. 
(2)  To establish a violation in an enforcement action based on TMC 6-14-050 requires the evidence of a sound measurement device that: 
(a)  Is in good operating condition; 
(b)  Meets the requirements of a Type I or Type II meter; 
(c)  Contains at least an A-weighted scale and both fast and slow meter response; 
(d)  Was operated by a person trained in the use of a sound meter and used in a manner consistent with that training. 
(Ord. 1361-13 §1, 10-14-13)  
TMC 6-14-115 - Violation is Civil Infraction. 
(1)  A violation of any provision of this Chapter is a civil infraction and punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $250.00 
(2)  A violation of the same or a similar noise disturbance within six months of having received a citation or other notice of a violation of this Chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00, imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both. 
(3)  The civil infraction procedures in TMC 7-1 apply to the prosecution of any violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1361-13 §1, 10-14-13)  
CHAPTER 6-15 - KEEPING OF BACKYARD CHICKENS 
Sections: 
 
TMC 6-15-005 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards for keeping backyard chickens for domestic purposes and to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Tualatin. 
(Ord. 1362-13 §1, 11-25-13)  
TMC 6-15-010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
Chicken means Gallus gallus domesticus, a domestic fowl believed to be descended from the red jungle fowl of southeastern Asia and developed in a number of breeds. 
City Manager means the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. 
Chicken Facility means a coop, a run, or a combination of a coop and a run. 
Coop means a structure that provides roofed shelter for chickens. 
Hen means an adult female chicken. 
Licensee means the person granted a license to keep chickens. 
Run means an enclosed or fenced area either surrounding or separate from the coop in which poultry are kept and allowed to walk, run about, peck and otherwise move freely. 
Rodent means a mouse or rat. 
Rooster means a male chicken over four months of age. 
Vector means any insect organism; including, but not limited to: flies, fleas, lice, ticks, fly maggots and mosquito larvae capable of bearing or carrying a disease transmittable to human beings. 
Vermin means any rodent or vector. 
(Ord. 1362-13 §1, 11-25-13)  
TMC 6-15-020 - License to Keep Chickens Required. 
(1)  A person must not keep chickens within the City of Tualatin, unless the person has a valid license issued by the City of Tualatin for such purpose. 
(2)  The license to keep chickens is valid for a period of five years, and may be renewed for additional five-year terms. The process for renewal shall be the same as for acquiring a license. 
(Ord. 1362-13 §1, 11-25-13)  
TMC 6-15-030 - Conditions of License. 
Every licensee must comply with the following conditions at all times: 
(1)  The place where the chickens are to be kept must be within a planning district that allows the keeping of chickens as a use; 
(2)  A maximum of four hens are permitted on any one lot; 
(3)  Roosters are prohibited; 
(4)  Harvesting or butchering of a chicken is prohibited; 
(5)  Chickens must be confined at all times within a chicken facility; unless, within a fenced yard and under the direct supervision of the licensee; 
(6)  The chicken facility must be located in the rear yard of a lot and be at least ten feet from all property lines and 25 feet from all residences; 
(7)  The chicken facility must not exceed 200 square feet in floor space; 
(8)  The chicken facility must not exceed a height of eight feet measured from the tallest part of the roof surface to the ground; 
(9)  The coop must have at least three enclosed sides. The fourth side may be open with the open side facing away from all neighboring property lines; 
(10)  The chicken facility and the place where the chickens are located must be maintained in good repair, in a clean and sanitary condition, and free of vermin, and obnoxious smells and substances that create a nuisance for adjoining property; and 
(11)  Chicken feed must be properly stored in a vermin-proof container or receptacle. 
(Ord. 1362-13 §1, 11-25-13)  
TMC 6-15-040 - License Application. 
(1)  An application for a license to keep chickens must include the following: 
(a)  The name and mailing address of the person seeking the license; 
(b)  The address where the chickens will be kept; 
(c)  A description of the chicken facility to be utilized, its dimensions, a description of the site, including notation of setbacks; 
(d)  The names and addresses of all owners of property adjoining the location where the chickens are proposed to be kept; 
(e)  A certification by the person seeking a license that the person agrees to abide by the license provisions of this Chapter for the duration of the license term; and 
(f)  The payment of the licensing fee, as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(2)  The City must grant a license within 30 days of receipt of a complete and valid application. 
(3)  An application for a license to keep chickens, or a renewal of a license, may be denied for any of the following reasons: 
(a)  The application materials contain any inaccurate, misleading, or incomplete statements; 
(b)  The applicant previously failed to comply with the conditions of the license issued; or 
(c)  Other activity by the person seeking the license that presents reasonable doubt about the person's ability to comply with the license conditions or otherwise endanger the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
(Ord. 1362-13 §1, 11-25-13)  
TMC 6-15-050 - Notice of License to Neighboring Properties. 
Within ten business days following approval of a license application, the City shall provide written notice by first class mail to all property owners immediately adjacent to the licensee's property. The notice must list the name and address of the licensee and the City's contact information for persons to seek information or file complaints. 
(Ord. 1362-13 §1, 11-25-13)  
TMC 6-15-060 - Complaint Processes. 
(1)  Any person may file a complaint alleging a violation of this Chapter by submitting a written complaint to the City of Tualatin. The complaint must contain the following information: 
(a)  The name of the person filing the complaint; 
(b)  The address of the alleged violation; and 
(c)  A complete description of the alleged violation. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the complaint, the City Manager must determine if the complaint alleges a violation of this Chapter, and if so, conduct an investigation of the complaint. If the City Manager determines that the complaint is not valid, the case will be closed and all parties will be notified of the closure. 
(a)  If after investigating the complaint, the City Manager determines a violation has occurred, the City Manager may issue a warning or citation. 
(Ord. 1362-13 §1, 11-25-13)  
TMC 6-15-070 - Inspection of Premises; Administrative Warrant. 
When it is necessary to inspect the premises to investigate or enforce the provisions of this Chapter, the City Manager may, with the owner's permission, enter the premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this Chapter, or must otherwise seek an administrative warrant. The process for seeking inspection of a premise is as follows: 
(1)  If the single-family dwelling or premises are occupied, the City Manager must present credentials to the occupant and request permission to enter. 
(2)  If the single-family dwelling or premises are unoccupied, the City Manager must make a reasonable effort to locate the owner/keeper or other person having charge or control of the single-family dwelling or premises and request permission to enter. 
(3)  If entry is refused or the dwelling unit or premises are unoccupied, the City Manager must obtain an administrative warrant before entry or inspection of the premises. 
(Ord. 1362-13 §1, 11-25-13)  
TMC 6-15-080 - Abatement of Violations. 
In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the City may cause any violation of this Chapter to be abated as provided by the abatement proceedings in TMC 6-04-170 through 6-04-240. 
(Ord. 1362-13 §1, 11-25-13)  
TMC 6-15-090 - Violation is Civil Infraction. 
(1)  A person who violates or refuses to comply with this Chapter commits a civil infraction and shall be subject to a fine of up to $500.00. Each violation, and each day that a violation continues, constitutes a separate civil infraction. 
(2)  In addition to any other remedy provided by law, a person that commits more than two violations of this Chapter within any six-month period may have their license revoked for up to one year. 
(3)  The civil infraction procedures in TMC 7-01 apply to the prosecution of any violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1362-13 §1, 11-25-13)  
TITLE 7 - UNIFORM CIVIL INFRACTION PROCEDURE 
Chapters:  
CHAPTER 7-01 - UNIFORM CIVIL INFRACTION PROCEDURE 
Sections: 
 
TMC 7-1-010 - Establishment, Purpose and Title. 
(1)  A procedure to handle violations of City ordinances as civil infractions, subject to the provisions set forth below, is established, pursuant to Sections 4, 5, and 21 of the City of Tualatin Charter. 
(2)  The civil infraction procedure is established for the purpose of decriminalizing penalties for violations of certain ordinances and for the purpose of providing a convenient and practical forum for the civil hearing and determination of cases arising out of said violations. 
(3)  Acts or omissions to act which are processed pursuant to this chapter or are designated an infraction or violation by City ordinance shall be punishable even though the responsible party does not knowingly or intentionally violate the provisions of such ordinances. The mere fact that an infraction exists and that a person is responsible or owns or controls the property on which the infraction occurs is sufficient to initiate enforcement proceedings and to impose penalties. A person may be found liable, responsible and guilty of an alleged infraction by reason of ownership, control or possession of property on which the in-fraction exists, has existed or by reason of such person being the proximate cause of such infraction. 
(4)  This ordinance shall be known as the "Uniform Civil Infraction Procedure Ordinance." 
(5)  It is intended that the adoption of this ordinance shall have no effect on the prosecution or enforcement of any offense, violation or crime committed or made punishable under the law existing prior to the adoption of this ordinance. Acts, omissions or conditions which constitute an offense or violation, which occurred or arose prior to the adoption of this ordinance, and for which no complaint or other judicial action has been filed, shall be enforced pursuant to this chapter. 
(6)  Except in instances where the City has expended its own resources to remedy or correct a condition which violates City ordinances or codes and, therefore, utilizes procedures provided by this chapter to recover its costs and expenses from a responsible party, the purpose of this ordinance is to provide an effective remedy for obtaining compliance with City ordinances and codes. The procedures outlined in this chapter provide a party who is allegedly responsible for a violation and the City with a convenient, impartial forum and fair, nontechnical rules for determining the occurrence of a violation. Any judgment that is rendered by the Municipal Court must be preceded by a determination that a responsible party and violation of a City ordinance or code exists, since it is this determination and not necessarily the amount of any monetary judgment which persuades a responsible party to perform some required act or correct some nonconforming condition. The remedies provided by this chapter are intended to supplement the enforcement measures provided by other ordinances and general laws of the state. 
(Ord. 699-86 §1, 6-23-86; Ord. 851-91, 11-25-91)  
TMC 7-1-020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
City Manager means the Tualatin City Manager or any City officer or employee designated by the City Manager to perform duties of the City Manager under this chapter. 
Civil Infraction or Infraction means the commission of an act, the ownership of property on which a condition exists, or the omission to act in a manner prescribed by this chapter or other City ordinance, constituting breach, violation or infringement of a City ordinance, or of this ordinance constitutes a civil infraction and shall be handled in accordance with the procedures established by this chapter. "Civil infraction" does not include violations of other City ordinances where a criminal penalty is provided and criminal procedures apply. When an infraction is of a continuing nature, except where specifically provided otherwise, a separate infraction will be deemed to occur on each calendar day the infraction continues to exist and a separate citation may be filed, or the citation and complaint may include allegations as to the ongoing nature of the violation and unless it would tend to substantially prejudice the rights of an accused such separate violations shall be consolidated in a single proceeding and a separate forfeiture may be imposed for each such violation. 
Enforcement Officer means the City Manager or any officer, employee or agent designated by the City Manager to perform duties as an enforcement officer. 
Forfeiture; Forfeiture Schedule means the only judgment to be rendered for an infraction is a monetary judgment called a forfeiture. The procedure prescribed by this chapter shall be the exclusive procedure for imposing a forfeiture; however, this section shall not be read to prohibit in any way any alternative remedies set out in ordinances or state law which are intended to abate or alleviate ordinance violations or nuisances, nor in any manner restrict the authority of the Municipal Judge to enforce orders, judgments and attached conditions, nor shall the City be prohibited from recovering, in a manner prescribed by law, any expense incurred by it in abating or removing ordinance violations pursuant to any ordinance or law. 
Prior Contact means: (a) any prior contact between the enforcement officer and the responsible party regarding the alleged infraction, including but not limited to telephone calls, personal oral communication at any location, letters or other forms of written communication, or a prior citation issued for the same or similar infraction; (b) prior contact shall be deemed to occur without actual contact between the enforcement officer and a responsible party if the alleged infraction is related to regulatory activity, and the City has issued a permit, license, agreement or written directive required or permitted by law or policy in conjunction with such regulated activity. No time limit shall restrict prior contact which is deemed to have occurred under this section. Prior contact includes but is not limited to such prior contact as may have taken place prior to the adoption of this ordinance. 
Responsible Party means the person responsible for curing or remedying the infraction; and includes, but is not limited to: (a) the owner of the property or the owner's manager or agent or other person in control of the property on behalf of the owner; (b) the person occupying or controlling the property including bailer, lessee, tenant or other person having possession; (c) the person who is alleged to have committed or authorized the commission of the infraction or omitted to perform some action required by ordinance and constituting an infraction; (d) the parent, guardian or other person having custody of a person who is under 18 years of age and who has committed an act which is a civil infraction or which if done by an adult would constitute a civil infraction; or (e) the person who procures, aids or abets another in the commission of an infraction. 
(Ord. 699-86 §2, 6-23-86; Ord. 706-86, 9-22-86; Ord. 851-91 §3, 11-25-91)  
TMC 7-1-030 - Cumulative Remedies, Administrative Enforcement Provisions. 
(1)  Official Action. All officials, departments and employees of the City vested with authority to issue permits or grant approvals shall adhere to and require conformance with this or any City ordinance, and shall issue no permit or grant approval for any development, use or regulated activity which violates or fails to comply with the conditions or standards imposed by this chapter. Any permit or approval issued or granted in conflict with this or any City ordinance, whether intentional or otherwise, shall be void. 
(2)  Inspection and Right of Entry. Whenever the enforcement officer has reasonable cause to suspect a violation of a City ordinance exists, the enforcement officer may enter on any site or into a structure for the purpose of investigation, provided that no premises shall be entered without first attempting to obtain the consent of the owner or person in control of the premises if other than the owner. If consent cannot be obtained, the enforcement officer shall secure a search warrant from the City's Municipal Court or any appropriate court before further attempts to gain entry, and shall have recourse to every other remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(3)  Injunctive Relief. Upon request of the City Manager, the City Attorney may institute an appropriate action in any appropriate court to enjoin the maintenance of any use, condition, occupation, building or structure which is in violation of this or any City ordinance. 
(4)  Evidence of Violation. Proof of a violation of this ordinance or permit or approval issued or granted shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such violation is that of the owner of the property upon which the violation or infraction exists. After such prima facie evidence has been established, the owner shall then have the burden of establishing a defense to the charge. Prosecution, or lack of prosecution, of the owner of the property, the occupant, or other person in possession or control of the property or condition shall not be deemed to relieve any other responsible person. 
(5)  Cumulative Remedies. The rights, remedies and penalties provided in this chapter are cumulative, not mutually exclusive and are in addition to any other rights, remedies and penalties available to the City under any other law. Unless the context or an ordinance clearly indicates a different enforcement procedure is required, such as parking enforcement and false security alarm enforcement, the procedures provided for enforcement of ordinance violations may utilize the civil infractions procedures of this chapter to obtain compliance with City ordinances, codes and regulations. 
(Ord. 699-86 §3, 6-23-86; Ord. 851-91, §4, 11-25-91)  
TMC 7-1-040 - Infraction Procedure. 
(1)  Reporting. All reports of infractions covered by this chapter shall be forwarded to the enforcement officer. The City Manager may provide administrative rules and procedures for routing the reports of infractions to the appropriate enforcement officer. 
(2)  Review of Facts. When an infraction covered by this chapter is reported to the enforcement officer, the enforcement officer, after reviewing the facts and circumstances surrounding the alleged infraction, may refuse to proceed further with the matter or may elect one or more of the enforcement remedies available under this chapter or other remedial law depending upon an assessment of the quantity, quality and sufficiency of the evidence, the seriousness of the violation and the appropriateness of the remedy. 
(3)  Prior Contact. Prior contact with an alleged responsible party is often the most effective means of obtaining compliance with regulations. The enforcement officer making prior contact may be able to warn a responsible party of the applicable law and the consequences of violation and to obtain evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances. The decision to make prior contact rests solely with the sound discretion of the enforcement officer. If prior contact is made and a violation is determined to exist, the following information should be communicated to the responsible party: 
(a)  A description or identification of the activity or condition constituting the alleged infraction and identification of the recipient as being the responsible party for the infraction; 
(b)  A statement that the activity or condition has been determined to violate City law; 
(c)  A statement of the action to remedy or cure the violation and the time and date by which the remedy must be completed or begun; and 
(d)  A statement advising that, if the required remedy or abatement is not completed or commenced within the time specified, a uniform infraction citation and complaint may or will be issued and that a forfeiture in the maximum amount provided could be imposed, or that some enforcement process may or will be pursued. 
The City Manager may prescribe a form to be used by the enforcement officer in providing prior contact. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as requiring prior contact to be provided prior to issuance of a uniform infraction citation or to pursuing any other available remedy. 
(4)  Voluntary Compliance Agreement. 
(a)  When the enforcement officer considers it advisable, the enforcement officer may enter into a written agreement resolving the problems which gave rise to the prior contact. The agreement shall be known as a voluntary compliance agreement and shall be binding on the responsible party. The fact that a person alleged to have committed a civil infraction enters into such an agreement shall not be considered an admission of having committed a civil infraction for any purpose. 
(b)  During the time allowed in the voluntary compliance agreement for the completion of necessary corrective action, the City shall hold in abeyance further processing of the alleged violation. If all terms of the voluntary compliance agreement are satisfied, the City shall take no further action concerning the alleged violation other than those steps necessary to terminate the matter. 
(c)  The failure to comply with any term of the voluntary compliance agreement constitutes a separate infraction and shall be handled in accordance with the procedures established by this chapter. The City may also proceed with processing the alleged infraction giving rise to the voluntary compliance agreement. 
(5)  Uniform Infraction Citation and Complaint. 
(a)  A Uniform Citation and Complaint conforming to the requirements of this section may be used for all violations committed within the City for which enforcement action is to be taken under this chapter. 
(b)  The Uniform Citation shall consist of at least three parts. Additional parts may be inserted for administrative use. The required parts are: 
(A)  The complaint, which contains the allegations of the infraction; 
(B)  The enforcement officer's or department's record of violation; and 
(C)  The summons which orders or requires the cited person to appear in Municipal Court. 
(c)  Each of the parts shall contain the following information or blanks in which such information shall be entered: 
(A)  Name of the person cited; 
(B)  City ordinance, code or regulation violated; 
(C)  Brief description of the violation of which the person is charged in such a manner as can be readily understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so, the date and place at which the violation occurred, the date on which the citation was issued, and the name of the complainant; 
(D)  The time and place where the person is to appear before the Court, which shall be not more than 14 days from the date of issuance of the citation, and the maximum penalty amount, if any, fixed for the violation; 
(E)  The designation of the method of service and certification that such service has been made; and 
(F)  The bail, if any, fixed for the violation. 
(G)  The complaint shall contain a form of certificate in which the complaint shall certify that the complainant has reasonable grounds to believe that the person cited committed the offense contrary to law. A certificate conforming to this provision shall be deemed equivalent to a sworn complaint. 
(d)  Each of the parts shall also contain such identifying and additional information as may be necessary or appropriate for the City to administer its ordinances, codes and regulations. 
(e)  The summons shall contain a notice to the person that the complaint will be filed with the Municipal Court. The reverse side of the summons shall contain the following in a form substantially as follows: 
READ CAREFULLY 
You have been charged with a violation of a City of Tualatin ordinance, code or regulation. You MUST do one of the following: 
1.  Appear in court at the time mentioned in this summons and request a hearing. The court will then set a time for a hearing. 
2.  Mail to the court this summons, together with a check or money order in the amount of the penalty indicated on the other side of this summons, and tell the court you request a hearing. THIS SUMMONS AND THE PENALTY MUST REACH THE COURT BEFORE THE TIME WHEN THIS SUMMONS REQUIRES YOU TO APPEAR IN COURT. If you do not want a hearing, but wish to explain your side, send your explanation with the summons and payment of the penalty. The court will then consider your explanation and may retain your penalty or any part of it on the basis of your explanation and what evidence is presented to the court. 
3.  Sign the "Admission or No Contest" form and send this summons and check or money order in the amount of the penalty indicated on the other side of this summons to the court. THIS SUMMONS AND THE PENALTY MUST REACH THE COURT BEFORE THE TIME WHEN THIS SUMMONS REQUIRES YOU TO APPEAR IN COURT. 
APPEARANCE, "ADMISSION OR NO CONTEST", AND WAIVER 
I, the undersigned, enter my appearance on the complaint of the violation charged on the other side of this summons. I have been informed of my right to a trial, that my signature to this admission or no contest will have the same force and effect as a judgment of the court. I do ADMIT, or give NO CONTEST to the violation as charged, WAIVE my right to a HEARING by the court and agree to pay the penalty prescribed for my violation. 
Respondent 
Respondent's Address 
Mail your summons and remittance to: 
Tualatin Municipal Court 
18880 SW Martinazzi Ave. 
Tualatin, OR 97062 
NOTICE 
IF YOU FAIL TO DO ONE OF THE THREE FOREGOING PROCEDURES, OR FAIL TO APPEAR FOR TRIAL AT THE TIME SET BY THE COURT YOU MAY BE CHARGED WITH THE ADDITIONAL AND SEPARATE VIOLATION OF FAILURE TO MAKE REQUIRED APPEARANCE. 
THE COURT MAY, IN ANY CASE, AFTER NOTICE, REQUIRE YOU TO APPEAR FOR A HEARING. 
(f)  Any error in transcribing information into the blanks provided in the citation form when determined by the City or court to be non-prejudicial to the respondent's defense, may be corrected at the time of hearing or prior to time of hearing with notice being given to the respondent. A uniform infraction citation and complaint may allege more than a single violation arising out of the same or a related series of acts, occurrences or conditions. No civil infraction citation and complaint is insufficient, nor can the trial, judgment or other proceedings on the alleged infraction be affected, by reason of a defect or imperfection in a matter of form which does not tend to the prejudice of the substantial rights of the respondent upon the merits. 
(g)  Establishing identity. An enforcement officer may not arrest for violation of the infraction but may detain any individual reasonably believed to have committed a violation, or any employee, agent or representative or a firm, corporation or organization reasonably believed to have committed a violation, only so long as is necessary to determine, for the purposes of issuing a citation, the identity of the violator and such other information as is appropriate to assure the person's "answer" to an infraction citation. 
(6)  Service of Summons. If a uniform citation is issued under subsection (5) of this section, the City Manager, the enforcement officer or a peace officer, respectively, shall serve or cause to be served, the summons portion of such citation in any manner provided in the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure (1991 Edition) for service of summons and complaint. 
(7)  Appearance by Defendant. 
(a)  The respondent shall either appear before the court at the time indicated in the summons, or prior to such time shall deliver to the court the summons, together with a check or money order in the amount of the penalty set forth on the summons, together with: 
(A)  A request of a hearing; 
(B)  A statement of matters and explanation or mitigation of the offense charged; or 
(C)  The executed appearance, waiver of hearing and the "Admission or No Contest" form appearing on the summons. 
(b)  If a respondent has submitted to the court a written statement as provided in subparagraphs (A) (B) or (C), it constitutes a waiver of hearing and consent to judgment by the court declaring a forfeiture of all or any part of the penalty as determined by the court on the basis of such statement and any testimony or written statement of the complainant or other witness which may be presented to the court. 
(c)  If the respondent requests a hearing, or pursuant to paragraph (e), the court directs that a hearing be held, the court shall fix a date and time for hearing and, unless notice is waived, shall at least five days in advance of the hearing, mail to respondent, a notice of the date and time so fixed. The notice shall set forth a warning that for failure to appear for the hearing, the respondent may be charged with a separate and additional offense of failure to appear. 
(d)  Bail. Unless otherwise specifically established by the court, the bail amount shall be not less than the amount of the forfeiture for the violation. If the person alleged to have committed the infraction denies all or part of the infraction and submits a request for hearing, upon application to the Municipal Court and good cause shown, may be permitted to post bail in an amount less than the amount of the maximum penalty for such violation, but in no event less than ten percent of such maximum penalty, provided the cited person certifies that such person will attend the hearing when scheduled. 
(e)  Hearing Discretionary, Exception. The court may direct that a hearing be held on any Uniform Infraction Citation issued. 
(f)  Failure to Appear. Upon a finding by the court that the respondent did not make an appearance as required without due and good cause, the respondent shall be guilty of failure to appear. The fine for conviction of failure to appear shall be in addition to the fine and court costs of the violation for which respondent failed to appear, and shall be not less than twice the amount of the bail for such violation, nor more than $1,000.00. 
(g)  Warrant for Arrest. If a person cited fails to comply with paragraph (a) of this subsection or fails to appear at any time fixed by the court, a warrant for arrest may be issued by the judge pursuant to ORS 133.075 and TMC 7-2-030. A warrant issued by the court may be served without further endorsement, in any county of this state. Arrest and release decisions shall comply with ORS 133.450. 
No warrant of arrest may be issued after a period of 60 days from the date of the entry of an order declaring a forfeiture of bail or other security given by the respondent. In such case, the order declaring the forfeiture of bail or other security shall be deemed the final disposition of the case. 
(8)  Hearing. 
(a)  Every hearing to determine whether an infraction has occurred shall be held before the Municipal Court without a jury. The parties shall be entitled to mutual pretrial discovery of evidence as provided in ORS 135.805—135.873 as constituted on the date this ordinance takes effect, except that a violation of said rules shall not result in refusal to permit a witness to testify, refusal to receive in evidence the material not disclosed, or dismissal of the charges. 
(b)  The respondent may be represented by counsel, but counsel shall not be provided at public expense. If counsel is to appear, written notice shall be provided to the Municipal Court not less than five business days prior to the hearing date. 
(c)  The respondent shall have the right to present evidence and witnesses in the respondent's favor, to cross examine witnesses who testify against the respondent and to submit rebuttal evidence. The respondent shall not be required to testify. 
(d)  If the respondent alleged to have committed the infraction desires that witnesses be ordered to appear by subpoena, the respondent must so request in writing from the Court at the time the answer is returned, or subsequently by mail at any time at least five business days prior to the scheduled hearing. A deposit for each witness shall accompany the request, and such deposit is to be refunded if no forfeiture is assessed by the final order. The deposit shall be in the amount equal to the witness fee allowed for witnesses in non-criminal matters where a public body is a party. Subject to the same five day limitation, the enforcement officer, the citizen who signed the complaint or the City Attorney, as appropriate, may also request in writing that the Municipal Court order certain witnesses to appear by subpoena. If a forfeiture is declared in the final order, the order may also provide that the respondent shall pay any witness fees payable in connection with the hearing. 
(e)  The hearing shall be limited to production of evidence only on the infraction alleged in the complaint. 
(A)  Oral Evidence. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. 
(B)  Hearsay Evidence. Hearsay may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. 
(C)  Admissibility of Evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. 
(D)  Exclusion of Evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(f)  The complainant or, if the City is the complainant, the enforcement officer shall have the burden of proving the alleged ordinance infraction by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(g)  The court may proceed to make a determination on the infraction under any of the following circumstances: 
(A)  If a hearing is held, either at the request of the cited person or at the court's own direction, when the court makes a finding on the evidence presented at the hearing. 
(B)  If a hearing is not required by law, directed by the court or requested by the cited person and the cited person has complied with the requirements of subsection (7)(a), when the court makes a finding on the citation, any plea and any evidence or other material submitted. 
(C)  If the court does not direct that a hearing be held, a hearing is not required by law and the person has not complied with the requirements of subsection (7)(a), or made appearance, when the time indicated in the citation passes and the court makes a finding on the citation and any other evidence the judge determines appropriate. 
(h)  If the person complies with the requirements of subsection (7)(a) and deposits the amount of bail thereunder but neither the person nor the court requests a hearing and a hearing is not required by law, no fine may be imposed in excess of the bail deposited. If the person has not deposited bail or has requested a hearing under subsection (7)(a) without depositing bail and does not appear at the hearing, the court may impose any judgment of forfeiture within the limits for the infraction. 
(i)  If a court enters judgment requiring a person to pay a forfeiture under this paragraph when the person has not complied with the requirements of subsection (7)(a), the court is not precluded from: 
(A)  Taking any other action against the person as permitted by law for the person's failure to comply, including, but not limited to, sentencing the person further as permitted by law after the person is brought to hearing. 
(B)  Following any procedures established by law when the person fails to appear. 
(j)  If a judgment is entered under this section after a person has failed to comply with the requirement of subsection (7)(a) or make appearance, on motion and upon such terms as are just, the court may relieve a person from the judgment upon a showing that the failure of the cited person to comply with the requirements of subsection (7)(a) or to appear was due to mistake, inadvertence, surprise or excusable neglect. The motion must be made within a reasonable time, and in no event more than one year after the person receives notice of the judgment. 
(k)  No judgment may be entered under this subsection by reason of a person failing to comply with the requirements of subsection (7)(a) or make appearance unless the citation issued to the person contains a statement notifying the cited person that a monetary judgment may be entered against the person up to the maximum limit for the offense if the cited person fails to comply with the requirements of subsection (7)(a) or appear at the time and date specified in the citation. 
(l)  The only issue to be decided by the Municipal Judge is a determination of whether or not the act occurred or the condition of the property was as alleged in the uniform infraction citation and complaint. If the judge finds that the alleged act occurred or condition existed at the time and place specified in the citation, the Municipal Judge shall enter an appropriate finding. 
(m)  Upon completion of its determination under subsection (8)(g) and (l) if the court finds that the alleged act did not occur and that the alleged condition did not exist at the time and place specified in the citation, then the Judge shall enter an appropriate finding and return any posted bail. Upon a finding that an infraction has occurred, the court shall assess a forfeiture, plus court costs and witness fees where appropriate, which may be paid out of the bail deposit. The court may suspend or condition the payment of any forfeiture or part of such forfeiture by requiring correction of the condition or activity giving rise to the infraction. In addition, the court may order any or all City departments which are responsible for issuing permits to refuse to issue any permit requested by the responsible party until the court's judgment is complied with. 
(n)  The court shall maintain a record of its proceedings. A mechanical (tape) recording of the hearing accompanied by any written documents, correspondence or physical evidence associated with the matter, shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of this subsection. Unless otherwise ordered, the record of proceedings shall be maintained by the Municipal Court for not less than 180 days from the date the order is entered by the Municipal Court. The determination of the Municipal Court shall be final. Review of the court's determination may be taken by either party and shall be to the Circuit Court of Washington County by writ of review under ORS Chapter 34. 
(o)  In imposing a penalty pursuant to this chapter, the Municipal Judge shall consider the following factors: 
(A)  The past history of the person incurring a penalty in taking all feasible steps or procedures necessary or appropriate to correct any violation; 
(B)  Any prior violations of statutes, rules, orders and permits pertaining to fire City regulations; 
(C)  The economic and financial conditions of the person incurring a penalty, including any benefits, accruing or likely to accrue as a result of the violations; 
(D)  The gravity and magnitude of the violation; 
(E)  Whether the violation was repeated or continuous or isolated and temporary; 
(F)  The City's costs of investigating the violation and correcting or attempting to correct the violation; 
(G)  Whether the facts underlying the violation have been considered in a previous criminal or civil proceeding; 
(H)  Whether a warning or other notice of infraction was provided; 
(I)  Whether the cause of the violation was an unavoidable accident, negligence or an intentional act; 
(J)  The violator's cooperativeness and efforts to correct the violation; and 
(K)  Any other factors the Municipal Judge deems relevant. 
(p)  Prior to the commencement of a hearing on a civil infraction the City representative or the Municipal Court shall summarize the procedures to be followed by the court in conducting the civil infractions hearing. The information required to be given by this subsection may be given in writing or orally before the commencement of the hearing. The failure to give an explanation of the civil infractions procedures shall not invalidate any determination or order of the court unless upon review of the determination or order a court finds that the failure affects the substantial rights of the complaining party. In the event of such a finding, the court shall remand the matter to the Municipal Court for a reopening of the hearing and shall direct the Municipal Court as to what steps it shall take to remedy the prejudice to the rights of the respondent. The City Manager or the Manager's designee may prepare a written summary of the procedures to be followed by the Municipal Court in the conduct of a civil infractions hearing. 
(9)  Enforcement. 
(a)  If the cited person fails to answer the Summons, or to appear at a scheduled hearing, a default judgment shall be entered in the Municipal Court records for the scheduled forfeiture applicable to the charged infraction. In addition, when a person fails to appear for a requested hearing, an additional $20.00 shall be ordered forfeited with any security posted to be credited to this amount. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit in any way, the contempt powers of the Municipal Court granted by the Tualatin City Charter, Tualatin General Ordinances, or Oregon state law and the judge may exercise those powers as may be deemed necessary and advisable in conjunction with any matter arising under the procedures set forth in this ordinance. Upon a willful failure to comply with the Court's order, the offender may be sentenced and committed to jail. 
(b)  A forfeiture assessed is to be paid no later than ten days after the receipt of the final order declaring that forfeiture. Such period may be extended upon order of the Municipal Judge for good cause shown. 
(c)  Delinquent forfeitures and those brought to default judgment which were assessed for infractions may in addition to any other method, be collected or enforced under ORS 30.310 or 30.315, or both. 
(d)  In addition to any other method of enforcement, the City may impose a lien upon real property where a judgment of forfeiture resulting from a civil infraction complaint is given for an infraction which occurs on real property or for improper use of real property. In such cases, the following procedure shall apply: 
(A)  Where the responsible party has failed to pay a judgment of forfeiture within 30 days after the same shall become due, the Court shall notify the City Recorder of the amount of the judgment, including any costs and witness fees assessed. 
(B)  Upon receipt by the City Recorder, a notice shall be sent to the responsible party and the owner of the property if different than the responsible party, by certified mail, return receipt requested. The address listed on the records of the Washington, or, where appropriate, Clackamas County Department of Assessment and Taxation, corresponding with the real property shall be sufficient for mailing purposes. The notice shall state the amount of the forfeiture together with costs and fees, and that such amount will be assessed as a lien against the property unless paid within 30 days of the notice. A copy of the notice may be sent to any other person whose interest appears on the County or City records. Failure of the responsible party or owner to receive the notice shall not invalidate the assessment lien. 
(C)  If the judgment is not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice, an assessment, as stated by the Council, shall be made by resolution and shall thereupon be entered in the docket of City liens, and upon such entry being made shall constitute a lien upon the property. 
(D)  Except as otherwise provided under ORS 87.392, the lien shall be prior in right to other liens or encumbrances that may exist with respect to the property. Such lien shall bear interest at the legal rate, as provided in ORS 82.010, as now or hereafter constituted from the date of entry in the lien docket until paid. At any time after entry in the lien docket, the City may proceed, without further notice or demand, to foreclose such lien for the amount of the lien, together with interest and costs in the manner provided by state law for collection of assessments for local improvement districts. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall limit the City from revoking or denying any City license or permit held or desired by a person owing a forfeiture to the City. Any City department which receives notice from the Municipal Court that a person who desires a permit from such department is owing and delinquent in payment of the forfeiture, or has failed or refused to comply with a final order of the Municipal Court, concerning an alleged infraction, may consider noncompliance with such order as a basis for denying to issue a permit until such delinquent forfeiture is paid in full or such Municipal Court order is complied with. 
(f)  Unless otherwise provided, an assessment for a forfeiture for an infraction shall be an assessment to pay an amount not exceeding $500.00. 
(Ord. 699-86 §4, 6-23-86; Ord. 851-91 §5, 11-25-91)  
TMC 7-1-050 - General Penalty, Continuing Violation. 
(1)  When an ordinance in the Tualatin Municipal Code or the Tualatin Development Code declares an act or condition, or the failure to do an act, to be prohibited, unlawful, a violation or an offense and no penalty is specified, the violation shall be enforced as a civil infraction with a forfeiture not to exceed $500.00. 
(2)  If the same offense violates both City ordinances and state law, the maximum penalty for the ordinance violation shall not exceed the maximum penalty provided under state law. 
(3)  If a violation is of a continuing nature, each day that the violation continues will constitute a separate violation. 
(4)  In an appropriate case, whether an infraction or a crime, upon finding that the offense has been committed by the person as alleged, the Court may reduce the amount of the forfeiture and in lieu of payment, allow the person to perform community service. 
(Ord. 699-86 §5, 6-23-86; Ord. 851-91 §12, 11-25-91)  
CHAPTER 7-02 - CITATION IN LIEU OF ARREST 
Sections: 
 
TMC 7-2-010 - Application of Ordinance. 
This ordinance applies in any instance when a person, firm or corporation is subject to arrest for the violation of a City ordinance. 
(Ord. 330-76 §1, 5-10-76)  
TMC 7-2-020 - Citation in Lieu of Custody. 
A City police officer in lieu of taking the person into custody may issue and serve a citation to the person to appear before the Municipal Judge. 
(Ord. 330-76 §2, 5-10-76)  
TMC 7-2-030 - Court Appearance. 
The person cited shall appear before the Municipal Judge at the time, date and place specified in the citation, which shall not be later than two weeks from the date the citation was issued. If the cited person fails to appear at the time, date and place specified in the citation, and a complaint is filed against such person in the Municipal Court, the Municipal Judge shall issue a warrant of arrest immediately upon the person's failure to appear. 
(Ord. 330-76 §3, 5-10-76)  
TMC 7-2-040 - Service and Filing. 
If a citation is issued as described in Section 7-2-030, the police officer shall serve one copy to the person arrested and shall, as soon as practicable, file a duplicate copy with the Clerk of the Municipal Court, along with the officer's proof of service of citation upon the person. Each copy of the citation issued under the authority of this ordinance shall contain: 
(1)  The name of the court at which the cited person is to appear; 
(2)  The name of the person cited; 
(3)  A brief description of the offense of which the person is charged; the date, the time and place at which the offense occurred, the date on which the citation was issued; and the name of the police officer who issued the citation; 
(4)  The time, date and place at which the person cited is to appear in court; 
(5)  Whether a complaint had been filed at the time the citation was issued; 
(6)  If the arrest was made by a private party, the name of the arresting person; and 
(7)  The following notice: 
READ CAREFULLY 
This citation is not a complaint. One may be filed and you will be provided a copy of the complaint at the time of your first appearance. You must appear in court at the time set in citation. If you fail to appear and a complaint has been filed, the court will immediately issue a warrant for your arrest. 
(Ord. 330-76 §4, 5-10-76)  
TMC 7-2-050 - Failure to Appear. 
If any person willfully fails to appear before the Municipal Court pursuant to a citation issued and served under the authority of this chapter, and a complaint is filed, such person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for such willful failure to appear. 
(Ord. 330-76 §5, 5-10-76)  
CHAPTER 7-03 - JURY TRIALS 
Sections: 
 
TMC 7-3-010 - State Jury Law Adopted. 
The provisions of ORS 54.010 through ORS 54.160 are adopted by this reference and incorporated into this Code. 
(Ord. 199A-71 §1, 11-2-71)  
TMC 7-3-020 - Right to Trial by Jury. 
In all prosecutions for an offense which carries a possibility of the imposition of a jail sentence, as defined and made punishable by the charter or any ordinance of the City, the defendant shall have the right of trial by jury. 
(Ord. 199A-71 §2, 11-2-71; Ord. 438-78, §1, 5-8-78)  
TMC 7-3-030 - Number of Jurors. 
The jury shall consist of six persons duly sworn to try the cause for which they are called, and all six of the jurors sworn to try the cause must concur to render a verdict. 
(Ord. 438-78 §2, 5-8-78)  
TMC 7-3-040 - Request for Jury Trial. 
At the time of arraignment, and in open court, the judge shall advise the defendant of the right to trial by jury. A defendant shall make known his or her demand for a jury trial to the judge, either at the time of the defendant's arraignment or at the time of the entry of the defendant's plea. The trial judge may accept defendant's demand for trial by jury at the time of entry of defendant's plea and any at time prior to the time set for trial. 
(Ord. 199A-71 §3, 11-2-71)  
CHAPTER 7-04 - VEHICLE TOWING, IMPOUNDING AND INVENTORY POLICY 
Sections: 
 
TMC 7-4-010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
Closed container means a container, the contents of which are not exposed to view. 
Open container means a container which is unsecured or incompletely secured in such a fashion that the container's contents are exposed to view. 
Valuables means: (a) cash money of an aggregate amount of $50.00 or more; or (b) individual items of personal property with a value of over $500.00. 
(Ord. 1267-08 §1, 7-28-08)  
TMC 7-4-020 - Purpose and Scope. 
This policy provides the procedures for towing a vehicle by or at the direction of the Tualatin Police Department. 
(Ord. 1267-08 §2, 7-28-08)  
TMC 7-4-030 - Vehicles Subject to Impound. 
Officers may tow vehicles as a result of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Abandoned vehicles. 
(2)  Vehicles left standing in or partially blocking the roadway and constituting a hazard. 
(3)  As a recovered stolen vehicle. 
(4)  A vehicle disabled in a collision. 
(5)  As evidence pursuant to a criminal investigation. 
(6)  When probable cause exists to believe the vehicle is subject to forfeiture under the Oregon Criminal Forfeiture Law, HB 3457, 2005. 
(7)  When the operator is found to be in violation of one of the following traffic offenses, the officer shall tow the vehicle: 
(a)  Driving while suspended or revoked (ORS 809.720). 
(b)  Operating without driving privileges, or in violation of license restrictions (ORS 809.720). 
(c)  Driving while under the influence of intoxicants (ORS 809.720). 
(d)  Driving uninsured (ORS 809.720). 
Officers may choose not to tow the vehicle when the officer has received permission from the on duty Supervisor or the Officer in Charge and the officer has demonstrated that towing and impounding the vehicle is not in the best interest of public safety. 
(Ord. 1267-08 §3, 7-28-08)  
TMC 7-4-040 - Responsibilities. 
The responsibilities of those officers impounding a vehicle are as follows: 
(1)  Abandoned Vehicles or Vehicles Constituting a Hazard. 
(a)  Vehicles may be considered abandoned only under Tualatin Municipal Code 8-1-260, Storage on Streets and in City-Owned Off-Street Public Parking Facilities and an officer finds the vehicle to be parked in violation of those provisions. The officer should attempt to locate the owner and request the removal of the vehicle. The vehicle may be impounded after the 24-hour period if it has not been moved. 
(b)  Vehicles constituting a hazard may be impounded if the owner cannot be located, and the vehicle moved. 
(c)  Officers impounding a vehicle shall complete a Miscellaneous Service Report. A copy is to be given to the Records Division as soon as practical after the vehicle is qued for towing. 
(d)  The officer should make every effort to promptly enter pertinent data from the completed Vehicle Impound Report into LEDS. If the officer is unable to enter the vehicle information into LEDS, a notification will be sent to the Records Division for entry. 
(e)  Once a Vehicle Impound Report is approved and forwarded to the Records Division, it shall be entered in the Tualatin Police Records database and filed so it will be immediately available for release or for information should inquiries be made. 
(2)  Removal of Vehicle Disabled in a Traffic Collision. 
(a)  When a vehicle has been involved in a traffic collision and must be removed from the scene, the officer shall have the driver select a towing company, if possible, and shall relay the request for the specified towing company to the dispatcher. When there is no preferred company requested, a company will be selected from the no preference towing company list in Dispatch. 
(b)  If the owner is incapacitated, or for any reason it is necessary for the Department to assume responsibility for a vehicle involved in a collision, the officer shall request the dispatcher to call a no preference towing company. The officer will then have the vehicle towed to the tow company's storage lot for safekeeping, and complete a Crash Report. 
(3)  Notice to Drivers and Owners. 
(a)  Officers towing vehicles under ORS 809.720 shall provide the person having operated the vehicle with a Vehicle Impoundment instruction form, which outlines when the officer is allowed to tow the vehicle, how the person can retrieve the vehicle, the current administrative fee and the person's rights to a hearing. 
(b)  Once the vehicle is impounded, Records personnel shall mail a copy of the approved Vehicle Impound Report form, along with information describing the location of the vehicle and the procedures for its release, to the legal and registered owners of the stored vehicle within 48 hours after it has been stored, unless the vehicle has been previously released (ORS 819.180). 
(Ord. 1267-08 §4, 7-28-08)  
TMC 7-4-050 - Towing Services. 
(1)  The City of Tualatin periodically selects a firm to act as the official tow service and awards a contract to that firm. This firm will be used in the following situations: 
(a)  When a vehicle is being held as evidence in connection with an Investigation. 
(b)  Vehicles belonging to the City of Tualatin. 
Nothing in this policy shall require the Department to tow a vehicle. 
(2)  No Preference Tow Services. 
(a)  Upon proper application, the Washington County Sheriff's Office may approve qualified towing services to be called when a citizen needs towing but has no preference as to which service to call. 
(b)  Any complaint alleging a violation of the agreement or other misconduct by a no preference operator shall be referred to the Washington County Sheriff's Office, Office of Towing Coordination, for investigation. The department may periodically review the performance of each authorized no preference operator. 
(c)  The department will assist citizens by calling any towing company desired. If the citizen has no preference and requests towing service, one of the authorized firms shall be called in rotation. 
(d)  All officers are specifically prohibited from directly or indirectly soliciting for or recommending any garage or tow service. 
(Ord. 1267-08 §5, 7-28-08)  
TMC 7-4-060 - Vehicle Impound Inventory. 
This Chapter is meant to exclusively apply to the process for conducting an inventory of the personal property in an impounded vehicle and shall not be interpreted to affect any other statutory or constitutional right(s) that police officers may employ to search vehicles or persons or to search or seize possessions for other purposes. The contents of all impounded vehicles shall be inventoried in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  An inventory of personal property and the contents of open containers will be conducted throughout the passenger and engine compartments of the vehicle including, but not limited to, the glove box, other accessible areas under or within the dashboard area, any pockets in the doors or in the back of the front seat, in any console between the seats, under any floor mats and under the seats. 
(2)  In addition to the passenger and engine compartments as described above, an inventory of personal property and the contents of open containers will also be conducted in the following locations: 
(a)  Any other type of unlocked compartments that are a part of the vehicle including, but not limited to, unlocked vehicle trunks, unlocked glove compartments, and unlocked car top containers; and 
(b)  Any locked compartments including, but not limited to, locked vehicle trunks, locked hatchbacks and locked car-top containers, if either the keys are available to be released with the vehicle to the third party towing company or an unlocking mechanism for such compartment is available within the vehicle. 
(3)  The contents of open containers located within the vehicle or any of the vehicle's compartments will be inspected and inventoried for valuables. 
(4)  Closed containers located either within the vehicle or any of the vehicle's compartments will not be opened for inventory purposes except for the following, which shall be opened for inventory: wallets, purses, coin purses, fanny packs, personal organizers, briefcases or other closed containers designed for or likely to contain money or small valuables, or closed containers which are designed for hazardous materials. 
(5)  Other closed containers shall be opened and inventoried if the owner acknowledges they contain cash in excess of $10.00, valuables or a hazardous material. 
(6)  Any valuables, to include cash in excess of $10.00 or property valued at more than $200.00, located during the inventory process will be listed on a property receipt and stored in this agency's property/evidence room. A copy of the property receipt will either be left in the vehicle or tendered to the person in control of the vehicle if such person is present. 
(7)  The inventory is not a search for evidence of a crime. However, officers shall seize evidence or contraband located during the inventory. Items should be scrutinized to the extent necessary to complete the inventory. 
These inventory procedures are for the purpose of protecting an owner's property while in police custody, to provide for the safety of officers, and to protect the Department against fraudulent claims of lost, stolen, or damaged property. 
(Ord. 1267-08 §6, 7-28-08)  
TMC 7-4-070 - Proof of Ownership. 
Any vehicle towed by the Tualatin Police Department, other than as abandoned and/or creating a hazard, shall be released to a registered owner, person possessing proof of ownership, or person acting as his/her agent, so designated in notarized written form. 
Proof of ownership shall mean a properly signed certificate of title or other document properly sustaining rightful ownership. 
(Ord. 1267-08 §7, 7-28-08)  
TMC 7-4-080 - Security of Vehicles and Property. 
Unless it would cause an unreasonable delay in the completion of a vehicle impound/storage or create an issue of officer safety, officers should make reasonable accommodations to permit a driver/owner to retrieve small items of value or personal need (e.g. cash, jewelry, cell phone, prescriptions) which are not considered evidence or contraband. 
If a search of a vehicle leaves the vehicle or any property contained therein vulnerable to unauthorized entry, theft or damage, search personnel shall take such steps as are reasonably necessary to secure and/or preserve the vehicle or property from such hazards. 
(Ord. 1267-08 §8, 7-28-08)  
TMC 7-4-090 - Release Criteria. 
A vehicle impounded under this section shall be released to a person entitled to lawful possession of the vehicle upon compliance with the following: 
(1)  Proof that a person with valid driving privileges will be operating the vehicle. 
(2)  Proof of compliance with financial responsibility requirements for the vehicle. 
(3)  Payment of the Tualatin Police Department administrative fee and any towing and storage charges. 
(Ord. 1267-08 §9, 7-28-08)  
CHAPTER 7-05 - PRISONER PROPERTY INVENTORY POLICY 
Sections: 
 
TMC 7-5-010 - Purpose and Scope. 
(1)  The purpose of the inventory of a person in police custody will be to: 
(a)  Promptly identify property to establish accountability and avoid spurious claims to property; 
(b)  Fulfill the requirement of ORS 133.455 to the extent that such statutes may apply to certain property held by the officer for safekeeping; 
(c)  Assist in the prevention of theft of property; 
(d)  Locate toxic, flammable or explosive substances; 
(e)  Locate weapons instruments that may facilitate an escape from custody or endanger law enforcement personnel; or 
(f)  Reduce the danger to persons and property. 
(2)  An officer will inventory the personal property of a person taken into police custody and such inventory will be conducted whenever; 
(a)  Such person will be either placed in the secure holding facility or transported in the secure portion of a police vehicle; or 
(b)  Custody of the person will be transferred to another law enforcement agency, correctional facility, or "treatment facility" as that phrase is used in ORS 430.399, or such other lawfully approved facility for involuntary confinement of persons pursuant to Oregon Revised Statute. [Or. 1266-08 §1, 7-28-08)  
TMC 7-5-020 - Procedures. 
Inventories of the personal property in the possession of such persons will be conducted according to the following procedures: 
(1)  An inventory will occur prior to placing such person into the temporary holding facility or a police vehicle, whichever occurs first. However, if there is reasonable suspicion to believe the safety of the officer, officers, the person in custody or any other person is at risk, an inventory will be done as soon as is safely practical prior to the transfer of custody to another officer, into a police vehicle, and/or to another law enforcement agency or facility. 
(2)  To complete the inventory of the personal property in the possession of such person, the officer will remove all items of personal property from the clothing worn by such person. In addition, the officer will also remove all items of personal property from all open containers (containers which are unsecured or incompletely secured in such a fashion that the container's contents are exposed to view) in the possession of such persons. 
(3)  Closed containers located within the personal property of such persons will not be opened for inventory purposes except for the following, which shall be opened for inventory: wallets, purses, coin purses, fanny packs, personal organizers, briefcases or other closed containers designed for or likely to contain money or small valuables, or closed containers which are designed for hazardous materials. 
(4)  All items of personal property will be secured in the temporary holding facility or in the police vehicle. No personal property will be retained by any such person in police custody. 
(5)  Valuables found during the inventory process will be noted by the officer in a report as directed by the Tualatin Police Department. 
(6)  Release of personal property shall be pursuant to Tualatin Police Department Policy #900 (Temporary Holding Facility), Section 900.85. 
(Or. 1266-08 §2, 7-28-08)  
TITLE 8 - VEHICLES AND PARKING 
Chapters  
CHAPTER 8-01 - PARKING REGULATIONS AND PERMITS 
Sections: 
Parking Regulations 
Parking Citations and Owner Responsibility 
Impoundment and Penalties  
PARKING REGULATIONS 
 
TMC 8-1-150 - Method of Parking. 
(1)  Unless otherwise indicated, no person shall stand or park a vehicle other than in the direction of travel for the side of the street upon which the vehicle is parked. 
(2)  When the operator of a vehicle discovers that his or her vehicle is parked close to a building to which the fire department has been summoned, the operator shall immediately remove the vehicle from the area unless otherwise directed by police or fire officers. 
(Ord. 506-80 §21, 4-14-80; Ord. 989-98 §21, 1-26-98)  
TMC 8-1-160 - Prohibited Parking or Standing. 
(1)  No person shall park or stand: 
(a)  A vehicle in violation of state motor vehicle laws prohibiting parking. 
(b)  A vehicle in an alley other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, and in no case for a period in excess of ten consecutive minutes. 
(c)  A motor truck as defined by ORS 801.355 on a street between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day in front of or adjacent to a residence or apartment house. 
(2)  No operator shall park and no owner shall allow a vehicle to be parked upon a public right-of-way or street for the principal purpose of: 
(a)  Displaying the vehicle for sale. 
(b)  Repairing or servicing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(c)  Displaying advertising from the vehicle. 
(d)  Selling merchandise from the vehicle, except when authorized. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stop, stand, or park such vehicle whether attended or unattended in any City owned or operated public off-street parking facility except in designated parking spaces or in compliance with the directions of a police officer. 
(4)  No vehicle operator shall park a vehicle in violation of City regulations which prohibit or restrict the location or time limits of vehicle parking. 
(Ord. 506-80 §22, 4-14-80; Ord. 639-84 §1, 6-25-84; Ord. 664-85 §2, 5-28-85; Ord. 734-87 §2, 10-12-87; Ord. 747-88 §5, 6-13-88)  
TMC 8-1-170 - Use of Loading Zone. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, in a place designated as a loading zone when the hours applicable to that loading zone are in effect. In no case, when the hours applicable to the loading zone are in effect, shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed the time limits posted. If no time limits are posted, then the use of the zone shall not exceed 30 minutes. 
(Ord. 506-80 §23, 4-14-80)  
TMC 8-1-180 - Unattended Vehicles. 
Whenever a police officer finds a motor vehicle parked unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, the police officer is authorized to remove the key from the vehicle and deliver the key to the person in charge of the police station. 
(Ord. 506-80 §23, 4-14-80)  
TMC 8-1-190 - Standing or Parking of Buses and Taxicabs. 
The operator of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park the vehicle upon a street in a business district at a place other than a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping his or her vehicle outside a traffic lane while loading or unloading passengers. 
(Ord. 506-80 §23, 4-14-80; Ord. 989-98 §25, 1-26-98)  
TMC 8-1-200 - Restricted Use of Bus and Taxicab Stands. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, or a bus in a bus stop; except that the operator of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, when stopping does not interfere with a bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the restricted space. 
(Ord. 506-80 §26, 4-14-80)  
TMC 8-1-210 - Lights on Parked Vehicle. 
No lights need be displayed upon a vehicle that is parked in accordance with this ordinance upon a street where there is sufficient light to reveal a person or object at a distance of at least 500 feet from the vehicle. 
(Ord. 506-80 §27, 4-14-80)  
TMC 8-1-220 - Extension of Parking Time. 
No person may move a vehicle from one timed-specified space to another timed-specified space within a public parking facility in the Core Area Parking District without first reaching an off-site destination and for the sole purpose of extending the time the vehicle is legally parked. 
(Ord. 506-80 §28, April 14, 1980; Ord.1289-09 §1, 9-28-09)  
TMC 8-1-230 - Exemption. 
This ordinance regulating vehicle parking or standing shall not apply to City, county or state or public utility vehicles while necessarily in use for construction or repair work on a street, or a vehicle while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of the United States mail. 
(Ord. 506-80 §29, April 14, 1980; Ord. 989-98 §29, 1-26-98)  
TMC 8-1-240 - Regulation of Parking at City Center, Library, and Council Building. 
(1)  This section applies to the following parking areas: 
(a)  All public parking spaces in the parking lot located in front of the City Center and Library building; and 
(b)  All public parking spaces located in the parking areas adjacent to the Council Building; 
(2)  Vehicle parking in those parking areas referred to in subsection (1) shall be regulated as follows: 
Between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays, no vehicle may park longer than the times identified on Schedule C, TMC 8-3, unless the vehicle operator obtains a validation slip from the City Manager or designee, as described in subsection (4). 
(3)  (a) Movement of a vehicle within a parking area shall not extend the time zone parking limit. 
(b)  A validation slip shall be placed with the validation date plainly visible on the driver's side dashboard of the vehicle to which it is assigned and is not transferable from one vehicle to another. 
(c)  A validation slip shall be effective for not more than a single day and remains effective only as long as the operator remains qualified for the validation slip under subsection (4). A vehicle operator who receives a validation slip may not use the parking areas referred to in subsection (1) after qualification for such use has ceased. 
(4)  An operator of a vehicle who parks his or her vehicle in parking areas referred to in subsection (1) for more than the allowed time limit on Schedule C, TMC 8-3, is entitled to a validation slip, if the operator demonstrates his or her qualification under any of the following criteria: 
(a)  A person who is using or by driving is facilitating another person's use of the City Library; 
(b)  A person who is meeting with a member of City staff, who regularly reports for work in the City Center, Library or Council Building; or 
(c)  A person who has been subpoenaed for or is attending a Municipal Court trial as a witness, juror, or interested person. 
(5)  The requirements of this section do not apply to parking spaces reserved for parking for disabled persons. 
(6)  Current City Council members may use parking spaces referred to in subsection (1) without a validation slip. The City Manager shall inform the enforcement officers of the vehicles whose operators qualify for exemption under this subsection. 
(7)  The City Manager shall prescribe the form, content and administration of the validation slip, which shall include at least the following information: "name of vehicle operator, vehicle license number, the department of the City with which business is being conducted or in the appropriate case, the Library, and the date and time of validation. The City Manager shall designate the officers or employees of the City responsible for issuing validation slips. The City Manager shall cause the preparation and placement of signs for the parking areas regulated by this section to give appropriate notice of the time limits and how validation may be obtained. 
(8)  A person who obtains, displays or uses or causes another to obtain, display or use a validation slip improperly, without authorization or upon a false representation commits a civil infraction and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. 734-87 §1, 10-12-87; Ord. 989-98 §30, 1-26-98; Ord. 1255-08 §1, 3-24-08)  
TMC 8-1-250 - Building Relocation; Temporary No Parking; Tow Away Zone. 
(1)  It is unlawful for a vehicle operator to park a vehicle in violation of temporary no parking restrictions under this section. The owner of a vehicle parked in violation of this section shall be liable for the cost of towing and storage of the vehicle. 
(2)  When an application to relocate a building has been submitted to the City and the City Engineer has determined that a street or portions of a street along the route are too narrow for safe passage of the building vehicle parking, the Building Official may cause a sign or signs to be placed along the route in accordance with subsection (2) of this section when no parking signs have been placed along a street, the Building Officer may cause an illegally parked vehicle to be towed at the owner's expense. 
(3)  After determining the route or portion where vehicular parking will be restricted due to the passage of a building or portion of a building, the City Engineer shall cause a sign or signs to be placed along the route or portion of the route, advising the public that a building relocation permit has been issued which necessitates the temporary restriction of parking and warning that vehicles which are parked in violation thereof may be towed away at the owner's expense. Such signs shall be erected not less than 24 hours prior to the time at which building relocation is scheduled to occur. The location of such signs shall conform with applicable state standards. 
(Ord. 779-89, 7-10-89; Ord. 989-98 §31, 1-26-98)  
TMC 8-1-252 - Residential Parking Zones. 
(1)  The City Council establishes the following residential parking zones for the purpose of prohibiting parking on public streets except by residential permit: 
(a)  School Day Zones. During school days between 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. in the following locations: 
(i)  Waterford Subdivision, which includes the following streets within the zone: SW 94th Terrace, SW 93rd Terrace, SW Palouse Lane, and SW Skokomish Lane; and 
(ii)  Moccasin Run Subdivision, which includes the following streets within the zone: SW Ibach Court. 
(iii)  SW Alabama Street, east of SW Chilkat Terrace and west of SW Boones Ferry Road. 
(b)  General Residential Zones. During all hours of every day, the area bounded on the north by SW Hazelbrook Road, on the south by Tualatin Road, on the east by SW 112th Avenue, and on the west by SW 115th Avenue, which includes the following streets within the zone: 
(i)  SW 115th Avenue, between Tualatin Road and Hazelbrook Road; 
(ii)  the south side of SW Hazelbrook Road, east of SW 115th Avenue and west of Hazelbrook Middle School Property; 
(iii)  SW Elmers Court, east of SW 115th Avenue; 
(iv)  SW Roberts Court, east of SW 115th Avenue; and 
(v)  SW Kalispell Street, east of SW 115th Avenue and west of SW 112th Avenue. 
(2)  Only those vehicles displaying a valid parking permit may park within the particular zone established in subsection (1) of this section. Persons who reside within the parking zone may obtain a permit for that zone from the City Manager under subsection (3) of this section. 
(3)  The City Manager shall establish procedures and standards for the issuance of permanent and temporary permits that will allow residents and their guests to park their vehicles within residential parking zones during the restricted hours. At a minimum, the City Manager shall establish rules that establish the criteria for issuance, surrender and revocation of permits, evidence of proof of residence and vehicle ownership, terms of the permit, standards for display of the permit, and allow for the issuance of temporary permits to residents for the parking of nonresident vehicles for temporary periods upon a showing of reasonable need for such permits. 
(4)  The City Manager shall cause official signs for residential parking zones to be installed and maintained. The signs shall clearly identify the parking restrictions for nonresidents and the exception to those restrictions for permit holders within the residential parking zones. 
(5)  It is unlawful and a violation for any person to sell, transfer, purchase, or otherwise acquire for value any permit issued by the City of Tualatin. Notwithstanding TMC 8-1-360 and in addition to any criminal penalties that may apply, A violation of this subsection is punishable by a fine of not less than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 1193-05, 08-08-2005; Ord. No. 1385-15, 10-12-2015; Ord. No. 1412-18, 08-13-2018)  
TMC 8-1-253 - Unlawful to Provide False Information; Penalties. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(a)  Provide false information in connection with an application for a permanent or temporary permit; 
(b)  Fail to surrender a permit, when requested to do so, when the person is no longer entitled to the permit; 
(c)  Use a permit when the permit holder is no longer entitled to the permit; 
(d)  Use, or allow the use of a permit in conjunction with a vehicle other than the vehicle for which the permit was issued; 
(e)  Use, or allow the use of a temporary permit in a manner inconsistent with the terms and limitations of the permit. 
(2)  The City Manager may revoke any permit when the permit holder is found to be in violation of this section, and upon written notification of the violation, the permit holder shall surrender the permit to the City Manager. If a permit holder fails to surrender the permit, such failure shall constitute a civil infraction and shall be subject to a fine of up to $100.00. 
(Ord. 1193-05; 8-8-05)  
TMC 8-1-260 - Storage on Streets and in City-Owned Off-Street Public Parking Facilities. 
(1)  Streets. It is unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to park or store a vehicle, object or matter upon a public street within the City for more than a continuous 72-hour period without first obtaining a permit from the City Manager or designee in accordance with this ordinance. 
(2)  Public Off-Street Parking Facilities. Except for personal vehicles of public employees or Council members authorized to conduct City business overnight or on weekends, or except as provided in subsection (3), it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle, object or matter within any public off-street parking facility continuously for more than 24 hours. For purposes of this subsection, movement of the vehicle, object, or matter from a parked position for less than one hour shall not interrupt the continuous 24 hour period. 
(3)  Operative vehicles which are not abandoned may park in the designated long-term spaces of the Blue and Green Public Parking Lots for more than 24 hours. 
(Ord. 989-98 §32, 01-26-98; Ord. 1113-02, 6-10-02; Ord. 1331-11 §1, 8-22-11)  
TMC 8-1-270 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. 1331-11 § 3, adopted August 22, 2011, repealed § 8-1-270.  
TMC 8-1-280 - Conditions of Permits. 
The City Manager or designee may issue a permit to the owner or lessee of a vehicle, object or matter upon a public street for more than a continuous 72-hour period for good cause as determined by the City Manager or designee: 
(1)  The vehicle owner shall pay a permit application fee of $25.00. 
(2)  A permit issued under this section shall be effective for no more than 21 days. The City Manager or designee may reissue the permit for one additional 21-day period upon (a) a showing by applicant that good cause continues to exist, and (b) payment of a re-issuance fee of $15.00. 
(3)  The permit shall bear the signature of the City Manager or designee, the signature of the issuing clerk, the date of issuance, the termination date of the permit, the location of the vehicle on the public street, and the owner of the vehicle and the owner's address and telephone number where he or she can be reached. 
(4)  The permit shall also bear the following information: 
(a)  The type of warning devices the permittee must place on or around the object to warn the public of the objects' location; and 
(b)  The type of warning devices must be placed and maintained continuously while the objects are in the street. 
(Ord. 989-98 §34, 1-26-98; Ord. 1331-11 §2, 8-22-11)  
TMC 8-1-290 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. 1331-11 adopted August 22, 2011, repealed § 8-1-290.  
TMC 8-1-300 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1385-15 adopted October 12, 2015, repealed § 8-1-300. 
(Ord. 989-98 §36, 1-26-98; Ord No. 1385-15, 10-12-2015)  
PARKING CITATIONS AND OWNER RESPONSIBILITY 
 
TMC 8-1-310 - Citation on Illegally Parked Vehicle. 
(1)  A police officer or authorized City employee who finds a motor vehicle parked or standing in violation of City parking ordinances or regulations may issue a parking citation to the owner or person in apparent control of the vehicle or both. In all prosecutions of City parking citations it is sufficient for a police officer or authorized City employee to charge the defendant by an unsworn written notice if the notice clearly states: 
(a)  The date, place, and nature of the violation; 
(b)  The time and place for defendant's appearance in court; 
(c)  The name of the issuing officer or other person authorized to issue the notice; and 
(d)  The license number of the vehicle. 
(2)  The notice provided for in subsection (1) of this section shall either be delivered to the defendant or placed in a conspicuous place upon the vehicle involved in the violation. A duplicate original of the notice shall serve as the complaint in the case when it is filed with the court. In all other respects the procedure now provided by law in such cases shall be followed. The officer or person authorized to issue a citation does not have to observe the act of parking the motor vehicle, but must observe that the vehicle was parked or left standing in violation of City parking regulations. 
(Ord. 506-80 §51, 4-14-80; Ord. 936-94 §2, 12-12-94)  
TMC 8-1-320 - Failure to Comply With Parking Citation Attached to Parked Vehicle. 
A person who receives a parking citation issued under TMC 8-1-310 shall comply with its terms by paying to the Municipal Court the fine in the amount and within the time indicated on the citation. If a person who receives a parking citation fails to comply with the terms of the citation, the City Recorder or other authorized City employee may send a notice to the person cited or the owner of the vehicle informing him or her of the violation and warning that unless the terms of the citation are followed within ten days from the date of the notice that the motor vehicle is subject to immediate impoundment or immobilization. 
(Ord. 506-80 §52, 4-14-80; Ord. 936-94, §3, 12-12-94)  
TMC 8-1-330 - Owner Responsibility. 
The owner of a vehicle placed in violation of a parking restriction shall be responsible for the offense, except when the use of the vehicle was secured by the operator without the owner's consent. 
(Ord. 506-80 §53, 4-14-80)  
TMC 8-1-340 - Registered Owner Presumption. 
In a prosecution of a motor vehicle owner who is charged with a violation of a City parking ordinance, proof that the vehicle at the time of the violation was registered to the defendant shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that such person was the owner in fact. 
(Ord. 506-80 §54, 4-14-80; Ord. 936-94 §4, 12-12-94)  
IMPOUNDMENT AND PENALTIES 
 
TMC 8-1-350 - Vehicle Immobilization and Towing. 
(1)  A police officer or authorized City employee may immobilize a motor vehicle located upon a public street or City off-street parking facility by installing or attaching a device to the motor vehicle that is designed to restrict the normal movement of the vehicle if: 
(a)  The vehicle has been the subject of four or more parking citations on which the outstanding fines have not been paid by the vehicle owner; or 
(b)  The owner of the motor vehicle has been sent a notice of delinquent parking citation under TMC 8-1-290 and has failed to appear at the time and place designated or otherwise see to the citation's proper disposition; or 
(c)  Has parked a vehicle on the street for more than 72 hours without obtaining a permit as required by this 1998 ordinance. 
(2)  If the motor vehicle is immobilized, the officer who installs or attaches the device shall conspicuously affix a written notice to the vehicle that advises the owner, or person in charge of the vehicle that it has been immobilized by the City for violation of a City parking ordinance and that release of the vehicle may be obtained at a designated place. Unless release of the vehicle is arranged within 24 hours of the time the notice is affixed, the vehicle shall be subject to removal from the street or lot at the direction of the Police Department. The immobilization notice shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The date and time the notice was affixed; 
(b)  The name of the person who placed the notice on the vehicle; 
(c)  A statement that the vehicle has been immobilized by the City for delinquent parking citations or fines; 
(d)  A statement that the vehicle may be released from immobilization at a designated place by payment of all outstanding fines against the vehicle plus an immobilization fee; 
(e)  A statement that the owner or person cited may request a hearing within ten days of immobilization to contest the immobilization or towing of the vehicle. The person requesting the hearing shall submit the full amount of outstanding fines plus the immobilization fee to the Municipal Court which shall be held by the court as a deposit to assure appearance. The deposit shall be disposed of in accordance with a court order if the defendant fails to appear at the time and place set by the court or the municipal judge determines the propriety of immobilization and, the towing of the vehicle, if applicable; 
(f)  The statements: "Unless arrangements are made for release of this vehicle within 24 hours after the notice is affixed, the vehicle will be towed and stored at the owner's expense. If an additional 30 days elapsed and arrangements have not been made to release the vehicle the vehicle may be disposed of as an abandoned vehicle"; 
(g)  The address and telephone number and office hours of the person to contact for release of the vehicle; and 
(h)  Such additional information which the Chief of Police considers necessary for proper administration. 
(3)  It is unlawful and a civil infraction for a person to remove or attempt to remove the immobilization device or to move or to attempt to move the immobilized vehicle unless a release of the vehicle is first obtained and the immobilization device is removed. A person who violates this subsection shall be liable to the City for the costs of repair or replacement of an immobilization device damaged by reason of the violation. 
(4)  If the owner of a vehicle that has been immobilized under this section or the owner's designee fails to contact the City as directed on the immobilization notice and arrange for the release of the vehicle within 24 hours of the affixing of the immobilization device, the vehicle may be towed and stored at the expense of the owner. 
(5)  When a vehicle is immobilized in accordance with this section, a $90.00 fee shall be charged by the department that authorizes the release of the vehicle, in addition to other amounts owing. The fee, fines, and all other amounts owed shall be paid before the vehicle is released. The immobilized vehicle is not subject to City parking restrictions while it is immobilized. 
(6)  The owner or a person who reasonably appears to have an interest in a vehicle which is subject to be immobilized or towed may request a hearing by following the procedure in this subsection. The request shall be in writing, directed to the Municipal Court, and submitted not later than ten days from the mailing of the notice. 
(7)  The owner or a person who reasonably appears to have an interest in the vehicle which has been immobilized or towed may request a hearing to contest the immobilization or towing by following the procedure in this subsection and subsection (11). The request shall be in writing, directed to the Municipal Court and submitted not more than ten days after immobilization or towing. 
(8)  Towing of Immobilized Vehicle. 
(a)  If the owner or an authorized person fails to contact the City as directed on the immobilization notice within 24 hours after immobilization, the vehicle may be towed and stored at the owner's expense. 
(b)  A vehicle which has been towed or hooked to a tow truck shall not be released until payment has been made of all parking penalties, the immobilization fee, and applicable towing and storage charges, or a cash deposit has been posted with the City in an amount equal to the sum of the outstanding parking penalties, the immobilization fee, and applicable towing and storage charges. 
(c)  The person towing the vehicle shall have a lien on the vehicle and its contents for reasonable towing and storage charges and may retain possession of the vehicle until such charges are paid or a cash deposit is posted. 
(d)  A lien described under this section does not attach to the contents of a vehicle taken into custody from public property or a public street until 30 days after taking the vehicle into custody. 
(9)  As soon as practicable after an immobilized vehicle is towed under subsection (8) of this section, the City shall send a notice by first class mail to the vehicle owner at the most current address on file with the Oregon Department of Transportation, Division of Motor Vehicles. The notice shall include a statement of the owner's rights under this ordinance. 
(10)  A person posting a deposit is deemed to have forfeited the cash deposit to the City if no request for hearing is filed within ten calendar days following the date of the immobilization or within ten calendar days following the date of the towing, in a case where the vehicle has been towed. 
(11)  Hearing. A person provided notice under subsections (2) or (9) of this section or any other person who reasonably appears to have an interest in the vehicle may request a hearing under this subsection to contest the validity of the immobilization, towing, or storage of the vehicle by submitting a request for hearing with the Municipal Court not more than ten days from the mailing date of the notice. 
(a)  If the City receives a request for hearing before the vehicle is towed and removed, the vehicle shall not be removed unless the vehicle constitutes a hazard or is occupying space in an off-street public parking lot. 
(b)  A request for hearing shall be in writing and shall state grounds upon which the person requesting the hearing believes that the immobilization or towing and storage of the vehicle is not justified. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a request for a hearing under this section, the Municipal Court shall set a time for the hearing within six days of the receipt of the request and shall provide notice of the hearing to the person requesting the hearing, to the owners of the vehicle, and to any lessors or security interest holders shown in the records of the Department of Transportation. The six-day period in this subsection does not include holidays, Saturdays, or Sundays. 
(d)  If the Municipal Court finds by substantial evidence and after hearing on the record that the custody and removal of the vehicle was: 
(i)  Invalid, the Municipal Court shall order the immediate release of the vehicle to the owner or person with right of possession. If the vehicle is released under this subsection, the person to whom the vehicle is released is not liable for towing or storage charges. If the person has already paid the towing and storage charges on the vehicle, the City shall reimburse the person for the charges. New storage costs on the vehicle will not start to accrue, until 24 hours after the vehicle is officially released to the person. 
(ii)  Valid, the Municipal Court shall order the vehicle to be held in custody until the costs of the hearing and all outstanding penalties, the immobilization fee, and all towing and storage costs are paid by the party claiming the vehicle. The order shall further specify the time within which the charges are to be paid and if not paid, the vehicle may be disposed of as an abandoned vehicle. If the vehicle has not yet been towed, the Municipal Court shall order its towing. 
(e)  A person who fails to appear at a hearing under this subsection is not entitled to another hearing unless the person provides reasons satisfactory to the Municipal Court for the person's failure to appear. Except as otherwise specifically provided by the Municipal Court, a person who fails to appear at a scheduled hearing shall be deemed to have waived the right to contest the immobilization or towing and shall forfeit any deposit to the City. 
(f)  The City must provide only one hearing under this subsection each time it takes a vehicle into custody and tows a vehicle or proposes to do so. 
(g)  A hearing under this subsection may be used to determine the reasonableness of the charge for towing and storage of the vehicle. Towing and storage charges set by law, ordinance, or rule are reasonable for purposes of this subsection. 
(h)  The Municipal Court shall provide a written statement of the results of a hearing held under this subsection to the person requesting the hearing. Hearings under this subsection may be informal in nature, but the presentation of evidence in a hearing shall be consistent with the presentation of evidence required in civil infraction cases. The determination of the Municipal Court at a hearing under this subsection is final and is not subject to appeal. 
(Ord. 506-80 §61, 4-14-80; Ord. 936-94 §5, 12-12-94; Ord. 1162-04 §1, 6-14-04)  
TMC 8-1-360 - Penalties. 
(1)  A Violation of TMC 8-1-150 through 8-1-260, except for a violation of TMC 8-1-160(1)(c), and except for a violation that occurs in a Core Area Parking Lot, is punishable as follows: 
(a)  First offense in any one day, $10.00; Second offense in any one day, $15.00; Third and additional offenses in any one day, $20.00; 
(b)  All fines noted in subsection (2)(a) are due and payable to the Municipal Court within ten days after the date the citation is issued. Fines listed in subsection (2)(a) that are not paid within ten days shall double on the eleventh day after date of issuance. 
(2)  Violation of TMC 8-1-160(1)(c) is punishable as follows: 
(a)  For the first offense, $15.00, if paid within five days. 
(b)  For the second offense, $25.00, if paid within five days. 
(c)  For the third offense, and any offense thereafter, $50.00, if paid within five days. 
(d)  If the fines listed in (a), (b), and (c) are not paid within five days, but are paid within thirty days, then the fines shall be double the amounts listed in (a), (b), and (c). 
(e)  If the fines listed in (a), (b), and (c) are not paid within 30 days, a warrant may be issued. After 30 days if the fine has not been paid, a disposition of the case by way of conviction at trial or plea of guilty is punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(3)  A violation of TMC 8-1-160(3) or (4) that occurs in a Core Area Parking Lot is punishable as follows: 
(a)  First offense in any one day, $30.00; Second offense in any one day, $35.00; Third and additional offenses in any one day, $40.00. 
(b)  All fines under this subsection (3)(a) are due and payable to the Municipal Court within ten days after the date the citation is issued. If a fine is imposed under subsection (3)(a) is not paid within the ten days, the fine shall double on the eleventh day after issuance. 
(Ord. 506-80 §62, 4-14-80; Ord. 734-87 §3, 10-12-87; Ord. 747-88 §6, 6-13-88; Ord. 989-98 §61, 1-26-98; Ord. 1019-99, 6-14-99; Ord. 1306-10 §1, 7-12-10)  
CHAPTER 8-02 - OFF-ROAD VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
TMC 8-2-010 - Section Title, Pleading and Jurisdictional Scope. 
This ordinance shall be known as the City of Tualatin Off-Road Vehicle Ordinance, and shall apply to the incorporated limits of the City of Tualatin. 
(Ord. 287-75 §1, 3-24-75)  
TMC 8-2-020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, unless the context requires otherwise, the following terms are defined as follows: 
City Police Officer means a person authorized directly or by contract to provide police services for the City. 
Non-Road Area means an area that is not a road, or a road which is closed to off-road vehicles and posted as such; except that areas commonly held open to vehicular use, such as parking lots and race tracks, shall not be considered off-road areas. 
Off-Road Vehicle means every self-propelled motor vehicle designed or capable of traversing on or over natural terrain, including but not limited to snowmobiles, mini-bikes, motorcycles, four-wheel drive trucks, pickups, all terrain vehicles, jeeps, half-trucks, and helicopters. "Off-road vehicles" do not include, unless used for purposes prohibited by this ordinance, implements of husbandry, nor does it include military, fire, emergency or law enforcement vehicles used for legal purposes. 
Road means every public way, thoroughfare, road, street or easement within the county used or intended for use by the general public for vehicular travel. 
(Ord. 287-75 §2, 3-24-75)  
TMC 8-2-030 - Policy. 
The City Council has determined that off-road vehicles can provide appropriate, useful and energy-efficient alternatives to automobiles when properly operated, but that the unregulated use of such vehicles is a nuisance to the people of the City of Tualatin and causes damage to and deterioration of the environment detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the people. 
(Ord. 287-75 §3, 3-24-75)  
TMC 8-2-040 - Operation of Off-Road Vehicles. 
(1)  It is unlawful for a person to operate an off-road vehicle on a non-road area which the operator does not own, unless: 
(a)  The operator possesses written permission from the owner, contract purchaser or lessee of the non-road area; or 
(b)  The operator possesses written evidence of membership in a club or association to which the owner, contract purchaser or lessee of the non-road area has given written permission and a copy of which has been filed with the City police officer and City of Tualatin; or 
(c)  The owner, contract purchaser or lessee of the non-road area, upon approval of the City Council, has designated the non-road area as open for recreational purposes in accordance with ORS 105.655 to 105.680 by filing such consent and other information necessary to identify the area with the City police officer and City of Tualatin; or 
(d)  The owner, contract purchaser or lessee of the non-road area, upon approval of the City Council, has designated the non-road area as being open to off-road vehicle use by posting notice in a form and manner prescribed by the City police officer. 
(2)  It is unlawful for a person to: 
(a)  Falsify the written permission required by subsection 1(a) of this section; 
(b)  Falsify the evidence of club or association membership or the written permission required by subsection 1(b) of this section; 
(c)  Falsify the filing or consent required by subsection 1(c) of this section; 
(d)  Post the notice or remove the posted notice required by subsection 1(d) of this section without the consent of owner, contract purchaser or lessee. 
(Ord. 287-75 §4, 3-24-75)  
TMC 8-2-050 - Seizure. 
(1)  The City police officer may arrest the person operating an off-road vehicle when the person is found in the act of operating an off-road vehicle in violation of this ordinance. However, the City police officer may issue a citation in accordance with ORS 133.070 in lieu of exercising custody of the operator. 
(a)  The City police officer may seize any off-road vehicle incident to arrest or citation of the operator if he or she has reasonable grounds to believe that the vehicle was operated with willful or reckless disregard of the likelihood that the operation would cause substantial damage to the off-road area and that substantial damage has been caused by that operation. 
(b)  The City police officer shall retain possession of the vehicle, if seized, and, in any event, proceed at once against the person arrested in the appropriate court of the City of Tualatin. 
(2)  If the person arrested is the legal owner of a seized vehicle, it shall be returned to the owner upon execution of a good and valid bond, or cash deposit, with sureties acceptable to the City police officer, in a sum equal to the average value of the vehicle as stated in a list of average values of known vehicle categories, prepared by the City police officer and approved by the Council, which bond or cash deposit shall be conditioned upon the return of the vehicle to the City police officer upon disposition of the judgment of the court. 
If the person arrested is convicted of a violation of this ordinance, and the person is the owner of the off-road vehicle, the vehicle shall be subject to disposition as provided in TMC 8-2-060. 
(3)  If the person arrested is not the legal owner of a seized vehicle, the City police officer shall make all reasonable efforts to identify the name and address of the owner. If the City police officer is able to determine the name and address of the owner, the officer shall notify the owner by registered or certified mail of the seizure and inform him or her of the owner's rights under subsection (4). 
(4)  A person notified under subsection (3) of this section, or an owner of the vehicle, or any other person asserting a claim of lawful possession of a seized vehicle, may, prior to trial, move the court for return of the vehicle or obtain possession of the vehicle by posting bond or cash in accordance with subsection (2) of this section. 
(a)  The court shall, upon receipt of motion for return of vehicle, hold a hearing to determine if the owner, or other person asserting a lawful claim to the vehicle, had any knowledge that the vehicle would be used in violation of this ordinance. 
(b)  If the court determines by clear and convincing evidence that the movant had knowledge that the person arrested would use the vehicle in violation of this ordinance, the vehicle shall not be returned to the movant except in accordance with subsection (2) of this section, and the vehicle shall be subject to forfeiture as specified in TMC 8-2.060. 
(5)  If the person arrested is not convicted of a violation of this ordinance, and if the City police officer is in possession of the vehicle, it shall immediately be returned to the owner. 
(Ord. 287-75 §5, 3-24-75)  
TMC 8-2-060 - Disposition of Vehicle. 
(1)  The court, upon conviction of the person arrested, may order a return of a seized vehicle to the owner after payment of all expenses, or it may, upon motion made by the City Attorney, order forfeiture and sale of the vehicle at public auction by the City police officer. 
In determining whether to order a forfeiture and sale of the vehicle, the court shall consider the amount of damage caused by the use of the vehicle and the willfulness or recklessness of the violation. 
(2)  If the court orders a forfeiture and sale of the vehicle, the City police officer, after deducting $50.00 for administrative expenses plus all other expenses incurred, shall pay, to the extent of the remaining proceeds, all liens of record, ratable and according to their priorities. Any balance remaining shall be paid into the general fund of the City. 
(3)  If no person claims the vehicle, the City police officer shall advertise the sale of the vehicle and the description. Proceeds from the sale of the property, after deducting the expenses and costs, shall be paid into the funds of the City to be used to develop a system of off-road vehicle trails or facilities. The Council may authorize the City police officer to submit a bid for purchase at the public sale if the vehicle could be used for City purposes. Unsold property may be destroyed. 
(Ord. 287-75 §6, 3-24-75)  
TMC 8-2-070 - System of Off-Road Vehicle Trails and Facilities. 
The City of Tualatin may develop, maintain and regulate facilities for the enjoyment of off-road vehicles and shall conspicuously post such areas as off-road vehicle areas. 
(Ord. 287-75 §7, 3-24-75)  
TMC 8-2-080 - Penalties. 
(1)  It is a violation of City law for any person to violate this ordinance. 
(2)  Any person convicted of a violation of this ordinance shall be punished by a term of not more than 30 days in the county jail, or by a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, or by imposition of a requirement of public service work of a kind and for a duration not to exceed one year, as it determines appropriate. The court may, in any event, order restitution for damages. 
(Ord. 287-75 §8, 3-24-75)  
TMC 8-2-090 - Conformance with Law. 
This ordinance shall not be a substitute for or eliminate the necessity of conformity with any and all State laws, rules and regulations, and other ordinances which are now or may be in the future in effect which relate to the activities herein regulated. 
(Ord. 287-75 §9, 3-24-75)  
CHAPTER 8-03 - TRAFFIC AND BICYCLE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
In General 
Administration 
General Regulations 
Bicycles 
Schedules  
IN GENERAL 
 
TMC 8-3-010 - Short Title. 
This ordinance may be cited as "City of Tualatin Uniform Traffic Ordinance." 
(Ord. 506-80 §1, 4-14-80)  
TMC 8-3-020 - Definitions. 
(1)  The Municipal Court, pursuant to ORS 221.339, shall have concurrent jurisdiction of all state traffic offenses committed within the City. Violation of provisions of Oregon's Revised Statutes, Chapter 153, and 801 through 822 inclusive except for Chapter 813, is an offense against the City. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided, the following definitions apply: 
Bus Stop means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for use by buses loading or unloading passengers. 
Holiday means New Year's Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and any other day proclaimed to be a holiday by the Council. 
Loading Zone means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or materials during specified hours of specified days. 
Person means a natural person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation. 
Taxicab Stand means a space on the edge of a highway designated by sign for use by taxicabs. 
Traffic Lane means the area of the highway used for or designated for the movement of a single line of traffic. 
(Ord. 506-80 §2, 4-14-80; Ord. 747-88, §1, 6-13-88; Ord. 878-92 §1, 9-14-92; Ord. 936-94 §1, 12-12-94; Ord. 989-98 §1, 1-26-98; Ord. 1287-09 §1, 8-24-09)  
ADMINISTRATION 
 
TMC 8-3-030 - Powers of the Council. 
Subject to state laws, the City Council shall exercise all municipal traffic authority for the City by resolution except those powers specifically and expressly delegated. 
(Ord. 506-80 §3, 4-14-80; Ord. 989-98 §3, 1-26-98)  
TMC 8-3-040 - Duties of the Operations Director. 
The Operations Director or designee shall implement the ordinances, resolutions and motions of the Council by installing traffic control devices in accordance with the standards contained in the Oregon Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. 
(Ord. 506-80 §4, 4-14-80; Ord. 747-88, §4, 6-13-88; Ord. 989-98 §4, 1-26-98)  
TMC 8-3-045 - Duties of City Manager. 
Upon the recommendation of the City Engineer, the City Manager acting on behalf of the City Council, may create temporary parking areas for special events. 
(Ord. 1282-09, §1, 4-13-09)  
TMC 8-3-050 - Public Danger. 
Under conditions constituting a danger to the public in the judgment of the City Engineer, the Operations Director may install temporary traffic control devices. 
(Ord. 506-80 §5, 4-14-80; Ord. 989-98 §5, 1-26-98)  
TMC 8-3-060 - Standards. 
The regulations of the City Council or its designee shall be based upon: 
(1)  Traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations. 
(2)  Standards, limitations and rules promulgated by the Oregon Transportation Commission. 
(3)  Other recognized traffic control standards. 
(Ord. 506-80 §6, 4-14-80; Ord. 989-98 §6, 1-26-98)  
TMC 8-3-070 - Authority of Police and Fire Officers. 
(1)  Police officers and other designated persons shall enforce this ordinance. 
(2)  In the event of a fire or other public emergency, officers of the police, fire department, or persons designated by the City Manager may direct traffic, as conditions require. 
(Ord. 506-80 §7, 4-14-80; Ord. 609-83 §1, 10-24-83; Ord. 989-98 §7, 1-26-98; Ord. 1273-08 §1, 11-10-08)  
GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
TMC 8-3-080 - Crossing Private Property. 
No operator of a vehicle shall proceed from one street to an intersecting street by crossing private property except when the operator of the vehicle stops on the property to procure or provide goods or services. 
(Ord. 506-80 §8, 4-14-80; Ord. 989-98 §8, 1-26-98)  
TMC 8-3-090 - Unlawful Riding. 
(1)  No operator shall permit a passenger and no passenger shall ride on a vehicle upon a street except on a portion of the vehicle designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to a person riding within a truck body in space intended for merchandise. 
(2)  No person shall board or alight from a vehicle while the vehicle is in motion upon a street. 
(Ord. 506-80 §9, 4-14-80)  
TMC 8-3-100 - Sleds on Streets. 
No person shall use the streets for traveling on skis, toboggans, sleds or similar devices, except where authorized. 
(Ord. 506-80 §10, 4-14-80)  
TMC 8-3-110 - Damaging Sidewalks and Curbs. 
(1)  The operator of a motor vehicle shall not drive upon a sidewalk or roadside planting strip except to cross at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(2)  No unauthorized person shall place dirt, wood or other material in the gutter or space next to the curb of a street with the intention of using it as a driveway. 
(3)  No person shall remove a portion of a curb or move a motor vehicle or device moved by a motor vehicle upon a curb or sidewalk without first obtaining authorization and posting bond if required. A person who causes damage shall be held responsible for the cost of repair. 
(Ord. 506-80 §11, 4-14-80)  
TMC 8-3-120 - Removing Glass and Debris. 
A party to a vehicle accident or a person causing broken glass or other debris to be upon a street shall remove the glass and other debris from the street. 
(Ord. 506-80 §12, 4-14-80)  
TMC 8-3-130 - Application of the Oregon Vehicle Code. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided, the Oregon Vehicle Code, ORS Chapters 801 to 822, are incorporated into this Code by reference. 
(2)  Except as otherwise ordered by the Municipal Judge, or as otherwise provided by state law or the City of Tualatin Charter of 1967, as amended, the violations and traffic offenses procedures set forth in ORS Chapter 153 are incorporated into this Code by reference. 
(Ord. 747-88 §2, 6-13-88; Ord. 989-98 §13, 1-26-98; Ord. 1273-08 §2, 11-10-08)  
TMC 8-3-140 - Prohibited Truck Traffic. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a truck, as defined in TMC 8-3-020(2)(g) to proceed onto or along any street which has been designated as prohibited for such truck traffic. 
(Ord. 747-88 §4, 6-13-88)  
TMC 8-3-141 - Prohibited Trucks on Certain Streets to Protect Public Safety. 
(1)  If the City Council determines that motor vehicles or trucks longer than a three-axle, single unit truck jeopardize the public's safety when those vehicles travel on a particular street, road or intersection, the City Council, by ordinance, may prohibit such vehicles on that street or road. 
(2)  The City Council may base its findings on evidence submitted by the City Engineer, including but not limited to: 
(a)  The turning radius and other geometrics of an intersection; 
(b)  The width of the street or roadway; 
(c)  The maximum length and/or weight of truck that can safely maneuver the intersection or area of right-of-way without leaving the paved driving area; 
(d)  The speed limit in the area; and 
(e)  Any other deficiency that causes the public safety to be jeopardized. 
(Ord. 1282-09 §1, 4-14-80)  
TMC 8-3-142 - Streets Where Trucks are Prohibited for Public Safety Reasons. 
The city Engineer has produced evidence to show that it is necessary for public safety reasons to prohibit trucks larger than three-axle, single unit from driving on the following streets: 
(a)  The portion of SW Blake Street between SW 105th Street and SW 108th Street. 
(Ord. 1282-09 §2, 4-12-09)  
TMC 8-3-145 - Exceptions to Truck Prohibitions. 
Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the following from traveling on a street restricted in TMC 8-3-142: 
(a)  School and mass transit buses; 
(b)  Trucks collecting solid waste or recyclables within the City of Tualatin; 
(c)  Emergency vehicles; 
(d)  Motor vehicles that are picking up, delivering, or servicing a location in the area, so long as the vehicle uses the major collector or arterial closest to the pick-up, delivery, or service and utilizes the shortest route available, and travels on the restricted street or road for the shortest distance possible. 
(Ord. 1282-09 §3, 4-12-09)  
TMC 8-3-146 - Civil Penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, trust, partnership, or other legal entity that violates or refuses to comply with this chapter shall commit a civil infraction and shall be subject to a fine of up to $500.00. Each incident shall constitute a new violation. 
(Ord. 1282-09 §4, 4-12-09)  
TMC 8-3-150 - Blake Street Right-of-Way. 
(1)  The 30-foot-wide portion of Blake Street Right-of-Way that is located north of and adjacent to Hedges Park Subdivision, recorded in Washington County Book of Plats, Book 107, page 46, west of SW 108th Avenue shall be restricted as follows: 
(a)  It shall not be developed for or used by motor vehicle traffic; 
(b)  It may be developed for pedestrian and bicycle use. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent emergency vehicles or private utility or City maintenance vehicles from accessing this right-of-way when necessary to provide emergency services or to construct, install, repair or maintain the area or utilities under or in the right-of-way. 
(Ord. 1314-10 §1, 11-22-10)  
BICYCLES 
 
TMC 8-3-210 - Bicycle Operating Rules. 
In addition to observing all other applicable provisions of this ordinance and state law pertaining to bicycles, no person shall leave a bicycle, except in a bicycle rack. If no rack is provided, the person shall leave the bicycle so as not to obstruct any roadway, sidewalk, driveway or building entrance. A person shall not leave a bicycle in violation of the provisions relating to the parking of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 506-80 §46, 4-14-80)  
TMC 8-3-220 - Impounding of Bicycles. 
(1)  No person shall leave a bicycle on public or private property without the consent of the person in charge or the owner. 
(2)  A bicycle left on public property for a period in excess of 24 hours may be impounded by the police department. 
(3)  In addition to any citation issued, a bicycle parked in violation of this ordinance may be immediately impounded by the police department. 
(4)  If a bicycle impounded under this ordinance is licensed, or other means of determining its ownership exist, the police shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner. No impounding fee shall be charged to the owner of a stolen bicycle which has been impounded. 
(5)  A bicycle impounded under this ordinance which remains unclaimed shall be disposed of in accordance with the City's procedures for disposal of abandoned or lost personal property. 
(6)  Except as provided in subsection (4), a fee of $1.00 shall be charged to the owner of a bicycle impounded under this section. 
(Ord. 506-80 §47, 4-14-80) 
SCHEDULE A
STOP SIGN LOCATIONS 
Resolution 	Date 	Location 
754-80 	06-30-80 	(1) NW corner SW Montauk Circle (both ends) at SW Childs Road. 
		(2) SE corner SW 65th Avenue at SW McEwan Road. 
		(3) Rescinded by Res. # 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(4) Rescinded by Res. # 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(5) Rescinded by Res. # 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(6) Rescinded by Res. # 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(7) Rescinded by Res. # 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(8) Rescinded by Res. # 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(9) Rescinded by Res. # 4618-07 §1, passed January 8, 2007. 
		(10) SE corner SW Childs Road at SW Lower Boones Ferry Road. 
		(11) Rescinded by Res. #3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(12) SE corner of SW 84th Avenue at SW Boones Ferry Road. 
		(13) Repealed by Res. # 2947-94, §2, passed March 14, 1994. 
		(14) Repealed by Res. # 2947-94, §2, passed March 14, 1994. 
		(15) NW corner SW 84th Avenue at SW Nyberg St. 
		(16) SW corner SW Seneca Street at SW Martinazzi Ave. 
		(17) NE corner SW Seneca Street at SW Boones Ferry Road. 
		(18) Rescinded by Res. # 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(19) NE corner of Tualatin Road, southerly access road into Community Park. 
		(20) NE corner of the northerly access road into Community Park at SW Tualatin Road. 
		(21) NW corner soccer field access road at SW Tualatin Road. 
		(22) Rescinded by Res. # 3725-00 §1, passed May 22, 2000. 
		(23) NW corner of SW Cheyenne Way at SW Tualatin Road. 
		(24) NW corner SW Sioux Court at SW Tualatin Road. 
		(25) NW corner SW Chippewa Trail at SW Tualatin Road. 
		(26) NW corner SW Shasta Trail at SW Tualatin Road. 
		(27) NW corner SW Jurgens Avenue at SW Tualatin Road. 
		(28) SE corner of SW Teton Avenue at SW Tualatin Road. 
		(29) NW corner of SW 106th Avenue at SW Tualatin Road. 
		(30) SW corner of SW Pueblo Court at SW 106th Avenue. 
		(31) NE corner of SW Pueblo Street at SW 106th Avenue. 
		(32) NW corner of SW 105th Court at SW Pueblo Street. 
		(33) SE corner of SW 108th Avenue at SW Tualatin Road. 
		(34) NW corner SW Teton Avenue at SW Herman Road. 
		(35) SE corner of SW Teton Avenue at SW Herman Road. 
		(36) SW corner of SW Manhasset Drive at SW Teton Avenue. 
		(37) Rescinded by Res.# 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(38) Rescinded by Res.# 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(39) Rescinded by Res.# 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(40) SE corner of SW 105th Avenue at SW Avery Street. 
		(41) NW corner of SW Teton Avenue at SW Avery Street. 
		(42) SE corner of SW Teton Avenue at SW Avery Street. 
		(43) NE corner of SW Erie Court at SW Teton Avenue. 
		(44) NE corner of SW Chickasaw Court at SW Teton Avenue. 
		(45) NE corner of SW Siletz Drive at SW Teton Avenue. 
		(46) SW corner of SW Siletz Drive at SW Teton Avenue. 
		(47) NW corner of SW 103rd Avenue at SW Siletz Drive. 
		(48) SW corner of SW Chickasaw Drive at SW 103rd Avenue. 
		(49) SW corner of SW 103rd Avenue at SW Teton Avenue. 
		(50) SE corner of SW Elkhorn Court at SW Avery Street. 
		(51) SE corner SW Winema Drive at SW Siletz Drive, both ends of said SW Winema Drive. 
		(52) NW corner of SW 98th Avenue at SW Siletz Drive. 
		(53) NW corner of SW Ochoco Drive at SW Siletz Drive. 
		(54) SE corner SW Willapa Way at SW Ochoco Drive. 
		(55) NW corner SW Willapa Way at SW Siletz Drive. 
		(56) SE corner of SW Willapa Court at SW Siletz Drive. 
		(57) SW corner of SW Siletz Drive at SW Boones Ferry Road. 
		(58) SE corner of SW 94th Avenue at SW Avery Street. 
		(59) Rescinded by Res.# 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(60) NW corner of SW 93rd Avenue at SW Avery Street. 
		(61) SW corner of SW Nez Pierce Court at SW 93rd Avenue. 
		(62) SE corner SW 93rd Avenue at SW Sagert Street. 
		(63) SE corner of SW Apache Drive at SW Sagert Street. 
		(64) Rescinded by Res.# 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(65) SW corner of SW Apache Drive at SW Boones Ferry Road. 
		(66) SW corner of SW Raritan Court at SW Boones Ferry Road. 
		(67) SW corner of SW Killarney Lane at SW Boones Ferry Road. 
		(68) SW corner of SW Alsea Drive at SW Boones Ferry Road. 
		(69) SE corner of SW Alsea Court at SW Alsea Drive. 
		(70) NW corner of SW Siuslaw Lane at SW Alsea Drive. 
		(71) SE corner of SW 95th Court at SW Siuslaw Lane. 
		(72) SE corner of SW 98th Avenue at SW Siuslaw Lane. 
		(73) SW corner of SW Coquille Drive at SW 99th Avenue. 
		(74) NE corner of SW Coquille Drive at SW Paulina Drive. 
		(75) NE corner of SW Paulina Drive at SW 105th Avenue. 
		(76) NW corner of SW 99th Avenue at SW Alsea Drive. 
		(77) SW corner of SW Arikara Drive at SW Boones Ferry Road. 
		(78) NW corner of the cul-de-sac serving lots 14-16 of Arikara Subdivision at SW Arikara Drive. 
		(79) NW corner of the cul-de-sac serving lots 19-21 of Arikara Subdivision at SW Arikara Drive. 
		(80) NW corner SW Arikara Drive at SW Columbia Drive. 
		(81) SE corner of SW Arikara Court at SW Columbia Drive. 
		(82) SE corner of SW Klickitat Court at SW Columbia Drive. 
		(83) SE corner of SW Chehalis Street at SW Columbia Drive. 
		(84) SE corner of SW Chehalis Court at SW Chehalis Street. 
		(85) SW corner of SW Chehalis Street at SW Columbia Drive. 
		(86) NW corner of SW Columbia Drive at SW Ibach Street. 
		(87) NE corner SW Columbia Circle at SW Columbia Drive, both ends of said SW Columbia Circle. 
		(88) NE corner of SW Ohop Court at SW Columbia Drive. 
		(89) SW corner of SW Dakota Drive at SW Mandan Drive. 
		(90) NE corner of SW Lummi Street at SW Mandan Drive. 
		(91) NE corner SW Tygh Loop at SW Mandan Drive. 
		(92) SW corner SW Tygh Loop at SW Tygh Loop. 
		(93) NW corner of SW Tygh Loop at SW Mandan Drive. 
		(94) SE corner of SW Creek Drive at SW Mandan Drive. 
		(95) NW corner of SW Creek Drive at SW Mandan Drive. 
		(96) NE corner of SW Creek Drive at SW Dakota Drive. 
		(97) NE corner of SW Mandan Drive at SW Dakota Drive. 
		(98) SW corner of SW Mandan Court at SW Dakota Drive. 
		(99) NE corner of SW Dakota Drive at SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(100) SW corner of SW Blackfoot Drive at SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(101) NW corner SW Blackfoot Drive at SW Osage Street. 
		(102) SW corner SW Osage Street at SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(103) SW corner of SW Dakota Circle at SW Martinazzi Avenue, both ends of said SW Dakota Circle. 
		(104) SE corner of SW Martinazzi Avenue at SW Blake Street. 
		(105) SE corner of SW 91 st Avenue at SW Blake Street. 
		(106) SE corner S.W. 92nd Ave. at S.W. Blake St. 
		(107) SW corner of SW Cayuse Court at SW 92nd Avenue. 
		(108) NE corner of SW Blake Street at SW Boones Ferry Road. 
		(109) NW corner SW 92nd Avenue at SW Blake Street. 
		(110) NW corner of SW 90th Avenue at SW Blake Street. 
		(110a) SE corner of SW 90th Avenue at SW Talawa Drive. 
		(111) SE corner of SW 90th Avenue at SW Talawa Drive. 
		(112) NW corner of SW 90th Avenue at SW Talawa Drive. 
		(113) SW corner of SW Talawa Drive at SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(114) NW corner SW Martinazzi Avenue at SW Blake Street. 
		(115) SW corner SW Martinazzi Court at SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(116) SW corner cul-de-sac serving lots 105-107 of Autumn Woods Subdivision at SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(117) NE corner of SW Pamlico Court at SW 90th Avenue. 
		(118) SW corner of SW Arapaho Road at SW 90th Avenue. 
		(119) NE corner SW Arapaho Road at SW Boones Ferry Road. 
		(120) SW corner cul-de-sac serving lots 59-62 of Autumn Woods Subdivision at SW 90th Avenue. 
		(121) NE corner cul-de-sac serving lots 50-52 of Autumn Woods Subdivision at SW 90th Avenue. 
		(122) NE corner of SW Iroquois Drive at SW 90th Avenue. 
		(123) SE corner of SW Jameco Court at SW Iroquois Drive. 
		(124) SE corner of SW 86th Court at SW Iroquois Drive. 
		(125) NW corner of SW 86th Avenue at SW Iroquois Drive. 
		(126) SE corner of the cul-de-sac serving lots 43-45 of Shaniko Subdivision at SW Iroquois Drive. 
		(127) NW corner of SW 84th Avenue at SW Iroquois Drive. 
		(128) SW corner SW Iroquois Drive at SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(129) NE corner of SW Iroquois Drive at SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(130) NE corner of SW Makah Street at SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(131) NW corner SW Iroquois Drive at SW Makah Street. 
		(132) NE corner of SW Ponco Court at SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(133) NE corner SW Piute Court at SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(134) SW corner of the cul-de-sac serving lots 18-21 of Shaniko Subdivision at SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(135) SW corner SW Chelan Street at SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(136) NW corner of SW Colville Court at SW Chelan Street. 
		(137) NW corner SW 84th Court at SW Chelan Street. 
		(138) SE corner of SW 84th Avenue at SW Chelan Street. 
		(139) SW corner of SW Umatilla Street at SW 84th Avenue. 
		(140) NE corner of SW Nestucca Court at SW 86th Avenue. 
		(141) NE corner SW Umatilla Street at SW 86th Avenue. 
		(142) SW corner of SW Umatilla Street at SW 86th Avenue. 
		(143) NE corner of SW Umatilla Street at SW 90th Avenue. 
		(144) NW corner SW 90th Avenue at SW Shoshone. 
		(145) SW corner of SW Nisqually Court at SW Shoshone. 
		(146) NE corner of SW Yakima Court at SW Shoshone. 
		(147) Rescinded by Res. # 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(148) SE corner of SW 90th Avenue at SW Avery Street. 
		(149) SE corner of SW Shoshone at SW Avery Street. 
		(150) NW corner of SW 86th Avenue at SW Avery Street. 
		(151) SW corner SW Avery Street at SW 86th Avenue. 
		(152) SE corner of SW 86th Avenue at SW Avery Street. 
		(153) NE corner of SW Avery Street at SW 86th Avenue. 
		(154) SW corner of SW Avery Street at SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(155) SE corner of SW Martinazzi Avenue at SW Avery Street. 
		(156) NE corner of SW Avery Street at SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(157) NW corner of SW Martinazzi Avenue at SW Avery Street. 
		(158) SW corner of SW Seminole Trail at SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(159) NE corner of SW Seminole Trail at SW 86th Avenue. 
		(160) SW corner of SW Seminole Trail at SW 86th Avenue. 
		(161) NE corner of SW Modoc Court at SW 86th Avenue. 
		(162) SW corner of SW Comanche Way at SW 86th Avenue. 
		(163) NE corner of SW Santiam Drive at SW 86th Avenue. 
		(164) SE corner of SW 86th Avenue at SW Sagert Street. 
		(165) Rescinded by Res.# 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(166) SE corner of SW Martinazzi Avenue at SW Sagert Street. 
		(167) NW corner of SW Martinazzi Avenue at SW Sagert Street. 
		(168) SW corner of SW Mohawk Street at SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(169) NE corner of SW Mohawk Street at SW Boones Ferry Road. 
		(170) Rescinded by Res. # 3725-00 §1, passed May 22, 2000. 
		(171) Rescinded by Res. # 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(172) NE corner of SW Tonka Street at SW Boones Ferry Road. 
		(173) SE corner of SW 72nd Avenue at SW Sagert Street. 
		(174) SW corner of SW Delaware Circle at SW 72nd Avenue. 
		(175) NE corner of SW Delaware Drive at SW 72nd Avenue. 
		(176) NE corner of SW 71 st Avenue at SW Delaware Drive. 
		(177) NE corner of SW Potomac Street at SW 70th Avenue. 
		(178) NE corner of SW Ottawa Street at SW 70th Avenue. 
		(179) SW corner of SW Algonkin Street at SW 70th Avenue. 
		(180) NE corner of SW Algonkin Street at SW 71st Avenue. 
		(181) SE corner of SW 71 st Avenue at SW Sagert Street. 
		(182) SE corner of SW 70th Avenue at SW Sagert Street. 
		(183) SW corner of SW Sagert Street at SW 65th Avenue. 
		(184) SE corner of SW 65th Avenue at SW Sagert Street. 
		(185) Rescinded by Res. # 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(186) Rescinded by Res. # 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(187) NW corner of SW 68th Avenue at SW Sagert Street. 
		(188) NW corner of SW 67th Avenue at SW 68th Avenue. 
		(189) SE corner of SW Santee Court at SW 68th Avenue. 
		(190) SW corner of SW 72nd Avenue at SW 68th Avenue. 
		(191) NE corner of SW Napa Court at SW 68th Avenue. 
		(192) SW corner of SW Hopi Court at SW 68th Avenue. 
		(193) SW corner of SW Washo Court at SW 72nd Avenue. 
		(194) SW corner of SW Coho Court at SW 72nd Avenue. 
		(195) Rescinded by Res. # 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(196) NW corner of SW 72nd Avenue at SW Sagert Street. 
		(197) Rescinded by Res. # 4618-07 §1, passed January 8, 2007. 
		(198) Rescinded by Res. # 4618-07 §1, passed January 8, 2007. 
		(199) SW corner of the VIP's access road at SW Lower Boones Ferry Road. 
805-80 	09-08-80 	(200) SW corner of SW Martinazzi Avenue at SW Iroquois Drive. 
		(201) NW corner of SW Martinazzi Avenue at SW Iroquois Drive. 
833-80 	11-10-80 	(202) SE corner of SW 82nd Avenue Parking Lot at SW Boones Ferry Road. 
		(203) NE corner of SW 82nd Avenue Parking Lot at SW Boones Ferry Road. 
		(204) Rescinded by Res. # 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
1085-82 	03-22-82 	(205) Rescinded by Res. # 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
		(206) Rescinded by Res. # 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
1136-82 	07-26-82 	(207) SW corner of SW 103rd Drive and SW Teton Avenue. 
		(208) NW corner of SW 103rd Drive and SW Susquehanna Drive 
		(209) NW corner of SW 104th Avenue and SW Susquehanna Drive. 
		(210) NE corner of SW 105th Avenue and SW Susquehanna Drive. 
		(211) SW corner of SW Teton Avenue and SW Susquehanna Drive. 
		(212) NE corner of SW Teton Avenue and SW Concho Court. 
		(213) SW corner of SW Teton Avenue and SW Kickapoo Court. 
1187-82 	10-11-82 	(214) NE corner of SW Sagert Street and SW Martinazzi Avenue 
		(215) SW corner of SW Sagert Street and SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
1233-83 	02-14-83 	(216) NE corner of SW Cherokee Street at SW Tualatin Road. 
		(217) NW corner of SW 86th Avenue at SW Tualatin Road. 
1271-83 	06-13-83 	(218) SW corner of SW Blake Street and SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(219) NE corner of SW Blake Street and SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
1335-83 	11-15-83 	(220) NE corner of SW Mandan Drive and SW Creek Court. 
		(221) SW corner of SW Mandan Drive and SW Creek Drive. 
1354-84 	01-09-84 	(222) NE corner of SW Cheyenne Way and SW Shawnee Trail (north end of Shawnee Trail). 
		(223) NE corner of SW Cheyenne Way and SW Shawnee Trail (south end of Shawnee Trail). 
		(224) SW corner of SW Tonopah Street and SW 93rd Avenue. 
		(225) SW corner of SW Umiat Street and SW 93rd Avenue. 
		(226) SE corner of SW Wanpanoag Drive and SW Sagert Street. 
		(227) SW corner of SW 69th Street and SW Wanpanoag Drive. 
		(228) SW corner of SW Ottowa Street and SW 69th Street. 
		(229) NW corner of SW 69th Street and SW Wanpanoag Drive. 
1354-84 	01-09-84 	(230) NE corner or SW 69th and SW (continued) Wanpanoag Drive. 
		(231) SE corner of SW 69th Street and SW Wanpanoag Drive. 
		(232) SW corner of SW Potomac Street and SW 69th Street. 
1363-84 	02-13-84 	(233) SE corner of SW 100th Court and SW Tualatin Road. 
		(234) SE corner of SW 118th Avenue and SW Herman Road. 
		(235) SE corner of SW 90th Court and SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road. 
		(236) NE corner of SW Siletz Drive and SW 105th Avenue. 
		(237) South side of SW 103rd Avenue and SW Teton Avenue. 
		(238) SE corner of SW 90th Street and SW Blake Street. 
		(239) North side of SW Dakota Court and SW Dakota Drive. 
		(240) SE corner of SW Pinto Avenue and SW Dakota Drive. 
		(241) East side of SW Pima Avenue and SW Pinto Drive. 
		(242) North Side of SW Pinto Drive and SW Pima Avenue. 
		(243) Rescinded by Res.# 4291-04, passed 9-27-04. 
		(244) NW corner of SW 108th Avenue and SW Herman Road. 
		(245) NW corner of SW 65th Avenue and SW Sagert Street. 
1371-84 	02-27-84 	(246) SE corner of SW Siletz Drive and SW 104th Avenue. 
		(247) NW corner of SW Siletz Drive and SW 104th Avenue. 
1409-84 	05-14-84 	(248) NE corner of SW Sagert Street and SW 65th Avenue. 
1520-85 	01-28-85 	(249) NW corner of SW Warm Springs and SW Tonka Streets. 
		(250) SE corner of SW Mohave Court and (old) SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road. 
		(251) SE corner of SW 92nd and SW Talawa Drive. 
		(252) SW corner of SW Calusa Loop and SW 57th Street (southernmost intersection). 
		(253) SW corner of SW Calusa Loop and SW 57th Street (north intersection). 
		(254) NW corner of SW 57th Street and SW Borland Road. 
		(255) NE corner of SW 57th Street and SW Powhattan Avenue. 
		(256) SW corner of SW Santiam Drive and SW Tillamook Street. 
		(257) SE corner of SW Tillamook Street and SW Sagert Street. 
		(258) SE corner of SW Mohawk Street and SW Warm Springs Street. 
		(259) NE corner of SW Mohawk Street and SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
1666-85 	09-23-85 	(260) NE corner of SW Moratoc Drive and SW 105th Avenue. 
		(261) SW corner of SW Moratoc Drive and SW Killarney Lane. 
		(262) NW corner of SW Teton Avenue and SW Moratoc Drive. 
		(263) NW corner of SW Pueblo Street and SW Jurgens Avenue. 
		(264) NW corner of SW Killarney Lane and SW Coquille Drive. 
1693-85 	10-28-85 	(265) NW corner of SW Killarney Court and SW Killarney Lane. 
1821-86 	07-14-86 	(266) NE and SW corners of SW 57th Avenue and SW Joshua Street. 
		(267) SE and NW corners of SW 57th Avenue and SW Natchez Street. 
		(268) NW corner of SW 55th Court and SW Natchez Street. 
1848-86 	09-08-86 	(269) NW corner of SW Tenino Lane and SW Tenino Court. 
		(270) SW corner of SW Tenino Lane and SW 72nd Avenue. 
1849-86 	09-08-86 	(271) NW corner of SW Siletz Court and SW Siletz Drive. 
		(272) SE corner of SW Siletz Court and SW Siletz Drive. 
		(273) NW corner of SW Siletz Drive and SW Sunde Court. 
		(274) NE corner of SW Siletz Drive and SW Boones Ferry Road. 
1855-86 	09-22-86 	(275) NW corner of SW 125th Court and SW Herman Road. 
1856-86 	09-22-86 	(276) NE corner of SW Martinazzi Avenue and SW Mohawk Street. 
		(277) SE corner of SW Warm Springs and SW Mohawk Street. 
1892-86 	11-24-86 	(278) SW corner of SW Potano Street and SW 97th Avenue. 
		(279) NW corner of SW 97th Avenue and SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road. 
1893-86 	11-24-86 	(280) NW corner of SW Natchez Street and SW Chesapeake Drive. 
		(281) NE corner of SW Wichita Street and SW Chesapeake Drive. 
		(282) SW corner of SW Chesapeake Court and SW Chesapeake Drive. 
		(283) SE corner of SW Chesapeake Drive and SW 53rd Court. 
1894-86 	11-24-86 	(284) SE corner of SW 98th Avenue and SW Avery Street. 
1895-86 	11-24-86 	(285) SE corner of SW Kawanda Court and SW Avery Street. 
1896-86 	11-24-86 	(286) NE corner of SW 98th Avenue and SW 98th Court. 
1897-86 	11-24-86 	(287) Rescinded by Res. # 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
1997-87 	06-08-87 	(287a) NW corner of Teton and Siletz (in the Commanche Woods Subdivision) 
		(287b) SE corner of Teton and Siletz (in the Commanche Woods Subdivision) 
2014-87 	07-13-87 	(288) Rescinded by Res.# 3725-00 §1, passed May 22, 2000. 
2059-87 	10-12-87 	(289) SW corner of SW Wasco Way and SW Shasta Trail in the Apache Bluff Subdivision. 
		(290) SE corner of SW Yaquina Court and SW Wasco Way in the Apache Bluff Subdivision. 
2060-87 	10-12-87 	(291) SE and NW corners of SW Columbia Drive and SW Arikara Drive in the Columbia I Subdivision. 
2088-88 	01-11-88 	(292) SW corner of SW 50th Avenue and SW Natchez Street. 
		(293) SW corner of SW 51 st Avenue and SW Natchez Street. 
		(294) SW corner of SW 51 st Avenue and SW Wichita Street. 
		(295) SE corner of SW 53rd Avenue and SW Joshua Street. 
2154-88 	05-23-88 	(296) NW corner of SW Blake Street and SW 90th Avenue. 
		(297) SE corner of SW Blake Street and SW 90th Avenue. 
2199-88 	08-08-88 	Fox Hill East Subdivision 
		(298) NW corner of SW 53rd Avenue and SW Greenwood Circle. 
		(299) SW corner of SW 50th Avenue and SW Greenwood Circle. 
		(300) SE corner of SW Greenwood Circle and SW Greenwood Circle. 
		(301) SW corner of SW Greenwood Circle and SW Greenwood Place. 
		(302) SE corner of SW Greenwood Circle and SW Bushbaum Court. 
		(303) North side of SW Greenwood Circle at SW 52nd Avenue. 
		(304) SW corner of SW Greenwood Circle and SW 52nd Avenue. 
		(305) NW corner of SW 52nd Avenue and SW Wilke Road. 
		(306) SE corner of SW Greenwood Circle and SW Malsam Court. 
		Jeffwood Estates Subdivision 
		(307) SW corner of SW 106th Avenue and SW Bannoch Street. 
		(308) NE corner of SW 106th Avenue and SW Bannoch Court. 
		(309) SW corner of SW 106th Avenue and SW Kiowa Court. 
		(310) NE corner of SW 106th Avenue and SW Kiowa Street. 
		Avery Business Park - Phase 2 
		(311) NW corner of SW Avery Street and SW Avery Court. 
2241-88 	11-15-89 	(312) SW corner of SW Avery and SW Teton Avenue. 
		(313) NE corner of SW Avery Street and SW Teton Avenue. 
		(314) SW corner of SW Old Tualatin-Sherwood Road and SW Mohave Court. 
		(314a) NE corner of SW Old Tualatin-Sherwood Road and SW Mohave Court. 
2293-89 	03-27-89 	(315) NW corner of SW Ibach Street and SW Hedges Drive. 
		(316) NW corner of SW Ibach Street and SW 103rd Court. 
		(317) NE corner of SW 103rd Court and SW Hedges Court. 
		(318) SE corner of SW Hedges Drive and SW Columbia Drive. 
		(319) NE corner of SW Hedges Drive and SW Columbia Drive. 
		(320) NW corner of SW Columbia Drive and SW 100th Drive. 
		(321) SE corner of SW 100th Drive and SW Alsea Court. 
2345-89 	07-10-89 	(322) NE corner of SW 99th Avenue and SW Alsea Drive. 
		(323) SW corner of SW 99th Avenue and SW Alsea Drive. 
2380-89 	09-10-89 	(324) SE corner of SW Hazelbrook Road and SW 105th Avenue. 
		(325) NE corner of SW 105th Avenue and SW Kellogg Street. 
		(326) NW corner of SW 106th Court and SW Starr Street. 
		(327) SE corner of SW 106th Avenue and SW Starr Street. 
		(328) NE corner of SW 106th Avenue and SW Lucas Court. 
2421-90 	08-01-90 	(329) SW corner of SW Sagert Street and SW Apache Drive. 
		(330) NE corner of SW Sagert Street and SW Apache Drive. 
2436-90 	02-20-90 	Fox Hill Park Subdivision 
		(331) SW corner of SW Navaho Court and SW 48th Avenue. 
		(332) NE corner of SW Chunut Court and SW 48th Avenue. 
		(333) NW corner of SW Saum Way and SW 48th Avenue. 
		(334) SE corner of SW Saum Way and SW 48th Avenue. 
		(335) NE corner of SW Tapoas Place and SW 48th Avenue. 
		(336) SW corner of SW Tapoas Court and SW 48th Avenue 
		(337) SE corner of SW Saum Way and SW 49th Avenue. 
		(338) NE corner of SW Saum Way and SW 50th Avenue. 
		Orchard Hill Park 
		(339) NE corner of SW Natchez Street and SW 50th Avenue. 
		(340) SW corner of SW Joshua Court and SW 48th Avenue. 
		(341) NE corner of SW Joshua Street and SW 48th Avenue. 
		(342) SE corner of SW Natchez Street and SW 48th Avenue. 
		(343) NW corner of SW Natchez Street and SW 48th Avenue. 
		(344) SE corner of SW Wichita Street and SW 48th Avenue. 
		(345) NW corner of SW Natchez Street and SW 46th Avenue. 
		(346) SE corner of SW Natchez Court and SW 46th Avenue. 
2450-90 	04-09-90 	(347) NE corner of SW Avery Street and SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(348) SW corner of SW Leveton Drive and SW 108th Avenue. 
		(349) NW corner of SW 119th Avenue and SW Herman Road. 
2482-90 	06-25-90 	(350) SE corner of 106th Avenue and Pueblo Street. 
		(351) NW corner of 106th Avenue and Pueblo Court. 
		(352) SE corner of 106th Avenue and Kiowa Street. 
		(353) NW corner of 106th Avenue and Kiowa Street. 
2518-90 	09-10-90 	(354) NW corner of SW 118th Avenue and SW Herman Road. 
		(355) SE corner of SW 118th Avenue and SW Leveton Drive. 
		(356) NE corner of SW 118th Avenue and SW Leveton Drive. 
		(357) SW corner of SW 118th Avenue and SW Leveton Drive. 
		(358) NW corner of SW 118th Avenue and SW Leveton Drive (JAE driveway). 
2523-90 	09-10-90 	Fox Hill No. 3 
		(359) SE corner of SW Nyberg Lane and SW 57th Avenue. 
		(360) NE corner of SW Omaha Court and SW 57th Avenue. 
		(361) SW corner of SW Mobile Place and SW 57th Avenue. 
		(362) NE corner of SW Wichita Street and SW 57th Avenue. 
		(363) SW corner of SW Wichita Street and SW 57th Avenue. 
		(364) NW corner of SW Natchez Street and SW 57th Avenue. 
		Hedges Creek No. 2 
		(365) SE corner of SW Ibach Street and SW Taylors Drive. 
		(366) NE corner of Taylors Lane and Taylors Drive. 
		(367) NW corner of Cole Court and Taylors Drive. 
		Jeffwood Estates No. 3 
		(368) SE corner of SW Hazelbrook Road and SW 107th Avenue. 
		Tualatin Woods (a.k.a. Dakota Hills No. 4) 
		(369) NW corner of SW Pinto Drive and SW Maricopa Drive. 
		(370) NE corner of SW Maricopa Drive and SW Vermillion Drive. 
		(371) NW corner of SW 87th Place and SW Stono Drive. 
2609-91 	06-03-94 	(372) SE corner of SW Hazelbrook Road and SW Jurgens Road. 
2646-91 	09-09-91 	(373) SW corner of SW 106th Avenue and SW Lucas Drive. 
2651-91 	09-23-91 	(374) NE corner of SW 106th Avenue and SW Starr Drive. 
		(375) SW corner SW 106th Avenue and SW Starr Drive. 
		(376) NW corner of SW 106th Avenue and SW Lucas Drive. 
		(377) SE corner of SW 106th Avenue and SW Lucas Drive. 
		(378) The placement of a "Stop Ahead" sign south of the intersection of SW 106th Avenue and SW Lucas Drive. 
2670-91 	11-12-91 	Arrowhead 
		(379) NE corner of SW 115th Avenue and SW Elmer Court. 
		(380) NE corner of SW 115th Avenue and SW Roberts Court. 
		Fox Hill Park No. 2 
		(381) The most southerly NW corner of SW Saum Way and 48th Ave. 
		Jeffwood Estates No. 4 
		(382) SW corner of SW 103rd Avenue and SW Kiowa. 
		Martinazzi Century Estates 
		(383) NE corner of SW Jurgens Avenue and SW Wasco Way. 
		(384) NE corner of SW Jurgens Avenue and SW Ladd Court. 
		(385) NE corner of SW Jurgens Avenue and SW Anderson Court. 
		Miller Forest 
		(386) NE corner of SW 104th Avenue and SW Chickasaw Drive. 
		Moccasin Run 
		(387) Rescinded by Res. # 3725-00 §1, passed May 22, 2000. 
2671-91 	11-12-91 	(388) Placement of a stop sign at the southwest corner of SW 118th and SW Myslony. 
		(389) Placement of a stop sign at the NE corner of SW 118th and SW Myslony. 
		(390) Rescinded by Res. # 3552-99 §1, passed February 22, 1999. 
2695-92 	02-10-92 	(391) NE corner of SW 57th Avenue and SW Natchez Street, adjacent to Lot 100 in the Foxhill No. 2 Subdivision. 
		(392) SW corner of SW 57th Avenue and SW Natchez Street, at approximately the property line between Lots 91 and 92 of the Foxhill No. 2 Subdivision. 
2717-92 	05-26-92 	(393) SW corner of SW Tawasa Court and SW Jurgens Avenue. 
		(394) NW corner of SW Jurgens Avenue and SW Wasco Way. 
		(395) NE corner of SW Jurgens Avenue and SW Ladd Court. 
		(396) NE corner of SW Jurgens Avenue and SW Anderson Court. 
2779-92 	11-09-92 	(397) NW corner of SW Herman Road and SW 119th Avenue. 
2809-93 	03-22-93 	David's Fox Run - Phase I 
		(398) NW corner of SW Tualatin Road and SW 112th Avenue. 
		(400) SW corner of SW 112th Avenue and SW Apalachee Street. 
		(401) NE corner of SW 112th Avenue and SW Apalachee Street. 
		(402) NW corner of SW 112th Avenue and SW Kalispel Street. 
		Tualatin River Estates 
		(403) SE corner of SW 52nd Court and SW Chesapeake Drive. 
		Tualatin Woods - Phase 2 
		(404) SW corner of SW Mandan Drive and SW Maricopa Drive. 
2899-93 	10-25-93 	(405) NW corner of SW Tualatin Road and SW 109th Avenue. 
		(406) SW corner of SW 109th Avenue and SW Tunica Street. 
		(407) SW corner of SW 110th Avenue and SW Wintu Court. 
		(408) SW corner of SW 110th Avenue and SW Wishram Court. 
		(409) NE corner of SW 110th Avenue and SW Bannoch Street. 
		(410) NW corner of SW 109th Avenue and SW Bannoch Street. 
		(411) SE corner of SW 109th Avenue and SW Bannoch Street. 
		Hedges Creek No. 3 
2921-94 	01-10-94 	(412) SE corner of SW Ibach Street and SW 103rd Avenue. 
		(413) SW corner of SW 103rd Avenue and SW Gardner Court. 
		(414) NE corner of SW 103rd Avenue and SW Taylors Drive. 
		(415) SW corner of SW 103rd Avenue and SW Meier Drive. 
		(416) SW corner of SW 103rd Avenue and SW Miller Court. 
		(417) SE corner of SW Miller Court and SW 104th Avenue. 
		(418) SE corner of SW Taylors Drive and SW 102nd Place. 
		(419) NE corner of SW 102nd Place and SW Luster Court. 
		Estates at Ambercreek 
		(420) NW corner of SW Lucas Drive and SW 108th Place. 
		(421) SE corner of SW Lucas Drive and SW 108th Place. 
2929-94 	01-24-94 	(422) NE corner of SW Martinazzi Avenue and SW Dakota Circle. 
		(423) SW corner of SW Martinazzi Avenue and SW Dakota Drive. 
2947-94 	03-14-94 	(424) NE corner of SW 84th Avenue and SW Seneca Street. 
		(425) SW corner of SW 84th Avenue and SW Seneca Street. 
2980-94 	06-27-94 	(426) SE corner of SW Boones Ferry Road and SW Boones Ferry Road, approximately 350 feet east of the centerline of SW 84th Avenue. 
2997-94 	08-08-94 	(427) SW corner of SW Siletz Drive and SW Siletz Court. 
		(428) NE corner of SW Siletz Drive and SW Siletz Court. 
3078-95 	05-08-95 	(429) SW corner of SW Ibach Street with 103rd Avenue and 103rd Court. 
		(430) NE corner of SW Ibach Street with 103rd Avenue and 103rd Court. 
3156-96 	01-08-96 	(431) NE corner of SW Sweek Drive and SW 90th Avenue. 
3310-97 	03-24-97 	(432) NE corner of SW Nyberg Lane and SW 57th Avenue 
		(433) SW corner of SW Nyberg Lane and SW 57th Avenue. 
		(434) NW corner of SW 50th Avenue and SW Natchez Street. 
		(435) SE corner of SW 50th Avenue and SW Natchez Street. 
3405-98 	01-13-98 	Copenhagen Industrial Park 
		(436) NE corner of SW Teton Avenue and SW Spokane Court. 
		Emery Zidell Commons 
		(437) NE corner of SW Old Tualatin-Sherwood Road and SW 89th Avenue. 
		(438) SW corner of SW Old Tualatin-Sherwood Road and SW 89th Avenue. 
		Hedges Park 
		(439) SW corner of SW 108th Avenue and SW Nierman Lane. 
		(440) SE corner of SW 109th Terrace and SW Nierman Lane. 
		(441) NW corner of SW 109th Terrace and SW Nierman Lane. 
		(442) SW corner of SW 110th Place and SW Byrom Terrace. 
		(443) NW corner of SW Fuller Drive and SW Byrom Terrace. 
		(444) NE corner of SW Fuller Drive and SW Evans Court. 
		(445) SW corner of SW Fuller Drive and SW Evans Court. 
		Ibach Park Estates 
		(446) NE corner of SW 108th Avenue and SW Willow Street. 
		Indian Park 
		(447) NE corner of SW Comanche Way and SW Comanche Terrace. 
		Norwood Heights 
		(448) SW corner of SW 89th Avenue and SW Stono Drive. 
		(449) NW corner of SW Stono Drive and SW 89th Place. 
		(450) NE corner of SW Stono Drive and SW 89th Place. 
		(451) NE corner of SW Stono Drive and Private Tract "A." 
		(452) NW corner of SW Stono Drive and Private Tract "B." 
		(453) NE corner of SW Iowa Drive and SW Stono Drive. 
		(454) SE corner of SW 90th Place and SW Iowa Drive. 
		(455) SE corner of SW 92nd Place and SW Iowa Drive. 
		Pennington Heights 
		(456) NW corner of SW Stono Drive and SW 93rd Terrace. 
		(457) SW corner of SW Quinault Lane and SW 93rd Terrace. 
		(458) SE corner of SW 93rd Terrace and SW Iowa Drive. 
		Pleasant Woods 
		(459) SE corner of SW Hazelbrook Road and SW 111th Avenue. 
		(460) NE corner of SW 110th Avenue and SW Lucas Drive. 
		(461) SW corner of SW 110th Avenue and SW Lucas Drive. 
		(462) SW corner of SW 110th Avenue and SW Winya Court. 
		Pony Ridge 
		(463) NW corner of SW 135th Terrace and SW Pacific Drive. 
		(464) NW corner of SW 134th Terrace and SW Pacific Drive. 
		(465) NW corner of SW 133rd Terrace and SW Pacific Drive. 
		(466) SE corner of SW 134th Terrace and SW Ute Street. 
		(467) SE corner of SW 135th Terrace and SW Ute Street. 
		Sequoia Ridge 
		(468) NE corner of SW 60th Avenue and SW Borland Road. 
		(469) NE corner of SW 60th Avenue and SW Sequoia Drive. 
		(470) SW corner of SW 60th Avenue and SW Sequoia Drive. 
		(471) SW corner of SW Sagert Street and SW Sequoia Drive. 
		(472) NW corner of SW 60th Avenue and SW Port Orford Street. 
		(473) NW corner of SW 59th Terrace and SW Port Orford Street. 
		(474) NE corner of SW 58th Terrace and SW Lee Street. 
		(475) SE corner of SW 58th Terrace and SW Sequoia Drive. 
		(476) SE corner of SW 59th Terrace and SW Sequoia Drive. 
		Victoria Woods No. 1 & No. 2 
		(477) SW corner of SW Boones Ferry Road and SW Iowa Drive. 
		(478) NW corner of SW 96th Drive and SW Iowa Drive. 
		(479) SW corner of SW Lumbee Lane and SW Iowa Drive. 
		(480) NE corner of SW Lumbee Lane and SW Eno Place. 
		(481) SW corner of SW Lumbee Lane and SW Eno Place. 
		(482) NE corner of SW Lumbee Lane and SW Miami Drive. 
		(483) SE corner of SW Iowa Drive and SW Erio Place. 
		Warwick Estates 
		(484) SE corner of SW Ibach Street and SW 106th Place. 
		Waterford 
		(485) NE corner of SW Boones Ferry Road and SW Iowa Drive. 
		(486) NW corner of SW Iowa Drive and SW 94th Terrace. 
		(487) NE corner of SW Skokomish Lane and SW 94th Terrace. 
3465-98 	07-13-98 	Glen at Ibach Park 
		(488) NW corner of SW 106th Avenue and SW Ibach Street. 
3506-98 	11-09-98 	(489) Rescinded by Res.# 4291-04, passed 9-27-04. 
3534-99 	01-11-99 	Victoria Woods III 
		(490) SW corner of SW Choctaw Street and SW Iowa Drive. 
		(491) NE corner of SW Iowa Drive and SW Chilkat Terrace. 
		(492) NE corner of SW Chilkat Terrace and SW Boxelder Street. 
3656-99 	11-08-99 	Forest Ridge No. 1 
		(493) SE corner of SW Meier Drive and SW 106th Avenue. 
		(494) NE corner of SW Meier Drive and SW 107th Avenue. 
		Kaitlin Park 
		(495) SE corner of SW 56th Court and SW Powhatan. 
		Joshua Estates 
		(496) SW corner of SW Joshua Street and SW Halcyon Road. 
38-0701 		Rescinded by Res. # 3876-01, passed 6-25-01. 
38-90-01 	03-12-01 	(497) SW Siletz Drive at the NE corner of the easterly intersection with SW Winema Drive. 
		(498) SW Siletz Drive at the SW corner of the easterly intersection with SW Winema Drive. 
3857-01 	05-29-01 	(499) NE corner of SW 108th Avenue and SW Cottonwood Street. 
		(500) NW corner of SW 107th Avenue and SW Cottonwood Street. 
		(501) NW corner of SW 106th Avenue and SW Cottonwood Street. 
		(502) SE corner of SW 106th Avenue and SW Cottonwood Street. 
		(503) NW corner of SW 106th Avenue and SW Dogwood Street. 
		(504) SE corner of SW 106th Avenue and SW Dogwood Street. 
		(505) NE corner of SW 108th Avenue and SW Dogwood Street. 
3876-01 	06-25-01 	Ibach Meadows 
		(506) SE corner of SW 107th Avenue and SW Ibach Street. 
		Lake Forest 
		(507) SE corner of SW Gram Street and SW 111th Avenue. 
		(508) NE corner of SW Madrone Court and SW 111th Avenue. 
		(509) NW corner of SW Marilyn Street and SW 111th Avenue. 
		(510) SE corner of SW Marilyn Street and SW 109th Avenue. 
		(511) SW corner of SW Marilyn Street and SW 108th Avenue. 
3897-01 	09-10-01 	Highland Terrace 
		(512) SW corner of SW Grahams Ferry Road and SW Dogwood Street. 
		(513) SE corner of SW Dogwood Street and SW 105th Avenue. 
3850-02 	03-11-02 	(514) SE corner of SW 65th Avenue and SW Rosewood Street. 
		(515) NE corner of SW 65th Avenue and SW Rosewood Street. 
		(516) SW corner of SW 65th Avenue and SW Rosewood Street. 
3951-02 	03-11-02 	(517) SE corner of SW 106th Avenue and SW Bannoch Street. 
		(518) NW corner of SW 106th Avenue and SW Bannoch Street. 
4291-04 	09-27-04 	Cennina 
		(519) NW corner of SW Ibach Street and SW 107th Avenue. 
		Franklin Business Park No. 2: 
		(520) SW corner of SW 112th Avenue and SW Amu Street. 
		Hazelbrook: 
		(521) NW corner of SW 108th Avenue and SW Hazelbrook Road. 
		Lake Forest No. 2: 
		(522) NE corner of SW Oneida Street and SW 112th Avenue. 
		(523) NE corner of SW Patwin Court and SW 112th Avenue. 
		(524) SW corner of SW Cowlitz Drive and SW 112th Avenue. 
		Liberty Oaks: 
		(525) SW corner of SW Sweek Drive and SW 90th Avenue. 
		(526) SE corner of SW Sweek Drive and SW 91 st Terrace. 
		(527) SE corner of SW Sweek Drive and the public alley. 
		(528) SE corner of SW Sweek Drive and SW 92nd Terrace. 
		(529) NE corner of SW Cascara Lane and SW 93rd Terrace. 
		(530) SW corner of SW Cascara Lane and SW 92nd Terrace. 
		(531) NW corner of SW Tanoak Lane and SW 92nd Terrace. 
		(532) NW corner of SW Tanoak Lane and the public alley. 
		(533) NW corner of SW Tanoak Lane and SW 91 st Terrace. 
		(534) SW corner of SW Tanoak Lane and SW 90th Avenue. 
		Park Ridge West: 
		(535) SW corner of SW Koller Street and SW 108th Avenue. 
		(536) SE corner of SW Koller Street and SW 109th Terrace. 
		Rogers Park: 
		(537) NW corner of SW Fuller Drive and SW Aspen Place. 
		(538) NE corner of SW Fuller Drive and SW Plum Court. 
		Venetia and Venetia No. 2: 
		(539) SE corner of SW 57th Terrace and SW Sequoia Drive. 
		(540) NW corner of SW 57th Terrace and SW Lee Street. 
		(541) NE corner of SW 56th Avenue and SW Sequoia Drive. 
		(542) SW corner of SW 56th Avenue and SW Sequoia Drive. 
		(543) NW corner of SW 56th Avenue and SW Lee Street. 
		(544) NE corner of SW 56th Avenue and SW Lee Street. 
		(545) SW corner of SW 56th Avenue and SW Lee Street. 
		(546) SE corner of SW 55th Terrace and SW Sequoia Drive. 
		(547) NW corner of SW 55th Terrace and SW Lee Street. 
		(548) SE corner of SW 54th Terrace and SW Sequoia Drive. 
		(549) NW corner of SW 54th Terrace and SW Lee Street. 
4323-05 	01-10-05 	Lake Forest No. 3 
		(550) NE corner of SW 109th Terrace and SW Brown Street. 
		(551) SW corner of SW 108th Avenue and SW Brown Street. 
		(552) NE corner of SW 112th Avenue and SW Brown Street. 
4324-05 	01-10-05 	SW Sagert Street 
		(553) NE corner of SW 95th Avenue and SW Sagert Street. 
4358-05 	04-25-05 	Quail Crossing 
		(554) NE corner of SW 109th Terrace and SW Westfall Court. 
		(555) NW corner of SW 109th Terrace and SW Helenius Street. 
		(556) SW corner of SW 108th Avenue and SW Helenius Street. 
		(557) NE corner of SW 108th Avenue and SW Helenius Street. 
4414-05 	08-08-05 	Victoria Meadows 
		(558) SW corner of SW 96th Drive and SW Iowa Drive. 
4431-05 	09-26-05 	SW Cottonwood Street 
		(559) NW corner of SW 108th Avenue and SW Cottonwood Street. 
		(560) SE corner of SW 108th Avenue and SW Cottonwood Street. 
4482-06 	02-13-06 	SW 108th Avenue 
		(561) NW corner of SW 108th Avenue and SW Helenius Road. 
4483-06 	02-13-06 	Parkview Estates 
		(562) SW corner of SW 106th Avenue and SW Ponderosa Lane. 
4518-06 	05-08-06 	Stream Stone Estates 
		(563) SW corner of SW 112th Avenue and SW Cowlitz Street. 
4529-06 	05-22-06 	(564) NE corner of a point approximately 350 feet east of the intersection of SW Old Lower Boones Ferry Road and SW 65 th Avenue. 
		(565) SW corner of a point approximately 350 feet east of the intersection of SW Old Lower Boones Ferry Road and SW 65th Avenue. 
		(566) NE corner of SW Old Lower Boones Ferry Road and SW Lower Boones Ferry Road. 
4559-06 	07-24-06 	Quail Crossing 
		(567) SE corner of SW 110th Place and SW Tunica Street. 
		(568) NE corner of SW 110th Avenue and SW Tunica Street. 
		(569) NW corner of SW 110th Avenue and SW Tunica Street. 
4589-06 	09-25-06 	Victoria Gardens 
		(570) NE corner of SW Grahams Ferry Road and SW Lodgepole Avenue. 
		(571) NE corner of SW Grahams Ferry Road and SW Helenius Street. 
		(572) NW corner of SW 104th Terrace and SW Lodgepole Avenue. 
		(573) SE corner of SW 104th Terrace and SW Lodgepole Avenue. 
		(574) NW corner of SW 104th Terrace and SW Helenius Street. 
		(575) SE corner of SW 104th Terrace and SW Helenius Street. 
		(576) SW corner of SW Helenius Street and SW Lodgepole Avenue. 
4619-07 	01-08-07 	(577) SW corner of SW Grahams Ferry Road and SW Koso Street. 
		(578) NW corner of SW Crow Way and SW Koso Street. 
		(579) NE corner of SW Koso Street and SW 104th Avenue. 
		(580) NE corner of SW 104 th Avenue and SW Crow Way. 
4646-07 	03-12-07 	(581) NW corner of SW 126th Place and SW Leveton Drive. 
4684-07 	06-11-07 	(582) Eastbound traffic on SW Nelson Street at the intersection with SW 107th Avenue. 
		(583) Westbound traffic on SW Sampson Lane at the intersection with SW 107 th Avenue. 
		(584) Eastbound traffic on SW Sampson Lane at the intersection with SW 106th Avenue. 
4716-07 	09-10-07 	(585) NE corner of SW Chilkat Terrace and SW Alabama Street. 
4783-08 	04-28-08 	(586) SE corner of SW 108th Avenue and SW Ibach Street. 
		(587) NW cordner of SW 108th Avenue and SW Ibach Street. 
5229-15 	07-27-15 	(588) Rayborn Estates Subdivision - SW corner of SW Jurgens Avenue and SW Rayborn Court. 
		(589) Heather Ridge Subdivision - NE corner of SW 112th Avenue and SW Helenius Street; NW Corner of SW 110th Place and SW Helenius Street. 
		(590) Mission Terrace Subdivision - NW corner of SW Comanche Terrace and SW Avery Street. 
5418-19 	01-28-19 	(591) SW Myslony Street and SW 118 th Avenue. 
		(592) SW Myslony Street and SW 112 th Avenue. 
 
(Resolution; 3897-01, 09-10-01, Resolution; 3876-01, 06-25-01, Resolution; 3857-01, 5-29-01, Resolution 4044-02, 11-25-02; Resolution 4323-05 01-10-05, Resolution 4324-05 01-10-05, Resolution 4358-05, 4-25-05; Resolution 4414-05 8-8-05; Resolution 4431-05 9-26-2005; Resolution 4482-06 2-13-2006; Resolution 4483-06 2-13-2006; Resolution 4518-06 5-8-2006; Resolution 4529-06, 5-22-06; Resolution 4559-06, 7-24-06; Resolution 4589-06, 9-25-06; Resolution 4619-07, 1-08-07; Resolution 4646-07, 3-12-07; Resolution 4684-07, 6-11-07; Resolution 4716-07, 9-10-07; Resolution 4783-08, 4-28-08; Resolution 5229-15, 07-27-15; Resolution 5418-19, 01-28-19) 
SCHEDULE B 
NO PARKING AREAS 
Resolution 	Date 	Area 
752-80 	06-30-80 	(1) East side of SW Boones Ferry Road, SW Nyberg Street to SW Ibach Street. 
		(2) West side of SW Boones Ferry Road, SW Nyberg Street to SW Ibach Street, except area 760 to 900 feet north of SW Boones Ferry and SW Sagert Street intersection. 
		(3) North and south sides of SW Mohawk Street, SW Boones Ferry Road to SW Martinazzi Avenue. 
		(4) East and west sides of SW Martinazzi Avenue, SW Nyberg Street to SW Sagert Street. 
		(5) South side of SW Seneca Street, west line of SW Martinazzi Avenue west 500 feet. 
		(6) North side of SW Seneca Street, west line SW Martinazzi Avenue west 130 feet. 
		(7) North and west sides of SW Martinazzi Avenue, in Dakota Hills Subdivision. 
		(8) On the south side of Nyberg Street from SW Martinazzi Avenue to SW 65th Avenue and on the north side of Nyberg Street from SW Boones Ferry Road to the east edge of the public alley, beginning approximately 170 feet from the center of the Nyberg Street/Boones Ferry Road intersection, and extending to the west right-of-way line of SW 84th Avenue, and from a point 200 feet west of the west line of Martinazzi Avenue to SW 65th Avenue. [Area 8 amended by Res.# 1218-83, §2, passed January 10, 1983, and Res.# 2942-94, §1, passed February 28, 1994.] 
		(9) West side of SW Martinazzi Avenue, SW Seneca Street to SW Nyberg Street. 
		(10) West side of SW Martinazzi Avenue, south right-of-way line of SW Boones Ferry Road south 45 feet. 
		(11) South side of SW Boones Ferry Road, west right-of-way line of SW Martinazzi Avenue west 150 feet. 
		(12) [Rescinded by Res.# 2555-90, § 1, passed November 26, 1990.] 
		(13) East side of SW Martinazzi Avenue, intersection with SW Seneca Street north 140 feet. 
		(14) East side of SW Martinazzi Avenue, 184 feet to 244 feet south of SW Boones Ferry Road. 
		(15) West side of SW Martinazzi Avenue, north right-of-way line, SW Seneca Street north 60 feet. 
		(16) North side of SW Boones Ferry Road from east line of SW Tualatin Road east 20 feet. 
		(17) South side of SW Boones Ferry Road from east line of SW Tualatin Road east 35 feet. 
		(18) East side of SW Tualatin Road from north line of SW Boones Ferry Road north 35 feet. 
		(19) East side of SW Boones Ferry Road from south line of SW Boones Ferry Road south 35 feet. 
		(20) East side of SW Boones Ferry Road beginning 35 feet from the south line of SW Boones Ferry Road south 120 feet, said restriction shall be for vehicles exceeding six feet in height. 
		(21) East side of SW Boones Ferry Road from north line of SW Seneca Street north 80 feet. 
		(22) North side of SW Seneca Street from the east line of SW Boones Ferry Road east 80 feet. 
		(23) South side of SW Seneca Street from the east line of SW Boones Ferry Road east 20 feet. 
		(24) East side of SW Boones Ferry Road from the south line of SW Seneca Street south 35 feet. 
		(25) East side of SW Boones Ferry Road beginning at a point 35 feet from the south line of SW Seneca Street south 66 feet, said restriction shall be for vehicles exceeding six feet in height. 
		(26) East side of SW Boones Ferry Road from the north line of SW Nyberg Street north 136 feet. 
		(27) West side of SW Killarney Court beginning 160 feet from the south right-of-way of SW Killarney Lane around the cul-de-sac to a point on the east side of SW Killarney Court which is 200 feet south of the south right-of-way line of SW Killarney Lane, 7:15 A.M. to 8:30 A.M. and 2:00 P.M. to 4:00 P.M. on school days. 
764-80 	07-21-80 	(28) East side of SW Martinazzi Avenue, SW Nyberg Street to easterly extension of the southerly right-of-way line of SW Seneca Street. 
834-80 	11-10-80 	(29) South side of SW Sagert Street from Interstate 5 to SW 65th Avenue. 
		(30) North side of SW Sagert Street from Interstate 5 to SW 65th Avenue. 
		(31) East side of SW 104th Avenue from the south right-of-way line of SW Tualatin Road south 60 feet. 
		(32) West side of SW 104th Avenue from the south right-of-way line of SW Tualatin Road south 60 feet. 
855-80 	12-22-80 	(33) Both sides of SW 102nd Avenue, between SW Avery Street and SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road. 
		(34) Both sides of SW 103rd Avenue and SW 104 Avenue, between SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road and SW Herman Road. 
		(35) Both sides of SW 104th Avenue, between SW Herman Road and SW Tualatin Road. 
880-81 	02-09-81 	(36) West side of SW McEwan Road from its intersection with SW 65th Avenue south 635 feet. 
896-81 	03-23-81 	(37)-(43) [Rescinded Resolution 1137-82] 
1032-81 	12-14-81 	(44) Northerly side of SW Lower Boones Ferry Road adjacent to Tax Lot #1500 & #1506 on Assessors Map #2S1-13D. 
1032-81 	12-14-81 	(45) [Rescinded Resolution 4618-07, 01-08-007] 
1036-81 	12-28-81 	(46) Both sides of SW Martinazzi Avenue between SW Seneca Street and SW Boones Ferry Road. 
1100-82 	05-10-82 	(47) Both sides of SW Martinazzi Avenue between SW Sagert Street and SW Avery Street. 
1130-82 	06-28-82 	(48) [Rescinded by Resolution 1374-84] 
1137-82 	07-26-82 	(49) Easterly side of SW 68th Avenue adjacent to Lot #1 and Lot #3 of the Stoneridge Subdivision. 
		(50) Westerly side of SW 68th Avenue adjacent to Lots #36, #37 and #38 and the southerly 3-4 of #40 of the Stoneridge Subdivision. 
		(51) Both sides of SW Santee Court, adjacent to Lots #35 & #36 of the Stoneridge Subdivision. 
		(52) Easterly side of SW 68th Avenue adjacent to the westerly one-half of Lot #43, #44 & #45 of the Stoneridge Subdivision. 
1137-82 	7-26-82 	(53) Easterly side of SW 68th Avenue adjacent to Lots #51, #52, #53, #54, #55, & #56 of the Stoneridge Subdivision. 
		(54) Westerly side of SW 67th Avenue adjacent to Lots #56 and the northerly one-half of Lot #57 of the Stoneridge Subdivision. 
		(55) Northerly side of SW 68th Avenue, between the westerly line of Lot #16 and the easterly line of Lot #17 of the Stoneridge Subdivision. This area is known as Tract A, dedicated to the City of Tualatin for a park and street right-of-way for SW 68th Avenue. [Resolution No. 1137-82, 1-26-82, repeals Resolution No. 896-81] 
1204-82 	12-13-82 	(55a) Westerly side of Martinazzi Avenue, adjacent to Lot 15 of the Shaniko Subdivision. 
1241-83 	03-28-83 	(56) On SW 65th Avenue, beginning at a point 635 feet southerly from SW 65th Avenue and continuing southerly a distance of 235 feet. 
1242-83 	06-13-83 	(57) [Rescinded by Resolution 1374-84] 
1272-83 	06-13-83 	(58) On the west side of SW 72nd Avenue, between the north right-of-way line of SW Bridgeport Road and the City of Tualatin City limits. 
1577-85 	04-22-85 	(59) Adjacent to Lots #36, #37, and #38 on SW Coquille Drive in the Indian Woods Subdivision, and Lots #19, #40, and #41 on SW Coquille Drive in the Indian Meadows Subdivision. 
		(60) Adjacent to Lot #1, east 70 feet of Lot #2, and Lots #10, #11, #12 along SW Arikara Drive in the Arikara Subdivision. 
1577-85 	04-22-85 	(61) Adjacent to Lot #7, #6, south 20 feet of Lot #5, and Lot #23 on SW 57th Avenue of the Fox Hill Subdivision. 
		(62) Adjacent to Lot #32 on SW Childs Road in the Piper's Run Subdivision. 
1665-85 	09-23-85 	(63) Two parcels of land located in the NW 1-4 of Section 26, Township 2S, Range 1W, Willamette Meridian, City of Tualatin, Washington Country, Oregon. Said parcels more particularly described in Res.# 1665-85. 
1676-85 	09-23-85 	(64) On SW 65th Avenue from the north line of SW Lower Boones Ferry to the south line of SW Jean Road. 
		(65) On the east side of SW 63rd Avenue from SW Lower Boones Ferry Road north 450 feet. [Area 65 repealed by Resolution No. 1776-86, Section 1(1), 5-12-86] 
		(66) On the west side of SW 63rd Avenue from SW Lower Boones Ferry Road north 200 feet. [Area 66 repealed by Resolution No. 1776-86, Section 1(2), 5-12-86] 
1706-85 	11-12-85 	(67) On the north side of SW Boones Ferry Road between SW Tualatin Road and the east boundary of the Blue Parking Lot. (See Schedule B, Exhibit "C") 
		(68) On the east side of SW Boones Ferry Road from the intersection with SW Tualatin Road south approximately 120 feet. (See Schedule B, Exhibit "C") 
1706-85 	11-12-85 	(69) On the east side of SW Tualatin Road from the intersection with Boones Ferry Road north approximately 285 feet. (See Schedule B, Exhibit "C") 
1842-86 	09-08-86 	(70) On the south side of SW McEwan Road from SW 65th Avenue west 700 feet to the east property line of the Northwest Textbook Depository property. (See Schedule B, Exhibit "D") 
2066-87 	11-23-97 	(71) On SW 90th Avenue from SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road to its southerly terminus, located within the Itel Industrial Park Subdivision. 
2233-88 	11-15-88 	(72) [Rescinded by Resolution 3912-01] 
2262-89 	01-23-89 	(73) On the east side of SW 86th Avenue between Cherokee Street and Tualatin Road for 22' north of Tualatin Road. 
2272-89 	02-13-89 	(74) On the NE and SW sides of SW Childs Road between the intersection with Lower Boones Ferry Road to the terminus at the I-5 freeway right-of-way. 
2283-89 	03-06-89 	(75) On the southwest side of SW Childs Road between the intersection with Lower Boones Ferry Road to the terminus at the I-5 freeway right-of-way. 
2283-89 	03-06-89 	(76) On the northeast side of SW Childs Road from Lower Boones Ferry Road to a point 470 feet southeast from the centerline of Lower Boones Ferry Road. 
2375-89 	09-25-89 	(77) The south side of SW McEwan Road from a point 700 feet west of 65th Avenue to a point approximately 1,155 feet westerly from SW 65th Avenue on the southerly and northerly side of SW McEwan when proceeding westerly. (See Schedule B, Exhibit "F") 
2424-90 	01-08-90 	(78) South side of Sagert Street from the centerline of Boones Ferry Road west approximately 225 feet. 
		(79) North side of Sagert Street from the centerline of Boones Ferry Road to the west line of 93rd Avenue a distance of approximately 1,425 feet. 
2550-90 	11-13-90 	(80) [Rescinded by Resolution 4618-07, 1-8-07] 
2632-91 	07-22-91 	(82) [Rescinded by Resolution 4618-07, 1-8-07] 
		(83) On the west side of SW Lower Boones Ferry Road from 266' south of SW Bridgeport Road and extending 150'. Through the 80' radius curve on the southwest corner of SW Lower Boones Ferry Road and SW Bridgeport Road. 
2705-92 	03-23-92 	(84) South side of SW Hazelbrook Road, west of SW 107th Avenue immediately adjacent to and for the full length of the north line of Lot 78 of the Jeffwood Estates No. 3 Subdivision, for a distance of approximately 78 feet. 
2763-92 	09-28-92 	(85) North side of SW Ibach Street between SW Columbia Drive and SW Boones Ferry Road. 
2780-92 	11-09-92 	(86) South side of SW Hazelbrook Road between the east property line of Hazelbrook Middle School and the west property line of Jeffwood Estates No. 3 Subdivision. 
2876-93 	08-23-93 	(87) East side of SW Martinazzi Avenue between SW Avery Street and SW Blake 
2891-93 	10-11-93 	(88) East side of SW Wampanoag Drive from the intersection of SW Sagert Street to a point approximately 50 feet south of the intersection. 
2942-94 	02-28-94 	(89) North side of SW Seneca Street, beginning at the east right-of-way line of 84th Avenue, east around the cul-de-sac bulb to the point of intersection with the south right-of-way line of Seneca Street and around the outside edge of the center traffic island. 
		(90) North right-of-way line of SW Seneca Street beginning approximately 450 feet west of the center of the Seneca Street/Martinazzi Avenue intersection to the west right-of-way line, and along the western end of SW Seneca Street between the north and south right-of-way lines. 
		(91)South side of SW Nyberg Street beginning at the east right-of-way line of Boones Ferry Road, continuing east approximately 450 feet, around the cul-de-sac bulb to a point approximately 262 feet east of the center of the Nyberg Street/84th Avenue intersection. 
		(92) North and south sides of SW Nyberg Street beginning at the west right-of-way line of Martinazzi Avenue, continuing west approximately 230 feet, around the cul-de-sac bulb and the outside edge of the center traffic island. 
		(93) East and south sides of the unnamed public right-of-way south from SW Boones Ferry Road into the Tualatin Commons, the centerline of which is located approximately 350 feet east of the center of the Boones Ferry Road/84th Avenue intersection. [Amended to delete the west side, Resolution 4560-06, 7-24-06] 
		(94) Both east and west sides of the unnamed public right-of-way north from SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road into the Tualatin Commons, the centerline of which is located approximately 660 feet east of the Boones Ferry Road/Tualatin-Sherwood Road intersection. 
2968-94 	5-23-94 	(95) West side of SW Wampanoag Drive from SW Sagert Street to 69th Avenue. 
3830-01 	04-12-01 	(96) Beginning at the stop sign on SW Siletz Drive at the NE corner of the easterly intersection with SW Winema Drive east 200' feet. Ord. 1113-02, 6-10-02] 
4290-04 	09-27-04 	Liberty Oaks 
		(97) On the north side of SW Sweek Drive, beginning at the intersection with SW 90th Avenue and ending at the intersection with SW 93rd Terrace. 
		(98) On the west side of SW 93rd Terrace, beginning at the intersection with SW Sweek Drive and ending at the westerly edge of the driveway into the Tualatin Meadows Apartments. 
		(99) The east side of SW 91st Terrace, between the intersection with SW Sweek Drive and the intersection with SW Tanoak Lane. 
		(100) The east and west sides of the public alley, between the intersection with SW Sweek Drive and the intersection with SW Tanoak Lane. 
		(101) The south side of SW Cascara Lane, between the intersection with SW 92nd Terrace and the intersection with SW 93rd Terrace. 
		(102) The north side of SW Tanoak Lane, between the intersection with SW 92nd Terrace and the intersection with SW 93rd Terrace. 
4502-06 	03-27-06 	(103) Both sides of SW 105th Avenue from SW Avery Street to SW Blake Street. 
		(104) Both sides of SW Blake Street from SW 105th Avenue to SW 108th Avenue. 
		(105) Both sides of SW 108th Avenue from SW Blake Street to SW Nelson Street. 
		(106) The east side of SW 108th Avenue from SW Nelson Street to SW Helenius Road. 
		(107) Both sides of SW Helenius Road from SW 100th Avenue to SW Grahams Ferry Road. 
4618-07 	01-08-07 	(108) [Resolution 4618-07, adopted 1-08-07 rescinds Resolution 1032-81 (Area 45) and Resolution 2550-90; Resolution 4618-07 is rescinded by Resolution 4629-07, 2-12-07] 
4629-07 	02-12-07 	(109) On the entire east and west sides of SW Hazel Fern Road between SW Bridgeport Road and SW Lower Boones Ferry Road, with the exception of Traveler's Lane, a private drive. [Resolution # 4629-07, 2-12-07, rescinds Resolution 4618-07] 
4715-07 	09-10-07 	(110) Both sides of SW Alabama Street from the west property line of Tract A in Chilkat Meadow to the east end of the future intersection of SW 96th Drive. 
4851-08 	12-08-08 	(111) Both sides of SW Boones Ferry Road from SW Ibach Street to SW Norwood Road. 
5228-15 	04-13-2015 	(112) No person may stop, stand, or park a vehicle on SW Old Tualatin-Sherwood Road at any place where where a traffic control device prohibits stopping, standing, or parking. 
5307-17 	01-08-2017 	(113) No person may stop, stand, or park a vehicle on SW Hazelbrook Road between Pacific Highway (99W) and SW 115th Avenue at any place where a traffic control device prohibits stopping, standing, and parking. 
5385-18 	07-09-2018 	(114) No person may stop, stand, or park a vehicle on the east side of SW Martinazzi Avenue (northbound lane) from a point beginning 60 feet south of the intersection of Martinazzi Avenue and Osage Drive then south to a point ending 360 feet south of the intersection of Martinazzi Avenue and Osage Drive. 
		(115) No person may stop, stand, or park a vehicle on the west side of Martinazzi Avenue (southbound lane) from a point beginning 40 feet south of the intersection of Martinazzi Avenue and Osage Drive then south to a point ending 175 feet south of the intersection of Martinazzi Avenue and Osage Drive. 
 
(Revised 07-2018) 
SCHEDULE C 
TIME ZONES 
Resolution/
Ordinance 	Date 	Location 	Designation 
Res. #1153-82 	08-09-92 	West side of S.W. Martinazzi Avenue from a point five feet north of the north right-of-way line of S.W. Seneca Street, northward a distance of 119 feet 	Loading Zone 15 minute parking 
Ord. #1255-08 	03-24-08 	Front Lot of City Center and Library, Parking Areas adjacent to the Council Building 	See Exhibit G. 
Ord. #734-87 	10-12-87 	Repealed by Ordinance 1255-08 	
Res. #4934-09 	10-12-09 	Parking Lots Blue, Green, Red, White, Yellow [Amended, Ord. 1113-02, 06-10-2002, Amended Ord. 1289-09, 09-28-091 	See Exhibits 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. 
Res. #1374-84 	02-27-84 	Rescinded by Resolution 3912-01 	
Res. #1472-84 	09-10-84 	Rescinded by Resolution 3912-01 	
Res. #2715-92 	05-11-92 	Rescinded by Resolution 3912-01 	
Res. #1472-84 	09-10-84 	Rescinded by Resolution 3912-01 	
Res. #2901-93 	10-25-93 	Rescinded by Resolution 3912-01 	
Res. #3114-95 	08-14-95 	Rescinded by Resolution 3912-01 	
Res. #3645-99 	09-13-99 	Rescinded by Resolution 3912-01 	
Res. #3692-00 	03-13-00 	Rescinded by Resolution 3912-01 	
Res. #3784-00 	10-09-00 	Rescinded by Resolution 3912-01 	
Res. #3912-01 	10-22-01 	Rescinded by Resolution 3954-02 	
Res. #3954-02 	03-11-02 	Rescinded by Resolution 3991-02 	
Res. #3991-02 	06-24-02 	Rescinded by Resolution 4008-02 	
Res. #4008-02 	07-22-02 	Rescinded by Resolution 4070-03 	
Res. #4070-03 	01-27-03 	Rescinded by Resolution 4185-03 	
Res. #4185-03 	12-18-03 	Rescinded by Resolution 4642-07 	
Res. #4642-07 	03-12-07 	Rescinded by Resolution 4765-08 	
 
*Note Print Exhibits 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 
(Revised 09-09) 
SCHEDULE D 
PROHIBITED TRUCK TRAFFIC 
Resolution 	Date 	Location 
753-80 	06-30-80 	(1) Portion S.W. Arapaho Road within Arapaho Ridge Subdivision. 
		(2) Portion S.W. 90th Ave. and S.W. Shoshone St. within Navajo Hills Subdivision. 
		(3) Portion S.W. 86th Ave. within Nestucca Hills Subdivision. 
		(4) Portion S.W. Paulina Dr. and S.W. Coquille Dr. within Indian Woods Subdivision. 
		(5) Portion S.W. Alsea Dr. and S.W. Siuslaw Lane within Indian Meadows Subdivision. 
1521-85 	01-28-85 	(6) S.W. Tualatin Road from Boones Ferry Road to S.W. 100th Court. 
		(7) S.W. Avery Street from Boones Ferry Road to a point 1,900 feet east of Teton Avenue. 
1667-85 	09-23-85 	(8) S.W. Killarney Lane west of S.W. Boones Ferry Road. 
		(9) S.W. Moratoc Drive east of S.W. 105th Avenue. 
		(10) S.W. Teton Avenue south of S.W. Avery Street. 
2196-88 	08-08-88 	(11) S.W. 57th Avenue between S.W. Borland Road and S.W. Natchez Drive. 
2559-90 	12-10-90 	(12) SW Sagert Street west of SW Boones Ferry Road. 
		(13) SW 93rd Avenue between SW Sagert Street and SW Avery Street. 
2869-93 	08-23-93 	(14) SW Ochoco Drive, from 94th Avenue to Willapa Way 
		(15) SW Siletz Drive, from Boones Ferry Road to 98th Avenue 
		(16) SW Willapa Way, from Ochoco Drive to Siletz Drive 
		(17) SW 94th Avenue, from Avery Street to Ochoco Drive 
		(18) SW 98th Avenue, from Avery Street to Siletz Drive 
 
(Revised 09-09) 
SCHEDULE E 
20 MPH SCHOOL ZONES 
When Flashing School Zones as defined in ORS 811.111(1 )(e)(A)(i): 
(1)  Hazelbrook Road from a point 200 feet east of the centerline of 115 th Avenue to a point 60 feet west of the centerline of 111 th Avenue. 
(2)  95 th Avenue from the centerline of Avery Street to a point 560 feet north of the centerline of Avery Street. 
(3)  Avery Street from a point 135 feet east of the centerline of Elk Horn Court to a point 150 feet west of the centerline of 93 rd Avenue. 
(4)  Boones Ferry Road from a point 550 feet north of the centerline of Ibach Court to a point 150 feet north of the centerline of Iowa Drive. 
(5)  Boones Ferry Road from a point 300 feet north of the centerline of Alsea Drive/Blake Street to a point 275 feet south of the centerline of Alsea Drive/Blake Street. 
(6)  Sagert Street from a point 50 feet west of the centerline of 72 nd Avenue to a point 650 feet west of the centerline of 72 nd Avenue. 
(7)  Borland Road from a point 425 feet east of the centerline of 56 th Avenue to a point 425 feet west of the centerline of 56 th Avenue. 
(8)  Ibach Street from a point 425 feet east of the centerline of Boones Ferry Road to the centerline of Boones Ferry Road. 
When Children Are Present School Zones as defined in ORS 811.111(1)(e)(B)(ii) (When Children Are Present as defined in ORS 811.124): 
(1)  Blake Street from a point 170 feet east of the centerline of 91 st Court to a point 170 feet west of the centerline of 91 st Court. 
(2)  95 th Avenue from a point 350 feet south of the centerline of Sagert Street to a point 255 feet south of the centerline of Sagert Street. 
(Resolution 5169-13, adopted 9-23-13 also rescinds Resolution 2747-92, Resolution 3515-98; Resolution 4284-04 and Resolution 5024-11; Revised 09-13) 
SCHEDULE F 
NO TRUCK OR TRUCK TRAILER PARKING 
Resolution 	Date 	Location 
2756-92 	09-14-92 	(1) From 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on SW Manhasset Drive. 
		(2) West side of SW McEwan Road, between the south line of Tax Map 2S1 13DA, Tax Lot 1400 and the north line of Tax Map 2S1 13DD, Tax Lot 1700. 
2890-93 	10-11-93 	(1) East side of SW McEwan Road from the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way line north approximately 550 feet. 
3047-95 	01-23-95 	(1) SW 125th Avenue. 
3770-00 	08-28-00 	(1) Both sides of the entire length of SW Spokane Court. 
4737-07 	12-10-07 	(1) The entire length of SW Myslony Street from SW 124th Avenue east to Hedges Creek. 
 
(Revised 12-08) 
SCHEDULE G 
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC 
Resolution 	Date 	Location 
2940-94 	02-28-94 	(1) Cul-de-sac bulb at the east end of SW Seneca Street beginning approximately 200 feet east of the center of the intersection of Seneca Street and 84th Avenue, and continuing counterclockwise around the traffic island. 
		(2) Cul-de-sac bulb at the west end of SW Nyberg Street beginning approximately 300 feet west of the center of the intersection of Nyberg Street and Martinazzi Avenue, and continuing counterclockwise around the traffic island. 
 
(Revised 12-04)  
CHAPTER 8-04 - BASKETBALL HOOPS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 
Sections: 
 
TMC 8-4-010 - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the "Basketball Hoop Ordinance." 
(Ord. 906-93 §1, 10-11-93)  
TMC 8-4-020 - Purpose and Scope. 
This ordinance is intended to regulate the duties and responsibilities associated with placing and using a basketball backboard, hoop, net or supporting apparatus in the public right-of-way by setting locational standards which are designed to reduce the risk of injury and damage to pedestrians and motorists in their shared use of public roadways. This ordinance is not intended to regulate the placement or use of basketball hoops on private property. This ordinance is intended to apply to all basketball hoops, both portable and permanent, in the right-of-way regardless of when they were erected. 
(Ord. 906-93 §2, 10-11-93; Ord. 1220-06, 8-28-06)  
TMC 8-4-030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
Basketball Hoop or Hoop means, except where the context clearly indicates some specific part, any part of a backboard, hoop, net or supporting apparatus designed or intended to be used for play with a ball of any kind. 
Pedestrian means a person afoot or in a wheelchair. 
Public Roadway or Roadway means the improved portion of the public right-of-way designed for vehicular travel. The term is not intended to refer to off-street bicycle paths. 
Sidewalk means the improved portion of the public right-of-way designed for preferential or exclusive use by pedestrians. 
Supporting Apparatus means the post, pole or similar object that is either: (a) affixed into the ground and supports a basketball hoop; or (b) attached to a moveable support base, and that supports a basketball hoop. 
(Ord. 906-93 §3, 10-11-93)  
TMC 8-4-040 - Permissible Locations and Hours of Use. 
(1)  No basketball hoop shall be erected in the right-of-way, if the driveway of the adjacent private property is of a suitable size and slope for playing basketball. A driveway having a slope of ¾ inch to one foot or less and an area of at least 400 square feet is considered suitable for playing basketball. 
(2)  If a hoop cannot be installed along the driveway under subsection (1) of this section, basketball hoops located within the public right-of-way shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  In a Residential Planning District; 
(b)  Abutting a public roadway designated in the Tualatin Development Code as a local residential street; 
(c)  Not attached to any light or utility pole, street sign or traffic control device or street tree; 
(d)  Outside of a sidewalk, pedestrian or bike path or public roadway, but abutting the owner's property in the planter strip; 
(e)  Not adjacent to roadways with striped, on-street bike-ways, but may be placed adjacent to shared roadways; 
(f)  At least five feet from manholes, catch basins, traffic signs, fire hydrants, and above ground electrical transformers, telephone boxes, and cable boxes. The pole for the hoop must be a minimum of three feet from street trees, light pole and mailboxes; 
(g)  Where possible, hoops should be at least ten feet from street trees; in any event they shall be centered between adjacent, existing or future street trees and no closer than five feet from such trees. If no trees have been planted, the Parks and Recreation Department shall first determine the location of any future street trees; 
(h)  A hoop backboard shall not extend more than one foot beyond the face of the roadway curb; 
(i)  A hoop ring shall be at least ten feet above the surface of the street, measured vertically from the public roadway; 
(j)  At least 50 feet from the nearest lateral street curb line which intersects at 90 degrees, except if located on a cul-de-sac, the hoop shall be at least 50 feet from the nearest lateral street curb line of the intersection; 
(k)  At least 100 feet unobstructed view as measured ten feet out from the face of the curb and five feet high along the public roadway in both directions. There shall be no obstructions resulting from curves in such roadway, elevation changes, landscaping or other fixtures located alongside such roadway, except if on a cul-de-sac, the hoop shall have an unobstructed view of at least 50 feet; 
(l)  At least 75 feet from the nearest other hoop in the right-of-way as measured along the curb line. This subsection applies only to basketball hoops placed after the adoption of this ordinance; 
(m)  Prior to installation or excavation, the installer shall inquire about and receive information from the utility locator service and avoid interfering with or damaging utilities. 
(3)  The use of a basketball hoop which satisfies the conditions set forth in subsection (2) of this section may occur only between 9:00 a.m. and sunset. 
(4)  A basketball hoop which complies with the requirements of subsection (2) of this section and later, due to changed conditions fails to comply with subsection (2), shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and subject to removal and any other available remedies. The requirements of subsection (2) are intended to be continuously complied with. 
(Ord. 906-93 §4, 10-11-93; Ord. 1220-06, 7-28-06; Ord. 1299-10, §1, 4-12-10)  
TMC 8-4-050 - Abutting Landowner's Duties and Liabilities. 
(1)  Any person owning, possessing, occupying or having control of property that abuts the public right-of-way where a basketball hoop is placed or located shall properly, safely and reasonably construct, maintain, inspect, repair, use and supervise its use and shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. A basketball hoop located within the public right-of-way shall be presumed to have been placed with the knowledge and consent of the owner of the abutting private property. Damage to the basketball hoop which occurs during the lawful, non-negligent use of the public right-of-way shall be the responsibility of the hoop owner. 
(2)  A person who is injured or whose property is damaged by reason of any act or omission constituting a violation of subsection (1) of this section shall have a cause of action for any and all damages sustained, including punitive damages, against a person or persons referred to in subsection (1) of this section, whose acts or omissions result in a violation of subsection (1) of this section. The person or persons who actually cause such injury or damage by reason of their negligence, wrongful or intentional misconduct shall also be liable. 
(Ord. 906-93 §5, 10-11-93)  
TMC 8-4-060 - City Immunity from Liability. 
(1)  No recourse whatsoever shall be had or available against the City, its officers, employees or agents for damage, injury or loss to any person or property arising directly or indirectly out of the negligent or otherwise wrongful construction, maintenance, inspection, repair, use or supervision of use of any basketball hoop placed in the public right-of-way or for any act or omission in violation of this ordinance. 
(2)  In consideration for the City allowing a person owning, possessing, occupying or having control of property that abuts the public right-of-way to construct, maintain, inspect, repair, use or supervise the use of a basketball hoop placed in or alongside the public right-of-way, such person shall indemnify, defend and hold the City, its officers, employees and agents harmless against any claim, suit or action made against the City, its officers, employees and agents as a result of any person's failure to satisfy any obligation imposed by this ordinance. 
(3)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed as a conveyance, grant or transfer of a property interest or permanent private right in any public right-of-way. The City retains the right to revoke the privilege allowed under this ordinance. 
(Ord. 906-93 §6, 10-11-93)  
TMC 8-4-070 - Unlawful Use of Basketball Hoops. 
(1)  No person shall use a basketball hoop located within the public right-of-way other than in accordance with the requirements of TMC 8-4-040. 
(2)  Persons who use a basketball hoop located in the public right-of-way shall comply with the requirements of Oregon law with respect to yielding the right-of-way to vehicles upon a roadway. 
(3)  No parent, guardian or other person having custody of another person who is under 18 years of age shall permit or allow such other person to violate either subsection (1) or (2) of this section. 
(Ord. 906-93 §7, 10-11-93)  
TMC 8-4-080 - Removal of Fixtures. 
(1)  Any person owning, possessing, occupying or having control of property that abuts the public right-of-way where a basketball hoop or similar apparatus is placed in violation of this ordinance shall remove the basketball hoop or similar apparatus. Except as otherwise specifically provided in TMC 8-4-040(2)(l), basketball hoops located alongside or within the right-of-way, upon adoption of this ordinance, shall comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(2)  The City may require the owner of abutting property to remove a basketball hoop in the right-of-way which due to its location or use is a nuisance. For purposes of this section a basketball hoop in the right-of-way is a nuisance under either of the following circumstances: 
(a)  When it is used on three or more occasions within a 30 day period at times prohibited by TMC 8-4-040(3) of this ordinance which causes annoyance to or disturbs another person; or 
(b)  When it is or has been placed in violation of TMC 8-4-040(1) or (2) of this ordinance. 
(3)  If a basketball hoop is or becomes a nuisance as defined in subsection (2) of this section, the City may order the basketball hoop to be removed. An order to remove a basketball hoop shall be delivered to the owner of the property in person or by first class mail return receipt requested. A person to whom an order of removal of a basketball hoop is sent shall remove the basketball hoop together with any support structure within ten days of delivery of the order, unless within said ten days such person delivers to the Community Development Director a written request for hearing, which shall stay the time frame for removal of the basketball hoop. If a person submits a timely request for a hearing on whether the basketball hoop should be removed as provided in the City's order, the matter shall be submitted to the Municipal Judge for determination. The hearing shall be conducted in the manner provided for civil infractions and the City shall have the burden of establishing by a preponderance of the evidence that the basketball hoop is a nuisance, as defined in subsection (2) of this section. If the Municipal Judge finds the basketball hoop to constitute a nuisance, the basketball hoop may be ordered removed, and its owner may in addition be ordered to pay reasonable costs and disbursements for the hearing. In addition, the Court may condition further use of the basketball hoop in a manner which the Court considers just. The decision of the Municipal Judge shall be final. 
(4)  A person who fails to remove a basketball hoop as provided in this section shall be liable to the City for its costs, including but not limited to labor and materials, for removal of the basketball hoop and any supporting apparatus, as well as costs, disbursements and attorney fees incurred for collection. The City shall not be liable for any damage to the basketball hoop or other property resulting from the non-negligent removal of the basketball hoop. When a basketball hoop has been removed due to a nuisance condition, defined under TMC 8-4-080(2)(a), it shall be unlawful for the owner of the abutting property to erect or allow the placement of a basketball hoop within the right-of-way along any portion of said property for two years after removal of the basketball hoop. 
(Ord. 906-93 §8, 10-11-93; Ord. 1220-06 §3, 8-28-06)  
TMC 8-4-090 - Penalty. 
(1)  Violation of this ordinance or an order or judgment of the Municipal Court concerning the status of the basketball hoop as a nuisance constitutes a civil infraction. 
(2)  Each day that a violation exists constitutes a separate infraction. 
(3)  The penalties imposed by this ordinance are in addition to and not in lieu of any other lawful remedies available to the City. 
(Ord. 906-93 §9, 10-11-93)  
CHAPTER 8-05 - TOWING FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
TMC 8-5-005 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure that towing motor vehicles from private property facilities is performed safely, require private parking facilities to provide adequate notice of prohibited parking areas, and ensure that those whose motor vehicles have been towed can gain knowledge of the location of their motor vehicle. The provisions of this Chapter shall be construed in conformity with the laws and regulations of the State of Oregon regarding towing from private property. Nothing in this section creates, or is intended to create, a special relationship, as that term is defined under Oregon law, between any person and the City. 
(Ord. 1356-13 §1, 10-28-13)  
TMC 8-5-010 - Administrative Authority. 
The City Manager, or the City Manager's designee, is authorized to prescribe administrative rules and policies to implement the requirements of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1356-13 §1, 10-28-13)  
TMC 8-5-020 - Definitions. 
Private Parking Facility means any property used for motor vehicle parking at which the private parking facility owner restricts or reserves parking. 
Private Parking Facility Owner means the owner, operator, lessee, manager, or designated agent of a private parking facility. 
Storage Facility means any property used for the storage of motor vehicles towed from a private parking facility. 
Tow means to haul, carry, pull along, or otherwise transport or remove a motor vehicle by means of another motor vehicle. 
Tow Company means any person, firm, corporation, or other entity that engages in, or owns or operates a business which engages in, the towing or removal of motor vehicles for compensation. 
Vehicle Owner means the person registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles as the owner of the motor vehicle, or a person in lawful possession of the motor vehicle. 
(Ord. 1356-13 §1, 10-28-13)  
TMC 8-5-030 - Tow Company License. 
(1)  A tow company must not, without the vehicle owner's consent, tow, cause to be towed, or store a motor vehicle towed from a private parking facility within the City of Tualatin unless the tow company has a valid license issued by the City of Tualatin. 
(2)  The City shall grant a license to a tow company upon the tow company providing the following: 
(a)  The legal business name, address, telephone number and fax number; 
(b)  A list of all tow trucks used for tows from private property; 
(c)  Addresses of all storage facilities utilized by the tow company to store motor vehicles towed from within the City of Tualatin; 
(d)  A 24-hour contact telephone number; 
(e)  The names of all owners of the tow company; 
(f)  Other information the City Manager determines is necessary to carry out the requirements of this Chapter; and 
(g)  Payment of a license fee, the amount of which is established by resolution of the City Council. 
(3)  The term of the license shall be for a period of one year. 
(4)  The licensing requirements of this Chapter do not apply to tow companies that tow a motor vehicle with the prior consent or authorization of the vehicle owner. 
(Ord. 1356-13 §1, 10-28-13)  
TMC 8-5-040 - Towing Vehicles from Private Parking Facilities. 
(1)  A tow company must not, without the vehicle owner's consent, tow, cause to be towed, or store a motor vehicle towed from a private parking facility unless: 
(a)  The tow company has express written authorization from the private parking facility owner to tow motor vehicles from the private parking facility; 
(b)  The private parking facility contains at least one sign at each entryway that prominently displays the following information: 
(i)  A statement that parking is prohibited, reserved, or otherwise restricted; 
(ii)  A statement of the hours the prohibition, reservation, or restriction applies; 
(iii)  The name of the tow company or companies that patrols the private parking facility; and 
(iv)  A 24-hour telephone number of the tow company or companies to call to obtain release of a motor vehicle towed. 
(c)  If a private parking facility serves multiple businesses and restricts or reserves parking spaces for each business, each parking space must be clearly marked to indicate which spaces are restricted or reserved for each business; 
(d)  The tow company photographs the motor vehicle to be towed and all signs posted prior to hookup; and 
(e)  The tow company complies with all requirements of this Chapter and all administrative rules and policies. 
(2)  It is unlawful for a tow company to do any of the following: 
(a)  Park within 1,000 feet of a private parking facility for the purpose of monitoring motor vehicles to tow; 
(b)  Post an observer at or near a private parking facility for the purpose of monitoring or ordering the towing of motor vehicles; and 
(c)  Patrol a private parking facility for the purpose of monitoring motor vehicles to tow. 
(Ord. 1356-13 §1, 10-28-13)  
TMC 8-5-050 - Tow Requirements. 
A tow company must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Perform tows in a safe and reasonable manner and not damage any person or property while towing or storing motor vehicles; 
(2)  Fully cooperate with any police agency to facilitate processing of stolen motor vehicles; 
(3)  Provide to the person seeking release of a towed motor vehicle a clearly legible receipt complete with all required information and with all fees and charges itemized; 
(4)  Be considered to be in possession of a motor vehicle when the hookup is complete and the tow truck has begun towing the motor vehicle by engaging the tow truck's transmission and moving forward; 
(5)  Offer to call for or provide transportation to the vehicle owner from within the immediate vicinity of the tow scene to the location of the towed motor vehicle storage; 
(6)  Have staff available at all times to provide information about the location of the towed motor vehicle and information for obtaining release of the towed motor vehicle; 
(7)  Accept as proof of motor vehicle ownership the vehicle's title or registration in addition to valid photo-identification of the person seeking the release; 
(8)  Accept at least cash or valid credit card for payment for any fees or charges assessed; 
(9)  Notify the City of Tualatin Police Department of the location of any towed motor vehicle within one hour of the motor vehicle being placed in storage; and 
(10)  Exercise reasonable care of any animal found to be in a towed motor vehicle. 
(Ord. 1356-13 §1, 10-28-13)  
TMC 8-5-060 - Storage of Towed Vehicles. 
A tow company must not store a motor vehicle towed from a private parking facility within the City of Tualatin at a storage facility located more than ten miles from the city limits of the City of Tualatin. 
(Ord. 1356-13 §1, 10-28-13)  
TMC 8-5-070 - Release at Scene. 
(1)  If a vehicle owner returns to the motor vehicle while the tow company is still attaching equipment to the motor vehicle, or the motor vehicle is fully attached, but the tow driver has not yet engaged the tow truck's transmission to begin removing the motor vehicle, the tow company must release the motor vehicle to the vehicle owner or operator at no charge. 
(2)  If the vehicle owner stops the tow company when the hookup is complete and the tow truck is in motion with the motor vehicle, the tow company must immediately halt the tow and inform the vehicle owner that: 
(a)  The motor vehicle will be released if the vehicle owner pays to the tow company the Release at Scene Fee; 
(b)  The amount of the Release at Scene Fee; and 
(c)  The vehicle owner has up to 15 minutes, without additional charge, to provide payment of the Release at Scene Fee. 
(3)  If a tow company complies with subsection (2) of this section and the vehicle owner fails to provide payment within 15 minutes, the tow company may proceed to tow the motor vehicle to the storage facility. 
(Ord. 1356-13 §1, 10-28-13)  
TMC 8-5-080 - Towing and Storage Rates. 
A tow company must not charge more than the following amounts for motor vehicles towed from private property: 
(1)  "After Hours Release Fee" of $25.00 for release of the motor vehicle between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., Monday through Friday; and all hours on Saturday, Sunday, and City recognized holidays. 
(2)  "Hookup Fee" of no more than the following fees, which includes: hookup, dollies, driveline or axle pull, 30 minutes of on-scene time, tower's dispatch, and photo fees and: 
(a)  One hundred seventy-five dollars for motor vehicles weighing less than 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight; 
(b)  Two hundred dollars for motor vehicles weighing from 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight to less than 20,000 pounds gross vehicle weight; and 
(c)  Two hundred fifty dollars for motor vehicles more than 20,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. 
(3)  "Mileage Fee" of no more than $4.50 per towed mile, up to a maximum of ten miles. 
(4)  "Release at Scene Fee" of no more than the Hookup Fee. 
(5)  "Storage Fee" per 24-hour period from completion of the tow of no more than: 
(a)  Twenty-five dollars per day; or 
(b)  Thirty-five dollars per day for motor vehicles over 20 feet long. 
(Ord. 1356-13 §1, 10-28-13)  
TMC 8-5-090 - Violation is Civil Infraction. 
(1)  A tow company that violates or refuses to comply with this Chapter commits a civil infraction and shall be subject to a fine of up to $500.00. Each violation, and each day that a violation continues, constitutes a separate civil infraction. 
(2)  In addition to any other remedy provided by law, a tow company that commits more than two violations of this Chapter within one year may have its license revoked for up to one year. 
(3)  The civil infraction procedures in TMC 7-01 apply to the prosecution of any violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1356-13 §1, 10-28-13)  
TITLE 9 - REGULATIONS 
Chapters:  
CHAPTER 9-01 - BUSINESS LICENSES 
Sections: 
 
TMC 9-1-010 - Purposes. 
The purposes of this ordinance are to provide revenue for general municipal purposes and to maintain records of persons doing business in the City of Tualatin. 
(Ord. 750-88 §1, 6-13-88)  
TMC 9-1-020 - License Required. 
(1)  Unless exempt under the provisions of subsection (2), it is unlawful for a person to carry on or engage in any business within the City without first having obtained a business license from the City. 
(2)  The following businesses are exempt from the business license requirements: 
(a)  A contractor or landscape contractor whose principal place of business is not within the City, who derives gross receipts of less than $125,000.00 from business conducted within the boundaries of the City during the calendar year for which the business license is obtained and who has obtained a current business license from the Metropolitan Service District. 
(b)  Independent Contractors who are sole proprietors and who furnish instructional services only to the City or on behalf of City-sponsored programs. 
(Ord. 750-88 §2, 6-13-88; Ord. 768-89, 2-13-89; Ord. 854-91 §1, 11-25-91)  
TMC 9-1-030 - Definitions. 
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following definitions shall apply: 
Business means an activity carried on by a person predominately for economic profit. "Business" does not include soliciting, canvassing, services, or selling activities where the predominate purpose is to benefit a charitable, fraternal or religious organization. 
Contractor has the meaning given under ORS 701.005. 
Employee means a natural person who works for or on behalf of a business in exchange for compensation, regardless of the number of hours per pay period or the method of compensation. "Employee" includes, but is not limited to, a sales agent who works primarily for or under the direction of a principal or a broker. 
Engage in Business means to engage in any activity in pursuit of gain, including activities carried on by a person through officers, agents and employees, as well as activities carried on by a person on that person's own behalf. 
Instructional Services means an activity whose primary purpose is to demonstrate or teach a method or methods of performance or assist another in developing or improving a craft or skill. 
Landscape Contractor means a person or business who is licensed under ORS 671.510 to 671.710 as a landscape contractor. 
Person means a natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or a combination. 
Principal Place of Business means the location in the City of Tualatin of the central administrative office of a person conducting business in the City. 
Sale means a transaction between persons based on consideration and includes, but is not limited to, bartering. 
(Ord. 750-88 §3, 6-13-88; Ord. 854-91 §2, 11-25-91)  
TMC 9-1-040 - License Application. 
Prior to engaging in business within Tualatin, each business required by TMC 9-1-020 to obtain and maintain a license shall complete and submit an application to the City for a Business License on forms provided for that purpose. 
Business license application forms shall be accompanied by payment of the appropriate fee. The City Manager shall prescribe the form of the business license application which shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Name of the business; 
(b)  Street and mailing addresses of business; 
(c)  Business owner or operator's name and title; 
(d)  Name of property owner on which business is located; 
(e)  Person and telephone number who may be contacted in case of emergency; 
(f)  Types of hazardous materials regularly maintained on the office or site, as defined under ORS 466.605; 
(g)  Number of employees; and 
(h)  A verification by the applicant. 
The City Manager may require additional information for administrative purposes. 
(Ord. 750-88 §4, 6-13-88)  
TMC 9-1-050 - Validity of Business License. 
Licenses shall be valid for no longer than one calendar year, from January 1 or the date of issue, until the immediately following December 31. 
(Ord. 750-88 §5, 6-13-88; Ord. 806-90, 5-29-90)  
TMC 9-1-060 - License. 
Each license issued by the City shall be deemed a personal license and shall not be assigned or transferred to any other person, firm or corporation. The license certificate shall include the following information: 
(a)  Name of licensee; 
(b)  Address of licensee; 
(c)  A unique license number issued by the City; 
(d)  The date of license issuance; 
(e)  The date of license expiration; 
(f)  The official signature of the City Recorder, or facsimile signature; and 
(g)  The corporate seal of the City of Tualatin. 
(Ord. 750-88 §6, 6-13-88)  
TMC 9-1-070 - License Fees. 
Upon application for a business license under this chapter, a fee shall be paid to the City. The fee shall be based on the number of employees in the business working within the City. The fee is nonrefundable. The license fee shall not be prorated for a portion of the license year, except for a business which begins its business activity after June 30 of a license year, the fee shall be one-half of the otherwise applicable fee. The following fees shall apply: 
1-2 Employees .....$55.00 
3-10 Employees .....60.00 
11-50 Employees .....120.00 
More than 50 Employees .....240.00 
Late Fee: Ten percent of the above business license fee for payments made after January 31. After March 1, and each month thereafter an additional 20 percent per month of the basic business license fee shall be added to the basic fee. 
(Ord. 750-88 §7, 6-13-88; Ord. 1167-04, §1, 7-12-04)  
TMC 9-1-080 - Penalties. 
(1)  Any person, agent, or representative of a person who engages in business within the corporate limits of the City without having first obtained a City business license as required by this ordinance commits a civil infraction and shall be subject to a forfeiture in an amount not exceeding $500.00. For each day that a person engages in business without a required license, a separate offense is committed. 
(2)  A person who engages in business within the City without first obtaining a City business license and who asserts he or she is exempt from the licensing requirements by virtue of the exemption in TMC 9-1-020 shall have the burden of establishing such exemption. 
(3)  A person who knowingly makes or files with the City a false, misleading or unfounded statement in connection with a license application commits a civil infraction and shall be subject to a forfeiture in an amount not exceeding $500.00. In addition to any other penalties imposed, the court may require payment of any license fee or portion of a fee, which because of the false, misleading or unfounded statement has resulted in less than the full required fee being paid. 
(Ord. 750-88 §8, 6-13-88)  
TMC 9-1-090 - Administration. 
The City Manager may establish such other rules for the administration of this ordinance, not inconsistent herewith as may be necessary and expedient. 
(Ord. 750-88 §9, 6-13-88)  
CHAPTER 9-02 - LIQUOR LICENSES 
Sections: 
 
TMC 9-2-010 - Title and Purpose. 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Liquor License Review Ordinance," and may also be referred to as, "this ordinance." 
The purposes of this ordinance are to establish the principle criteria which shall be considered by the Council, and its designee, the City Manager, in making recommendations to the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, concerning the granting, denying, modifying, or renewing of all liquor licenses for premises within the City limits and to establish a process, to be utilized for the investigation of such license applicants for the purpose of making such recommendations, that is fair, effective, and efficient. This ordinance is necessary to ensure that all premises licensed to sell and dispense liquor in any form, meet the high expectations of this community that all such businesses are conducted in a lawful manner that does not unreasonably disturb the peace and tranquility of this City and its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. 680-85 §1, 11-25-85)  
TMC 9-2-020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply: 
City Manager or Manager means the person holding the position of City Manager or any officer or employee of the City of Tualatin, delegated or assigned any or all of the tasks of the City Manager. 
Application means the written request to the City Manager to grant, modify, or renew a liquor license. 
Commission means the Oregon Liquor Control Commission. 
Special Retail Beer License (SRB) means a temporary dispenser license, issued by the Commission, pursuant to ORS 472 and OAR 845-04-025(2) and (5) for the purposes of serving beer or other malt beverage in exchange for some financial consideration and as part of a picnic, convention, fair, civil or community enterprise or similar special event, such as a spectator sports event, musical concert or festival and for which approval by the City must be obtained. 
Special Retail Wine License (SRW) means a temporary dispenser license, issued by the Commission, pursuant to ORS 472 and OAR 845-04-025(2) and (5) for the purpose of serving wine or similarly regulated fermented beverage in exchange for some financial consideration and as part of a picnic, convention, fair, civic or community event, musical concert or festival and for which approval from the City must be obtained. 
(Ord. 680-85 §2, 11-25-85; Ord. 709-86,10/27-86)  
TMC 9-2-030 - License Application. 
Any person or business, requesting a City recommendation to the Commission on a liquor license application, shall make application upon suitable forms, furnished by the City Manager. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The type of license applied for and a description of the nature of the business for which the application is made; 
(2)  The name of the applicant, with address; if the business is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; if the business is a corporation, the name and address of the home office, and the name and address of the designated agent in the state; if a foreign corporation, the name and address of the local agent or representative who will be in charge of the business in the City; 
(3)  The address of the location where the business will be located in the City; 
(4)  The date of application; 
(5)  Any other information the City Manager or Council deems necessary for review; 
(6)  A verification that the information submitted within the application is true and accurate; and 
(7)  The signature of the applicant or agent making the application. 
(8)  The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee, specified as follows. Such fees shall be non-refundable: 
(a)  In the case of an original application—$100.00. 
(b)  For a change in ownership, change in location, or change in privilege application—$75.00. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (d), for renewal and temporary license applications—$35.00. 
(d)  For Special Retail Beer and Special Retail Wine license applications or combined applications—$35.00. 
If the applicant for an SRB or SRW or combination can demonstrate that it is organized and operating as a non-profit organization, no application fee to the City shall be required. 
(Ord. 680-85 §2, 11-25-85; Ord. 709-86, 10/27-86)  
TMC 9-2-040 - City Manager's Duties. 
The City Manager shall provide application forms and shall maintain a record of all applications. The Manager shall coordinate and conduct an investigation of each application for the purpose of determining what recommendation shall be made by the City Manager to the Council or in the case of Special Retail Beer and Special Retail Wine licenses, to the Commission. The investigation may include those subjects contained in the ordinances of the City of Tualatin, as well as the statutes of the State of Oregon. The City Manager may require the applicant to supply any relevant additional information to determine the qualifications of the applicant. Upon completion of the review and for all applications except Special Retail Beer and Special Retail Wine licenses, the City Manager shall make a recommendation to the City Council. For Special Retail Beer and Special Retail Wine licenses upon completion of review, the City Manager shall determine and advise the applicant and the Commission what the recommendation of the City shall be in accordance with the standards, criteria and procedures contained in this ordinance. 
(Ord. 680-85 §4, 11-25-85; Ord. 709-86, 10/27-86)  
TMC 9-2-045 - Police to Conduct Background Checks of Liquor License Applicants. 
The Police Department will conduct a criminal history check of all applicants for a liquor license in order to assist the City Manager in making a recommendation to the Council or the Commission, as provided in TMC 9-2-040. 
(Ord. 1391-16, 4-25-16)  
TMC 9-2-050 - Hearing Procedure. 
(1)  For all applications for which Council approval is required under this ordinance, and where the City Manager recommends approval of an application, the matter will be scheduled as a consent agenda item at the next regular Council meeting. 
(2)  Prior to City Council consideration of a liquor license application, a Council member may review such application and the investigation materials gathered by the City Manager, but only to the extent that disclosure of such application and investigation materials is not prohibited by law. Upon the request of a Council member, a member of the public, or where the City Manager's recommendation is adverse to the application, by the applicant, a public hearing will be scheduled. 
(3)  Notice of Public Hearing before the Council shall be given in the following manner: 
(a)  The notice shall contain the business name of the applicant, the location of the business, the nature of the license applied for, and the time and location at which the hearing will take place. 
(b)  Notice shall be mailed to the applicant or applicant's agent at the address shown on the application not less than seven days before the date set for the hearing. 
(c)  Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City not less than five days before the date set for the hearing. 
(4)  The Public Hearing shall be conducted as follows: 
(a)  The City Manager shall present the City Manager's report. Any other written or oral evidence which is supportive of the City Manager's recommendation may also be presented at this time. 
(b)  The applicant may present evidence or witnesses in support of the application. 
(c)  Interested members of the public shall be given an opportunity to present evidence or testimony bearing upon the application, whether such evidence is supportive or adverse to the application. 
(d)  The applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to rebut evidence presented in opposition to the application. 
(e)  Any relevant evidence shall be admitted, if it is the type of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of their serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any law or rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Evidence of past transactions and occurrences shall not be excluded solely on the basis of having occurred in the past and may be relied upon by the Council in making its recommendation. However, irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(5)  In the case of Special Retail Beer and Special Retail Wine license applications, after due consideration of all pertinent information, the City Manager shall make a recommendation. The recommendation shall be based on substantial evidence relative to the criteria in this ordinance, ORS Chapters 471 and 472 and the public health, safety and welfare. The City Manager may attach reasonable conditions upon the recommendation, which conditions shall be consistent with the purposes of this ordinance. Where the City Manager recommends approval of an application, the Manager shall cause the applicant to be notified of the recommendation. Where the Manager's recommendation is for denial or otherwise adverse to the applicant, it may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with the procedures provided in this section. 
(Ord. 680-85 §5, 11-25-85; Ord. 709-86, 10/27-86; Ord. 764-88, 11-28-98)  
TMC 9-2-060 - Standards and Criteria. 
The Council shall make its recommendation for approval, denial, or modification of the liquor license application based on the Council's evaluation of the relevant standards and criteria, as set forth in this chapter. The applicant shall be held strictly accountable for the conditions of the premises. The Council may recommend against the applicant if any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The application is incomplete; 
(2)  The applicant neglects or refuses to provide in a timely manner any information reasonably requested by the City Manager or the City Council; 
(3)  The applicant provides false or misleading information to the City Manager, the City Council, or to any City employee; 
(4)  The applicant does not possess a current City Business License; 
(5)  The Planning District in which the applicant proposes to locate the business does not allow such business either as a permitted or conditional use; 
(6)  The record of the applicant shows a violation of criminal law or ordinance connected in time, place, and manner with a liquor establishment; 
(7)  The applicant has maintained or allowed to exist an establishment which creates or is a public nuisance under the ordinances of the City or laws of the State, or in which any violations of the provisions of the City ordinances or Federal or State law relating to minors, gambling, obscenity, controlled substances, prostitution or alcoholic beverages, or Chapters 163, 164, 165, or 166 of Oregon Revised Statutes have occurred, or which creates an increase in disorderly or violent acts, litter, noise, vandalism, vehicular or pedestrian traffic congestion, or other locational problems in the reasonable proximity of such premises; 
(8)  The applicant's premises are not maintained in reasonable repair, both interior and exterior, and kept clean and free of litter, rubbish, and dirt; 
(9)  In the case of an application for a new license or for an increase in liquor selling or dispensing privilege, there are sufficient licensed premises in the locality set out in the application and the license is not demanded by public interest or convenience; 
(10)  The licensing of the premises would not be in the best interest of the community because of a history of illegal activities, altercations, noisy conduct, or other disturbances in or around the premises; 
(11)  The applicant has demonstrated an unwillingness or inability to cooperate with City agencies or neighbors in resolving community disputes relating to a licensed establishment; or 
(12)  The applicant's premises place unreasonable, excessive demand on City services, including law enforcement. 
(Ord. 680-85 §6, 11-25-85)  
TMC 9-2-070 - Reconsideration of Applications. 
(1)  After having made a recommendation other than favorable on any license application, the Council shall not consider a new application for the same location by the same or substantially the same applicant for a period of at least six months, except as otherwise provided. 
(2)  If the City Manager reasonably believes that the conditions which caused the Council to make a recommendation, other than a favorable recommendation, have substantially changed and no court or administrative appeal of such license is pending, then the City Manager may reconsider or resubmit such application to the Council. 
(Ord. 680-85 §7, 11-25-85)  
TMC 9-2-080 - Penalty. 
Violation of this ordinance is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day that a violation is shown to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 680-85 §8, 11-25-85)  
CHAPTER 9-03 - LIEN SEARCH FINES 
Sections: 
 
TMC 9-3-010 - Lien Search and Certification Fees. 
The City Recorder shall charge a fee of $10.00 for issuing a certificate of lien or non-lien of the City of Tualatin after first searching the City lien docket and the City Bancroft bond docket to determine whether a lot, tract or parcel of real property located within the City is subject to a City lien. The fee shall accompany the request to the City Recorder or, at the discretion of the City Recorder, shall be invoiced to the person, firm or corporation requesting such lien search. 
(Ord. 117-68 §1, 8-12-68; Ord. 561-82, 3-8-82; Ord. 848-91, §1, 10/28-91)  
TMC 9-3-020 - Deposit of Fees. 
All fees received by the City Recorder under TMC 9-3-010 shall be deposited in the general fund of the City. 
(Ord. 117-68 §2, 8-12-68; Ord. 561-82 §2, 3-8-92)  
CHAPTER 9-04 - REGULATING SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS 
Sections: 
 
TMC 9-4-010 - Posting Premises. 
Whenever the owner or occupier of premises places a sign or notice upon the premises declaring that solicitors or canvassers are not permitted on the premises, it is unlawful for a person, firm or corporation, or agent, employee or representative of a person, firm or corporation, to enter upon such posted premises to solicit or canvass the owner or occupier. 
(Ord. 483-79 §1, 7-9-79)  
TMC 9-4-020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this ordinance, "solicitor" and "canvasser" means any individual taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever, for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether he or she is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. 
(Ord. 483-79 § 2, 7-9-79)  
TMC 9-4-030 - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation, or employee, agent or representative of a person, firm or corporation, violating the provisions of this ordinance shall be punished, upon conviction thereof, by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. 483-79 §3, 7-9-79)  
CHAPTER 9-05 - GARAGE SALES 
Sections: 
 
TMC 9-5-010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this ordinance the following terms shall mean: 
Garage Sale means a general sale open to the public conducted from or on a residential premise in a residential district for the purpose of disposing of personal property including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "garage," "moving," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "backyard," "patio," or "basement." 
Personal Property means property which is utilized, owned and maintained by an individual or by members of his or her residence and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment. 
(Ord. 554-81 §1, 12-14-81)  
TMC 9-5-020 - Number of Garage Sales. 
No person shall hold more than four garage sales during any one calendar year. If members of more than one residence join in holding a garage sale, then such sale shall be considered as having been held for each and all of such residences. 
(Ord. 554-81 §5, 12-14-81; Ord. 586-82, 12-27-82)  
TMC 9-5-030 - Hours of Operation. 
Garage sales shall be limited in time to no more than the daylight hours of three consecutive days. 
(Ord. 554-81 §7, 12-14-81)  
TMC 9-5-040 - Display of Sales Merchandise. 
Personal property offered for sale may be displayed within the residence, in a garage, carport and in the yard of the residence, but only in such areas. No property offered for sale shall be displayed in any public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 554-81 §8, 12-14-81)  
TMC 9-5-050 - Advertising Signs. 
Only the following specified signs may be displayed in relation to a pending garage sale: 
(1)  Two signs of not more than six square feet shall be permitted to be displayed on the property of the residence or location where the garage sale is being conducted; 
(2)  Two signs of not more than three square feet each are permitted, provided written permission to erect the signs is received from the property owners upon whose property such signs are to be placed; 
(3)  None of these signs shall be placed in a public right-of-way; 
(4)  No sign or other form of advertising shall be exhibited for more than two days prior to the day such sale is to commence; 
(5)  All signs must be removed within 24 hours of the termination of the garage sale. 
(Ord. 554-81 §9, 12-14-81)  
TMC 9-5-060 - Responsibility of Operator and/or Owner. 
The individual or individuals operating a garage sale and the owner or tenant of the premises upon which sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and severely held responsible for the maintenance of order and decorum on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such individual shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on the premises, nor permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any road or street in the area of such premises. 
(Ord. 554-81 §9, 12-14-81; Ord. 586-82, 12-27-82)  
TMC 9-5-070 - Owner Presumption. 
In the enforcement of this ordinance there is a presumption that an address or telephone number listed on a garage sale sign shall be that of the individual responsible for posting the sign. In addition, signs directing the public by way of arrows or other directional symbols or phrases to a particular residence are presumed to have been erected by the owner or occupant of the residence. 
(Ord. 554-81 §10, 12-14-81)  
TMC 9-5-080 - Penalties. 
Any person violating this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $50.00 for the first offense, and for the second and all subsequent offenses, not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00. 
(Ord. 554-81 §12, 12-14-81)  
CHAPTER 9-06 - MANDATORY RECYCLING FOR BUSINESSES 
Sections: 
 
TMC 9-6-005 - Purpose and Applicability. 
(1)  The purpose of this Ordinance is to comply with the Business Recycling Requirements set forth in Metro Code Chapter 5.10 and to assist the Metro region in achieving waste reduction goals, conserving natural resources, and reducing greenhouse gas emissions by increasing business recycling. 
(2)  This Ordinance applies to all businesses and business recycling service customers for which the principal office is not a residence. 
(3)  The City may exempt a business from some or all of the Business Recycling Requirements if: 
(a)  The business provides access for a site visit; and 
(b)  The City or its designee determine during the site visit that the business cannot comply with the Business Recycling Requirement. 
(Ord. 1280-09 §1, 3-23-09)  
TMC 9-6-010 - Definitions. 
As used in this Ordinance, the following definitions apply: 
Business means an entity of one or more persons, corporate or otherwise, engaged in commercial, professional, charitable, political, industrial, educational, or other activity that is non-residential in nature, including public bodies. 
Business Recycling Service Customer means a person who enters into a service agreement with a waste hauler or recycler for business recycling services. 
(Ord. 1280-09 §2, 3-23-09)  
TMC 9-6-020 - Business Requirements. 
(1)  Businesses shall ensure that recycling containers for internal maintenance of work areas are provided where recyclable materials may be collected, stored, or both. 
(2)  Businesses and business recycling service customers shall post accurate signs that: 
(a)  Describe the location where recyclable materials are collected, stored, or both; 
(b)  Identify the materials that the business must source separate for reuse or recycling; and 
(c)  Provide recycling instructions. 
(Ord. 1280-09 §3, 3-23-09)  
TMC 9-6-030 - Code Enforcement. 
(1)  In order to encourage maximum participation in the Business Recycling Program, the City or its designee will offer technical assistance to businesses, upon request. Code enforcement and penalties will be used as a last resort and reserved for those few uncooperative businesses that refuse to improve their waste prevention recycling practices after technical assistance efforts. 
(2)  Code enforcement actions will be handled as follows: 
(a)  Businesses found out of compliance may receive a written notice of non-compliance that describes the violation, how the violation can be cured through the education process, and an offer of assistance. 
(b)  If the business does not cure the violation within the timeframe specified, the enforcement procedures and penalties found in TMC 9-1-0801(1) may be used. 
(Ord. 1280-09 §4, 3-23-09)  
CHAPTER 9-07 - MOTION PICTURE AND FILM PRODUCTION 
Sections: 
 
TMC 9-7-005 - Purpose and Applicability. 
(1)  The Ordinance is referred to as the Motion Picture and Film Production Ordinance of the City of Tualatin. 
(2)  This Ordinance establishes procedures for the review and issuance of City filming permits as they relate to the production of commercial filming activities, within the City of Tualatin, subject to authorization and permit requirements. This ordinance is to facilitate film production within the City while protecting the health and safety of those who might be impacted by such production activities. This ordinance excludes companies duly licensed by a City of Tualatin Business License and companies that conduct filming operations within the confines of their own property without impacting public facilities. 
(Ord. 1297-10 §1, 4-12-10)  
TMC 9-7-010 - Definitions. 
As used in this Ordinance, the following definitions apply: 
City Manager means the chief executive of the City of Tualatin or the City Manager's designee. 
Commercial Film Production Activities means activities involving the use of motion picture, videotaping, sound-recording or any other type of moving image or audio recording equipment within the City of Tualatin that includes product or service advertisement, the creation/filming of a product for sale, or the use of actors, models, sets, and props for the purpose of generating revenue. This definition excludes all activities listed in the Permit Exceptions section of this Ordinance. 
Film Liaison means an individual designated by the City Manager to facilitate film and video shoots to be done in the City of Tualatin and its properties. The Film Liaison assists production companies with finding locations, securing permits and making sure required insurance is in place. 
Film Production Permit (Major) means permits that requires proof of insurance and the utilization of public services or that impact normal City operations and/or activities including but not limited to street closures, public safety services, park closures, special parking needs, excessive noise, traffic alterations, etc. 
Film Production Permit (Minor) means permits that do not require proof of insurance, the utilization of public services or that impact normal city operations and/or activities as stated in Section 2 Item 3 of this Ordinance. 
Non-Commercial or Personal Use means filming activity that involves shooting still photographs or "home movies" for personal use. Such activities do not involve advertisement of a product or service, the creation of a product for sale, or the creation of a product for sale, or the creation of media for monetary gain. 
News Purposes/Media means filming activity conducted for newspapers, television news and other news media for the purpose of reporting on persons, Electronic News Gathering (ENG), events, or scenes which are in the news. 
(Ord. 1297-10 §2, 4-12-10)  
TMC 9-7-020 - Business Requirements. 
(1)  Permit required. No commercial film production activities of any type may take place within the City of Tualatin without a Film Production Permit as required by this Ordinance. Failure to present a permit upon request of the Film Liaison or other authorized City official may result in the immediate termination of any filming activity.; 
(2)  Exceptions. The following persons or entities are not required to obtain a permit: 
(a)  News Media; 
(b)  Personal Use/Non-commercial video; 
(c)  Not-for-Profit agencies; 
(d)  Students engaged in completing school projects. 
(Ord. 1297-10 §3, 4-12-10)  
TMC 9-7-030 - Code Enforcement. 
(1)  Permit Application Process: 
(a)  Film Production Application (Major): Any person/agency intending to conduct community filming activities in the City of Tualatin shall complete the Film Production Application (Major) provided by the City. The Permit Application form will not be processed until it is submitted with the signature of the applicant and payment of all required fees, deposits and insurance certificate identified by this ordinance. The application must be received no later than ten business days prior to commencing production activities for which the permit is required. Significant traffic impacts that include closures, blocking traffic or public safety concerns ancillary to the production require submission of the Film Production Application no later than ten business days prior to commencing production activities. 
(b)  Film Production Application (Minor): The Film Production Application (Minor) form will not be processed until it is complete and submitted with the signature of the applicant. The application must be received no later than 24 business-day hours prior to the commencement of filming activities. 
(c)  The City Manager may or may not require written evidence of permits or coordination with other public agencies that have jurisdiction within the City of Tualatin upon submission of an application for a film production permit. Requirements of these responsible agencies will be additional requirements for the City's permit. Such requirements will be evaluated and determined by the City's film liaison through the film permitting process prior to the applicant's submission. 
(2)  Permit Issuance: 
(a)  The City Manager or designee will issue a film production permit when he or she has reviewed the application and determined that the application complies with this Ordinance. A permit will not be issued under the following conditions: 
(i)  If production is likely to result in endangering public health or safety. 
(ii)  If the production threatens to damage public property without due compensation. 
(iii)  If the production will be a detriment to the operations of the City. 
(3)  Certificate of Insurance: 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a Film Production Permit, the applicant shall provide a Certificate of Insurance to the City for general liability which lists the City of Tualatin as an additional insured. The Certificate must remain in effect for the duration of the filming period. The required minimum amounts of coverage are as follows: 
(i)  General Aggregate .....$1,000,000.00 
(ii)  Each Occurrence .....1,000,000.00 
(iii)  "Errors and Omissions" .....1,000,000.00 
(b)  If, in the City Manager's opinion, the potential damage could exceed the insurance limits stated in (2) above, the City Manager may require that additional insurance be obtained to cover the potential liability. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of a Film Production Permit, the applicant shall submit an indemnification and hold harmless agreement to the City that requires the applicant to indemnify the City and releases the City from all liabilities that may result from filming operations within City limits. The applicant shall be liable for all damages to public property resulting from filming operations and shall be responsible for restoring or repairing any area damaged or disrupted before leaving the site. If the site is not repaired or restored to the City's satisfaction, the City Manager or his/her designee may have the necessary restoration and/or repairs performed and the applicant shall reimburse the City for such work within ten days of completing the filming activities. In the event the applicant fails to reimburse the City, the City may secure its reimbursement from either a cash or surety bond, which the applicant will be required to post with the City to ensure faithful performance of such restoration. Such faithful performance bond shall be filed at the time of the application in an amount of $500.00 or in any higher amount determined by the circumstances. The amount of the bond shall in no way limit the applicant's liability or responsibility for the costs of repairs or restoration if these costs exceed the bond amount. 
(d)  The Film Production Permit is valid for a period of 60 days from date of approval unless otherwise specified by the City Manager or designee. If an extension of the permit is required, a written request indicating the intended duration of the extension, accompanied by a check for the amount determined to account for the filming fees associated with the additional days and a Certificate of Insurance covering the same time period, is required to be submitted to the Film Liaison no less than 24 hours prior to the expiration of the existing permit. 
(Ord. 1297-10 §4, 4-12-10)  
TMC 9-7-040 - Permit Process. 
(1)  Additional Services and Conditions. 
(a)  Upon request, the City Manager may allow additional City services to be provided for an additional cost. The costs will depend upon the type/extent of additional services requested. 
(b)  The City Manager or designee may impose any conditions found necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. The applicant must comply with such conditions prior to permit issuance and during the permit period. Permit conditions will not be changed unless the City Manager approves the changes. 
(Ord. 1297-10 §5, 4-12-10)  
TMC 9-7-050 - Fees. 
(1)  Film and Video Permit Fees: 
(a)  Film Production Application (Major): 
Application fee .....$50.00 
Film production permit .....1,000.00 
(b)  Film Production Application (Minor) 
No fees Apply 
(2)  The above fees shall be in lieu of any business license fees that may be required by the City of Tualatin. 
(3)  If additional City services are required, such as public safety services, road closures, public utilities, etc., the cost of providing those services will be charged at the city rate on an hourly basis. 
(Ord. 1297-10 §6, 4-12-10)  
CHAPTER 9-08 - BUSINESS FOOD WASTE REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
TMC 9-8-005 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to comply with the Business Food Waste Requirements set forth in Metro Code Chapter 5.10 (Metro Ordinance No. 18-1418) and to assist the Metro region in increasing recycling of food waste and achieving food waste reduction goals. This Chapter does not apply to food that is fit for human consumption and accepted for donation by a charitable organization or the use of food waste for animal consumption in compliance with applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1420-19 , § 1, 5-28-19)  
TMC 9-8-010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter, the terms and conditions have the following meanings: 
Covered Business means a business that cooks, assembles, processes, serves, or sells food or does so as service providers for other enterprises. 
Food Waste means waste from fruits, vegetables, meats, dairy products, fish, shellfish, nuts, seeds, grains, coffee grounds, and other food that results from the distribution, storage, preparation, cooking, handling, selling or serving of food for human consumption. 
(a)  Food waste includes but is not limited to excess, spoiled or unusable food and includes inedible parts commonly associated with food preparation such as pits, shells, bones, and peels. 
(b)  Food waste does not include liquids or large amounts of oils and meats which are collected for rendering, fuel production or other non-disposal applications, or any food fit for human consumption that has been set aside, stored properly and is accepted for donation by a charitable organization and any food collected to feed animals in compliance with applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1420-19 , § 1, 5-28-19)  
TMC 9-8-020 - Applicability. 
(1)  All covered businesses must comply with the provisions of the Food Waste Requirements in this Chapter. Covered businesses subject to the business food waste requirement include but are not limited to: 
(a)  Cafeterias and buffets; 
(b)  Caterers; 
(c)  Correctional facilities; 
(d)  Food service contractors; 
(e)  Full service restaurants; 
(f)  Grocery retail; 
(g)  Grocery wholesale; 
(h)  Limited service restaurants; 
(i)  Specialty food markets; and 
(j)  Warehouse clubs. 
(2)  The following covered business must comply with the provisions for this Food Waste Requirements in this Chapter only if the entities have full-service restaurants or on-site food preparation or service: 
(a)  Colleges and universities; 
(b)  Drinking places; 
(c)  Elementary and secondary schools; 
(d)  Hospitals; 
(e)  Hotels; 
(f)  Nursing and residential care; and 
(g)  Retirement and assisted living. 
(Ord. No. 1420-19 , § 1, 5-28-19)  
TMC 9-8-030 - Business Food Waste Requirements; Business Owner Requirements. 
(1)  A covered business must comply with the following minimum requirements for business food waste: 
(a)  Separate food waste from all other solid waste for collection; 
(b)  Collect food waste that is controlled by the business, agents, and employees. 
(i)  This requirement does not apply to food wastes controlled by customers or the public. 
(ii)  A covered business may, at its discretion, also collect food waste from customers or the public but must ensure that food wastes are free of non-food items. 
(iii)  Elementary and secondary schools may also include student-generated food waste from school cafeteria meals but must ensure that food wastes are free of non-food items. 
(c)  Have correctly-labeled and easily-identifiable receptacles for internal maintenance or work areas where food waste may be collected, stored, or both. 
(d)  Post accurate signs where food waste is collected, stored, or both that identify the materials that the covered business must source separate. 
(2)  In addition to the minimum requirements in subsection (1), owners or managers of single or multi-tenant buildings containing covered businesses must allow or otherwise enable the provision of food waste collection service to lessees or occupants subject to the business food waste requirement. 
(Ord. No. 1420-19 , § 1, 5-28-19)  
TMC 9-8-030 - Compliance Timeline; Temporary Compliance Waivers. 
(1)  Covered Businesses must comply with the food waste requirements as determined by the quantity of food waste they generate per week, on average. Implementation will begin with Business Group 1 and progress to the other groups according to the dates noted below. Covered Businesses that demonstrate they generate less than 250 pounds per week of food waste are not subject to this requirement. 
Business Group 1 
March 31, 2020-March 31, 2021 
  
≥0.5 ton (1,000 pounds) per week food waste generated 	Business Group 2 
March 31, 2021-Sept. 30, 2022 
  
≥0.25 ton (500 pounds) per week food waste generated 	Business Group 3 
Sept. 30, 2022-Sept. 30, 2023 
  
≥0.125 ton (250 pounds) per week food waste generated 
 
(2)  A covered business may seek a temporary 12-month waiver from the business food waste requirement by providing access to a recycling specialist for a site visit and demonstrating that the covered business cannot comply with the business food waste requirement. Businesses must agree to periodic waiver verification site visits to determine if conditions that warrant the waiver are still in place and cannot be remedied in accordance with waiver criteria. 
(Ord. No. 1420-19 , § 1, 5-28-19)  
TMC 9-8-040 - Enforcement of the Business Food Waste Requirement. 
(1)  A covered business that does not comply with the business food waste requirement may receive a written notice of noncompliance. The notice of noncompliance will describe the violation, provide the covered business an opportunity to cure the violation within the time specified in the notice, and offer assistance with compliance. 
(2)  A covered business that does not cure a violation within the time specified in the notice of noncompliance may receive a written citation. The citation will provide an additional opportunity to cure the violation within the time specified in the citation and will notify the covered business that it may be subject to a fine. 
(3)  Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter commits a civil infraction and is subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00. Each violation, and each day that a violation continues, is a separate civil infraction. 
(4)  The civil infraction procedures in TMC Chapter 7-01 apply to the prosecution of any violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1420-19 , § 1, 5-28-19)  
CHAPTER 9-09 - TRANSIENT LODGING TAX 
Sections: 
 
TMC 9-9-010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish and impose a transient lodging tax on an occupant of transient lodging within the City. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-020 - Administrative Rules and Regulations. 
(1)  The City Manager must administer and enforce the provisions of this Chapter and may adopt rules and regulations to aid in its administration and enforcement. 
(2)  Prior to the adoption of administrative rules and regulations, the City Manager must: 
(a)  Give public notice of the intent to adopt rules and regulations; 
(b)  Provide copies of the proposed rules and regulations to interested persons; and 
(c)  Provide not less than 15 calendar days for persons to submit data or written comments on the proposed administrative rule. 
(3)  Data or comments received from persons must be considered by the City Manager prior to adopting the administrative rule. 
(4)  Upon final adoption of the administrative rule, public notice must be given and the adopted rules must be filed with the City Recorder. 
(5)  Copies of current rules and regulations must be made available to the public on the City's website and upon request. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-030 - Definitions. 
Unless the context provides otherwise, the following words and phrases mean: 
Accrual Accounting means the transient lodging tax collector enters the rent due from a transient on records when the rent is earned, whether or not it is paid. 
Cash Accounting means the transient lodging tax collector does not enter the rent due from a transient on records until the rent is paid. 
City means the City of Tualatin. 
City Council means the City of Tualatin City Council. 
City Manager means the City Manager, or the City Manager's designee. 
Collection Reimbursement Charge means the amount a transient lodging tax collector may retain as reimbursement for the costs incurred by the transient lodging tax collector in collecting and reporting a transient lodging tax, and in maintaining transient lodging tax records. 
Conference Center means a facility that: (a) is owned or partially owned by a unit of local government, a governmental agency, or a nonprofit organization; and (b) meets the current membership criteria of the International Association of Conference Centers. 
Convention Center means a new or improved facility that: (a) is capable of attracting and accommodating conventions and trade shows from international, national, and regional markets requiring exhibition space, ballroom space, meeting rooms, and any other associated space, including without limitation banquet facilities, loading areas, and lobby and registration areas; (b) has a total meeting room and ballroom space between one-third and one-half of the total size of the center's exhibition space; (c) generates a majority of its business income from tourists; (d) has a room-block relationship with the local lodging industry; and (e) is owned by a unit of local government, a governmental agency, or a nonprofit organization. 
Evade or Evasion means a person fails or refuses to collect the transient lodging tax or to make, within the time provided in this Chapter, any report or remittance of the transient tax or any portion thereof, makes a fraudulent return, or otherwise willfully attempts to evade this Chapter. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, for lodging or sleeping purposes of any room or rooms in a transient lodging. 
Rent means any consideration rendered for the sale, service, or furnishing of transient lodging. 
Tourism means economic activity resulting from tourists. 
Tourism Promotion means any of the following activities: (a) advertising, publicizing, or distributing information for the purpose of attracting and welcoming tourists; (b) conducting strategic planning and research necessary to stimulate future tourism development; (c) operating tourism promotion agencies; and (d) marketing special events and festivals designed to attract tourists. 
Tourism Promotion Agency includes: (a) Incorporated nonprofit organization or governmental unit that is responsible for the tourism promotion of a destination on a year-round basis; (b) a nonprofit entity that manages tourism-related economic development plans, programs, and projects; or (c) a regional or statewide association that represents entities that rely on tourism-related business for more than 50 percent of their total income. 
Tourism-Related Facility means: (a) a conference center, convention center, or visitor information center; and (b) the improved real property that has a useful life of ten or more years and has a substantial purpose of supporting tourism or accommodating tourist activities. 
Tourist means a person who, for business, pleasure, recreation, or participation in events related to the arts, heritage, or culture, travels from the community in which that person is a resident to a different community that is separate, distinct from and unrelated to the person's community of residence, and that trip: (a) requires the person to travel more than 50 miles from the community of residence; or (b) includes an overnight stay. 
Transient means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in transient lodging for a period of less than 30 consecutive calendar days, counting portions of calendar days as full days. The day an individual checks out of the transient lodging is not included in determining the 30-day period if the individual is not charged rent for that day. Any such individual so occupying or entitled to occupy space in transient lodging is a "transient" for purposes of this Chapter until the period of 29 days has expired, unless there is an agreement in writing between the transient lodging tax collector and the transient providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a "transient," uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter may be considered. A human being who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in such month, is a "transient." 
Transient Lodging means: (a) hotel, motel, and inn dwelling units that are used for temporary overnight human occupancy; (b) spaces used for parking recreational vehicles or erecting tents during periods of human occupancy; or (c) houses, cabins, condominiums, apartment units, or other dwelling units, or portions of any of these dwelling units, used for temporary human occupancy. 
Transient Lodging Intermediary means a person other than a transient lodging provider that facilitates the retail sale of transient lodging and charges for occupancy of the transient lodging. 
Transient Lodging Provider means a person who furnishes transient lodging, and includes a person who operates a transient lodging facility, whether in the capacity of owner, managing agent, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, concessionaire, or any other capacity. 
Transient Lodging Tax Collector means a transient lodging provider or a transient lodging intermediary. 
Visitor Information Center means a building, or a portion of a building, the main purpose of which is to distribute or disseminate information to tourists. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-100 - Tax Rate and Computation; Total Retail Price. 
(1)  For the privilege of occupancy in any transient lodging within the corporate limits of the City, each transient must pay a tax of two and one-half percent of the rent. The transient lodging tax imposed is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any state or other local transient lodging tax collected within the corporate limits of the City. 
(2)  The transient lodging tax must be computed on the total retail price, including all charges other than taxes, paid by a person for occupancy of the transient lodging. The total retail price paid by a person for occupancy of transient lodging that is part of a travel package may be determined by reasonable and verifiable standards from books and records kept in the ordinary course of the transient lodging tax collector's business. 
(a)  If a separate fee is charged for a service and the service is optional, that fee is not subject to the transient lodging tax imposed. 
(b)  If a separate fee is charged for a service and the service is not optional, or if the value of a service is included in the normal lodging rate, the amount allocated to the service is subject to the transient lodging tax imposed. 
(c)  If the provider offers a lodging package that includes something that is not associated with the actual lodging or is provided by a third party, only the regular lodging rate that would have been charged absent the package item is subject to the transient lodging tax imposed. 
(d)  Any allocation made for the City's local transient lodging tax should be consistent with the allocation for the State of Oregon transient lodging tax. 
(3)  The transient lodging tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the City. The transient must pay the transient lodging tax to the transient lodging tax collector at the time the rent is paid or pay directly to the City. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-110 - Tax Exemptions. 
(1)  The following are exempt from the transient lodging tax: 
(a)  A dwelling unit in a hospital, health care facility, long term care facility, or any other residential facility, that is licensed, registered or certified by the Department of Human Services or the Oregon Health Authority; 
(b)  A dwelling unit in a facility providing treatment for drug or alcohol abuse or providing mental health treatment; 
(c)  A dwelling unit that is used by members of the general public for temporary human occupancy for fewer than 30 days per year; 
(d)  A dwelling unit, the consideration for which is funded through a contract with a government agency and the purpose of which is to provide emergency or temporary shelter; 
(e)  A dwelling unit at a charitable nonprofit camp, charitable nonprofit conference center, or other charitable nonprofit facility; 
(f)  A dwelling unit that is leased or otherwise occupied by the same person for a consecutive period of 30 days or more during the year. The requirements of this subsection are satisfied even if the physical dwelling unit changes during the consecutive period, if: 
(i)  All dwelling units occupied are within the same facility; and 
(ii)  The person paying consideration for the transient lodging is the same person throughout the consecutive period. 
(2)  A dwelling unit leased for a consecutive period of 30 days or more during the year by one person but occupied by one or more other persons for a consecutive period of less than 30 days is not exempt from the tax imposed under this Chapter during each person's occupancy that is for a consecutive period of less than 30 days. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-120 - Use of Funds. 
(1)  The City Manager must deposit all money collected pursuant to this Chapter in accordance with State Local Budget Law. 
(2)  All net revenue from the tax, following reductions attributed to collection reimbursement charges, must be used as follows: 
(a)  At least 70 percent of the net revenue from the transient lodging tax must be used to: 
(i)  Fund tourism promotion or tourism-related facilities; or 
(ii)  Finance or refinance the debt of tourism-related facilities and pay reasonable administrative costs incurred in financing or refinancing that debt; provided: 
(1)  The net revenue may be used for administrative costs only if the City provides a collection reimbursement charge; and 
(2)  Upon retirement of the debt, the City reduces the tax by the amount by which the tax was increased to finance or refinance the debt. 
(b)  No more than 30 percent of net revenue from the transient lodging tax may be used to fund City services. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-130 - Collection of Transient Lodging Tax; Collector Reimbursement. 
(1)  The transient lodging tax must be collected by the transient lodging tax collector who receives the consideration rendered for occupancy of the transient lodging. If, for any reason, the transient lodging tax due is not paid by the transient to the transient lodging tax collector, the City Manager may require the transient lodging tax be paid by the transient directly to the City. 
(2)  In all cases of credit or deferred payment of rent for transient lodging, the payment of transient lodging tax to the transient lodging tax collector may be deferred until the rent is paid. A transient lodging tax collector is not liable for the transient lodging tax until credits are paid or deferred payments are made. The deferral allowed by this subsection does not excuse a transient lodging tax collector from liability for any failure to collect the tax due. 
(3)  The transient lodging tax collector may withhold a collection reimbursement charge of five percent of the transient lodging tax amount collected. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-200 - Registration of Transient Lodging Tax Collector. 
(1)  Every person who engages or wishes to engage in business as a transient lodging tax collector of a transient lodging in the City must register with the City on a form provided by the City Manager. 
(2)  The person registering with the City must provide the name under which the transient lodging tax collector transacts or intends to transact business, the location of the place or places of business, and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the City Manager may require. The transient lodging tax collector must sign the registration. 
(3)  After the submittal of a completed registration form, the City Manager will issue a certificate of authority, at no charge, to each registrant to collect the transient lodging tax. 
(a)  Certificates are nonassignable and nontransferable and must be surrendered immediately to the City Manager upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. 
(b)  Each certificate and duplicate must state the place of business to which it is applicable and must be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. 
(4)  The certificate of authority must state the following: 
(a)  The name of the transient lodging tax collector; 
(b)  The address of the transient lodging; 
(c)  The date upon which the certificate was issued; and 
(d)  A certificate number as assigned by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-210 - Transient Lodging Tax Collection Records. 
(1)  The amount of transient lodging tax must be separately stated upon the transient lodging tax collector's business records, including lodging receipts provided to transients. 
(2)  The transient lodging tax collector must enter the transient lodging tax on the transient lodging tax collector's records when rent is collected if the transient lodging tax collector keeps records on the cash accounting basis or, if the transient lodging tax collector keeps records on the accrual accounting basis, when rent is earned. If rent is paid in installments, the transient must pay a proportionate share of the transient lodging tax to the transient lodging tax collector with each installment. 
(3)  The transient lodging tax collected or accrued by the transient lodging tax collector, or which should have been charged by the transient lodging tax collector, constitutes a debt owing by the transient lodging tax collector to the City. 
(4)  A transient lodging tax collector must not collect, report, or remit amounts of the transient lodging tax in amounts smaller than one cent. Fractions of cents calculated as an amount of tax that is collectable, reportable, or remittable may be ignored. 
(5)  The transient lodging tax collector must keep records, render statements, and comply with rules adopted by the City Manager. The records and statements required must be sufficient to show whether there is a tax liability and the transient lodging tax collector must retain all records for a period of at least 42 months from the end of the month in which the record was originally created. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-220 - Audit and Inspection; Certain Records Exempt from Public Disclosure. 
(1)  The City Manager may examine, inspect, audit, and make copies of the books, papers, and accounting records relating to room rentals of any transient lodging tax collector. The City Manager may investigate the business of the transient lodging tax collector to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the transient lodging tax collector, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(a)  The City Manager must notify the transient lodging tax collector of the intent to inspect prior to the inspection. 
(b)  All inspections must be conducted during normal business hours. 
(2)  Records, reports, or returns submitted to the City Manager are exempt from disclosure to the full extent provided by Oregon Public Records laws. However, nothing in this subsection prohibits: 
(a)  The disclosure to, or the examination of, financial records by City officials, employees, or agents for the purpose of administering or enforcing the terms of this Chapter, or collecting taxes imposed under the terms of this Chapter, or collecting City business license fees; 
(b)  The disclosure to the taxpayer, or the taxpayer's authorized representative, of financial information, including amounts of transient lodgings taxes, penalties, or interest, after filing of a written request by the taxpayer or the taxpayer's authorized representative and approval of the request by the City Manager; 
(c)  The disclosure of the names and addresses of any persons to whom a transient occupancy tax collector registration certificate has been issued; 
(d)  The disclosure of general statistics in a form that prevents the identification of financial information regarding any particular taxpayer's return or application; or 
(e)  The disclosure of financial information to the City Attorney or other legal representatives of the City, to the extent the City Manager deems disclosure or access necessary for the performance of the duties of advising or representing the City. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-230 - Due Date of Payment to City; Returns; Payments and Collection Charges. 
(1)  The transient lodging tax collected by a transient lodging tax collector are due and payable to the City on a monthly basis on the tenth day of the month for the preceding month. All taxes not remitted to the City on the last day of the month in which they are due are delinquent. 
(2)  Along with payment of the transient lodging tax, the transient lodging tax collector must file the preceding month's tax return. The returns must be filed on forms prescribed by the City. 
(a)  The returns must show the amount of transient lodging tax collected or otherwise due for the period covered by the return. 
(b)  The City Manager may require returns to show the total rentals upon which the transient lodging tax was collected or otherwise due, gross receipts of the transient lodging tax collector for such period and an explanation in detail of any discrepancy between such amounts, the amount of rents exempt, if any, and such other information as may otherwise be necessary for the administration of this Chapter. 
(3)  The transient lodging tax collector must deliver the return, together with the transient lodging tax due, to the City by personal delivery, mail, or other method authorized by the City Manager. If the return is mailed, the postmark is considered the date of delivery. 
(4)  For good cause shown, the City Manager may extend, for a period not to exceed one month, the time for making any return or payment of the transient lodging tax. Any transient lodging tax collector granted an extension must pay interest at the rate of one percent per month on the amount of tax due without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed, and the transient lodging tax and interest due is not paid by the end of the extension, then the interest becomes a part of the transient lodging tax for computation of penalties under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-240 - Penalties and Interest; Lien. 
(1)  A transient lodging tax collector who fails to remit the full amount of the tax imposed and due prior to delinquency must pay a late payment penalty of ten percent of the amount of the portion of the tax that is unpaid as of the delinquency date, in addition to the amount of the tax due. 
(2)  If the transient lodging tax collector does not pay the delinquent amount of transient lodging tax due and the ten percent late payment penalty within 30 days following the delinquency date, the transient lodging tax collector must pay a second late payment penalty of 15 percent of the portion of the transient lodging tax that remains unpaid as of the date that is 30 days following the delinquency date in addition to the remaining unpaid amount of the transient lodging tax and first late payment penalty. 
(3)  If the City Manager determines that the nonpayment is on account of fraud or intent to evade the provisions of this Chapter, or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant to this Chapter, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the transient lodging tax due must be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in this section. 
(4)  In addition to the penalties imposed, a transient lodging tax collector who fails to remit a transient lodging tax imposed by this Chapter must pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or a fraction thereof without proration for portions of a month, on the amount of the transient lodging tax due, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
(5)  Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section merge and become a part of the transient lodging tax required to be paid. 
(6)  Within ten days of notice of the imposition of a late payment penalty, a transient lodging tax collector may petition the City Manager for waiver or refund of any penalty or portion thereof. The City Manager may, if a good and sufficient reason is shown that such failure is not due to willful neglect, waive or refund the penalty in full or in part. 
(7)  The City may record a lien in the City's lien docket against any real property owned by the transient lodging tax collector in the City as to any delinquent remittances by the transient lodging tax collector. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-250 - Alternative Remittance of Receipts from Tax on Camping and Recreational Vehicle Spaces. 
(1)  A transient lodging tax collector who collects tax on rental of privately owned camping or recreational vehicle spaces may hold the tax collected until the amount of money held equals or exceeds $100.00, regardless of the schedule established by the City for payment of the tax. 
(2)  Once the amount held by a transient lodging tax collector equals or exceeds $100.00, or by December 31 of each year if the $100.00 threshold is not met, the transient lodging tax collector must remit the transient lodging tax collected at the next following reporting period established by the City for payment of the tax. 
(3)  No penalty or interest will be assessed against a transient lodging tax collector who withholds payments pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-300 - Deficiency Determination. 
(1)  The City Manager may investigate any act, or failure to act, to determine the correct amount of the transient lodging tax due and payable to the City, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  If the City Manager determines that a transient lodging tax collector's return or remittance of the transient lodging tax is missing, incomplete, or otherwise incorrect, the City Manager may compute and determine the amount of the transient lodging tax due based upon the facts contained in the transient lodging tax collector's return, if any, or any other source of information. 
(b)  If a transient lodging tax collector fails to collect, report, or remit the transient lodging tax required to be collected and paid to the City pursuant to this Chapter, or submits a fraudulent return, or commits fraud or willful intent to evade, or otherwise violates or attempts to violate this Chapter, the City Manager may estimate the transient lodging tax due, and calculate the amount owing from the transient lodging tax collector for tax remittance, interest, and penalties. 
(2)  Upon making a deficiency determination, the City Manager must send notice of the deficiency to the transient lodging tax collector. Any deficiency in the payment of the transient lodging tax due is due and payable immediately upon delivery of a notice of the deficiency from the City Manager to the transient lodging tax collector, at which time the deficiency amount owed is also delinquent. The City Manager will apply any penalty and interest relating to the deficiency amount owed as set forth in this Chapter. 
(3)  In making a deficiency determination, the City Manager may offset any overpayment the transient lodging tax collector has against any deficiency, penalty or interest the transient lodging tax collector owes. 
(4)  The City Manager must deliver the transient lodging tax collector a written notice of any deficiency determination within three years after the last day of the month following the end of the month for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period is later. However, in the case of fraud or willful intent to evade this Chapter, or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this Chapter, every deficiency determination must be made and notice of the deficiency determination delivered to the transient lodging tax collector within ten years after the last day of the month following the close of the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within ten years after the return is filed, whichever period is later. 
(5)  The deficiency determination is final ten days after receipt of the notice of deficiency, unless a timely petition for redetermination and refund is received by the City Manager, as provided in TMC 9-9-310. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-310 - Petition for Redetermination and Refund. 
(1)  A transient lodging tax collector who receives a notice of deficiency determination from the City Manager may petition for redetermination and refund of any overpayment by filing a petition for redetermination and refund with the City Manager within ten days of the transient lodging tax collector's receipt of the notice of a deficiency determination. 
(2)  The petition for redetermination and refund must include full payment of all transient lodging taxes, penalties, and interest determined by the City Manger to be due. 
(3)  Filing a petition for redetermination and refund is a prerequisite to seeking judicial review and the determination is final if a petition for redetermination and refund is not timely filed. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-320 - Hearing on Petition for Redetermination and Refund. 
(1)  If a petition for redetermination and refund is filed within the allowable period, the City Manager must reconsider the determination, and, if the petitioner requests, must grant the petitioner an oral hearing and provide at least ten days' notice of the time and place of the hearing, unless the City Manager and petitioner agree otherwise. The City Manager may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary. 
(2)  The City Manager may decrease or increase the amount of the original determination as a result of considering the petition and evidence and argument presented at the hearing. 
(3)  After considering the petition for redetermination and refund and all available information, the City Manager must issue a redetermination decision and mail the decision to the petitioner. If the City Manager increases the amount of the original determination, such increase is due upon delivery of a written notice of the increase to the petitioner. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-330 - Refunds to Transient Lodging Tax Collector. 
(1)  If a transient lodging tax collector concludes the transient lodging tax collector has paid more tax, penalty or interest than is due, the transient lodging tax collector may file a claim in writing stating the facts upon which the claim is based. The claim must be filed with the City Manager within one year from the date of payment. 
(2)  If the claim is approved by the City Manager, the excess amount paid must be credited against any amounts then due and payable from the transient lodging tax collector and the balance refunded to the transient lodging tax collector within 14 business days of the date the City Manager concludes that the refund is due. 
(3)  The transient lodging tax collector has the burden of proving the facts that establish the basis for a refund. This section is not applicable to any amount determined by the City Manager to be due pursuant to the deficiency determination provisions of TMC 9-9-310. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-340 - Refunds to Transient. 
(1)  If a transient concludes the transient paid more tax than is due, the transient may file a claim in writing stating the facts upon which the claim is based. The claim must be filed with the City Manager within one year from the date of payment. 
(2)  If the claim is approved by the City Manager, the excess amount collected must be refunded to the transient within 14 business days of the date the City Manager concludes that the refund is due. 
(3)  The transient has the burden of proving the facts that establish the basis for a refund. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-350 - Compromise of Tax. 
The City Manager may adjust, or enter into a settlement of, any amount believed to be due if, as a result of a bankruptcy filing, foreclosure, bona fide legal or factual dispute, or similar circumstance, when it is in the best interest of the City to do so. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-360 - Security for Collection of Tax. 
To ensure compliance with this Chapter, the City Manager may require any transient lodging tax collector deposit security in the form of cash, bond, or other security acceptable to the City Manager. The amount of the security must be fixed by the City Manager, but cannot be greater than five times the transient lodging tax collector's estimated average monthly tax liability for the period for which the transient lodging tax collector files returns, determined in such manner as the City Manager deems proper, or $5,000.00, whichever is less. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the City Manager subject to the limitations of this section. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-400 - Limitations Period on City Enforcement of Collection. 
(1)  The City may bring legal action to collect any amounts owed to the City under this Chapter within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, or at any time within three years after any determination becomes final, whichever is later. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (1), in the case of fraud or willful intent to evade this Chapter or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this Chapter, the City may bring legal action to collect any amounts owed to the City under this Chapter within ten years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, or at any time within ten years after any determination becomes final, whichever is later. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-410 - City Manager Review. 
Any determination made by the City Manger under this Chapter is a quasi-judicial decision and is not appealable to Council. Appeals from any determination made by the City Manager are solely and exclusively by writ of review to the Circuit Court of Washington County, as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-500 - Violations; Penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter commits a civil infraction and is subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00. Each violation, and each day that a violation continues, is a separate civil infraction. 
(2)  Each transient lodging transaction for which tax, penalty, or interest otherwise due is not paid is a separate civil infraction. 
(3)  Each day a person fails to register as a transient lodging tax collector is a separate civil infraction. 
(4)  A finding that a person has committed a civil infraction in violation of this Chapter does not act to relieve the person from compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(5)  If a court finds that a transient lodging tax collector collected the tax imposed by this Chapter and intentionally failed to remit the tax proceeds to the City when required by this Chapter, the amount of penalty may be increased up to ten times. 
(6)  The civil infraction procedures in Tualatin Municipal Code Chapter 7-01 apply to the prosecution of any violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-510 - Evidence of Amounts of Tax Collected. 
For purposes of enforcement of this Chapter, including any civil infraction under TMC 7-01, all amounts listed as room tax on bills or invoices issued by the transient lodging tax collector are considered tax collected by the transient lodging tax collector, unless the transient lodging tax collector received no payment on the bill or invoice. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
TMC 9-9-520 - Remedies Cumulative. 
Any fines issued under authority of this Chapter are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other civil, criminal, or administrative penalty, sanction, or remedy otherwise authorized by law. 
(Ord. 1408-18; 02-26-18)  
CHAPTER 9-10 - MOBILE FOOD UNIT REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
TMC 9-10-010 - Purpose and Applicability. 
(1)  The purpose of this Chapter is to permit mobile food units to operate on private property within the City and establish regulations to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(2)  The requirements of this Chapter do not apply to a mobile food unit that operates: 
(a)  As a vendor under an approved City event permit; 
(b)  Under a street closure permit granted by the City; 
(c)  On private property authorized by a Special Event Permit issued under TMC 5-5; 
(d)  On private property authorized by a Special Assembly permit issued under TMC 6-2; 
(e)  Under the authority of any other permit issued by the City where the City indicates approval of a mobile food unit; or 
(f)  At private catering events where the sale or distribution of food is not open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1403-17 , § 1, 10-9-17)  
TMC 9-10-020 - Definitions. 
Mobile Food Unit means a vehicle that is self-propelled or that can be pulled or pushed down a sidewalk, street, highway, or water on which food is prepared, processed, or converted, or which is used in selling and dispensing food to the public. Mobile Food Units include, but are not limited to, food trucks, food carts, and pushcarts. 
Person means individuals, corporations, associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies, and joint stock companies. 
Pushcart means a non-motorized cart designed to be pushed or pulled by a person. 
Site means a lot or parcel of property on which a mobile food unit is permitted to operate. 
(Ord. No. 1403-17 , § 1, 10-9-17)  
TMC 9-10-030 - Mobile Food Unit Permit Required. 
(1)  Any person wanting to operate a mobile food unit must obtain a City of Tualatin Mobile Food Unit Permit prior to operating a mobile food unit within the City. 
(2)  An applicant for a Mobile Food Unit Permit must provide the following information to the City: 
(a)  The name and contact information of the mobile food unit owner; 
(b)  The name and contact information of the mobile food unit operator; 
(c)  The specific location of where the mobile food unit intends to operate and the intended duration of operation; 
(d)  The name, contact information, and proof of consent from the owner of the property where the mobile food unit intends to operate; 
(e)  Proof of a City of Tualatin business license; and 
(f)  Proof that establishes the person has obtained all required health and sanitary licenses from the State of Oregon and Washington or Clackamas Counties, as applicable. 
(3)  If the applicant shows proof satisfactory to the City that the application criteria have been met, the City will grant the Mobile Food Unit Permit. 
(4)  If the City denies the Mobile Food Unit Permit, the City will notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for the denial. An applicant may correct the deficiency or appeal the denial. 
(5)  An applicant may appeal a denial of a Mobile Food Unit Permit to the City Manager by filing a request for review. The request for review must contain a copy of the denial notice, a request for a hearing or request for written review without a hearing, and a statement setting forth the reason(s) that the denial of the Mobile Food Permit was in error. The City Manager, or designee, will set the matter for a hearing and allow the applicant to present evidence and argument to support the applicant's position. The City Manager must make a written decision within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing. The City Manager's decision is final on the matter. 
(6)  A person granted a Mobile Food Unit Permit must notify the City of any changes in the information provided in the Mobile Food Unit application within 30 days of the change, and update such information annually. 
(Ord. No. 1403-17 , § 1, 10-9-17)  
TMC 9-10-040 - Operating Requirements. 
(1)  A person operating a mobile food unit must comply with all applicable policies and regulations set forth by the Tualatin Municipal Code and the Tualatin Development Code, including, but not limited to, all traffic laws and parking regulations. 
(2)  A person operating a mobile food unit must comply with all health, safety, and environmental laws, including, but not limited to, proper disposal of cooking waste and wastewater. 
(3)  A mobile food unit must have wheels and the wheels must not be removed. 
(Ord. No. 1403-17 , § 1, 10-9-17)  
TMC 9-10-050 - Location Standards. 
(1)  Mobile food units are allowed to operate in the following planning districts: 
(a)  CO—Commercial Office—except a mobile food unit cannot operate in the CO planning district if the location of the mobile food unit is within 200 feet of the Central Commercial (CC) planning district; 
(b)  CR—Recreational Commercial; 
(c)  CG—General Commercial—that portion of the General Commercial Zone that abuts Highway 99W (Pacific Highway); 
(d)  MC—Medical Center; 
(e)  ML—Light Manufacturing; 
(f)  MG—General Manufacturing; 
(g)  MP—Manufacturing Park; 
(h)  MBP—Manufacturing Business Park; and 
(i)  IN—Institutional. 
(2)  Mobile food units are prohibited to operate within 100 feet of a gas station. 
(Ord. No. 1403-17 , § 1, 10-9-17; Ord. No. 1434-20 , § 1, 4-13-20)  
TMC 9-10-060 - Site Standards. 
(1)  Mobile food units, including all items associated with the operation, must not obstruct pedestrian pathways, driveways, drive aisles, sidewalks, streets, or public rights-of-way, or otherwise create a traffic or safety hazard. 
(2)  Mobile food unit operators must provide garbage and recycling for patrons. 
(3)  Mobile food units must have self-contained water, sewer, and electrical systems, as applicable. 
(4)  Mobile food units are prohibited from connecting to public or private water, sewer, and electrical utilities. 
(5)  Mobile food units must operate and park only within an existing paved parking lot or other hard-surfaced area. 
(6)  Only one mobile food unit is allowed to be present at a site at any one time. 
(Ord. No. 1403-17 , § 1, 10-9-17)  
TMC 9-10-070 - Pushcarts. 
(1)  Pushcarts are allowed to operate in the following planning districts: 
(a)  CC—Central Commercial; 
(b)  CG—General Commercial; 
(c)  ML—Light Manufacturing; 
(d)  MG—General Manufacturing; and 
(e)  MP—Manufacturing Park. 
(2)  Pushcarts must comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Be no larger than six feet in length; 
(b)  Not locate within 200 feet of a restaurant or fruit and vegetable market without written consent from the proprietor of the restaurant or market; 
(c)  Not conduct business on public sidewalks without obtaining a permit from the City; 
(d)  Not operate on a private sidewalk, except by permission of the property owner; and 
(e)  Comply with the Site Standards in TMC 9-10-060. 
(Ord. No. 1403-17 , § 1, 10-9-17)  
TMC 9-10-080 - Joint and Several Liability. 
Any person who owns a mobile food unit will be held jointly and severally liable with any person that operates the mobile food unit for any violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1403-17 , § 1, 10-9-17)  
TMC 9-10-090 - Violations. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter commits a civil infraction and is subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00. Each violation, and each day that a violation continues, is a separate civil infraction. 
(2)  The civil infraction procedures in TMC Chapter 7-01 apply to the prosecution of any violation of this Chapter. 
(3)  In addition to prosecution for a civil infraction, a person found in violation of any provision of this Chapter may have a Mobile Food Unit Permit revoked. 
(a)  Prior to revocation, the City Manager, or designee, must provide the person with written notice of the alleged violation and an opportunity to rebut the allegations. 
(b)  The City Manager, or designee, will set the matter for a hearing and allow the applicant to present evidence and argument. 
(c)  Upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager, or designee, must make a written decision within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing. The City Manager's, or designee's, decision is final on the matter. 
(Ord. No. 1403-17 , § 1, 10-9-17)  
CHAPTER 9-11 - SOCIAL GAMING 
Sections: 
 
TMC 9-11-010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases mean: 
Business means a business, individual, firm, sole proprietorship, corporation, company, partnership, co-partnership, joint-stock company, trust, limited liability company, association, club, or other organization, including any natural person or any other legal entity, and any place of public accommodation. 
City Manager means the City Manager, or the City Manager's designee. 
Social Game means a game, other than a lottery, between players in a private business, private club, or place of public accommodation where no house player, house bank, or house odds exist, and there is no house income from the operation of the social game. Examples of social games include bingo, lotto, raffles, and casino-style games. 
(Ord. No. 1425-19 , § 1, 9-9-19)  
TMC 9-11-020 - Annual Social Gaming License Required; Conditions of license. 
(1)  A person cannot operate a social game at a business within the City of Tualatin, unless the person has a valid social gaming license issued by the City of Tualatin for such purpose. 
(2)  The social gaming license is valid for a period of one year, and may be renewed for additional one-year terms. The process for renewal is the same as for acquiring a license. 
(3)  Every licensee must comply with the following conditions at all times: 
(a)  No house player, house bank, or house odds exist in the operation of the social game; 
(b)  There is no house income from the operation of a social game; 
(c)  A business may not charge an entrance or access fee when social games are being played in the business; 
(d)  Persons under 21 years of age are not permitted in the room or enclosure where the social game is being played; 
(e)  Doors leading into the social game room must remain unlocked during all hours of operation; 
(f)  An owner, principal, agent, or managing employee may not participate in any social game on the premises; 
(g)  A charge for consumer goods, food, or beverage sold on the premises to an individual playing a social game must not be higher or lower than the price charged to a non-participant in the social game; 
(h)  An owner, principal, agent, or managing employee may not accept any payment, fee, service, or gratuity from a social game participant as consideration for participation in the social game on the premises; 
(i)  An owner, principal, agent, or managing employee may not charge a rental or lease fee for the use of the social game; 
(j)  At no point in time may a social game be conducted without an owner or principal managing employee present; 
(k)  No membership fee or cover fee may be charged for participation in the social game; and 
(l)  All social gaming activities and the business where social gaming is permitted must comply with applicable federal, state, local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1425-19 , § 1, 9-9-19)  
TMC 9-11-030 - Application for Social Gaming License; Denial; Appeal. 
(1)  An initial applicant, or person seeking renewal, of a social gaming license must provide the following information to the City: 
(a)  The name and contact information of the business owner; 
(b)  The name and contact information of the business operator; 
(c)  The specific location of where the social game intends to operate and the intended duration of operation; 
(d)  Proof of a City of Tualatin business license; and 
(e)  Submit to a police background check to show the applicant has not been convicted within the last ten years of any offense involving deception, fraud, theft, or gambling activities. 
(2)  The applicant must pay the appropriate license fee, as established by resolution of the Council. 
(3)  If the applicant shows proof satisfactory to the City that the application criteria have been met, passed the background check, and paid the fee, the City will grant the Social Gaming License. 
(4)  If the City denies the social gaming license, the City will notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for the denial. An applicant may correct the deficiency or appeal the denial. 
(5)  An applicant may appeal a denial of a social gaming license to the City Manager by filing a request for review. The request for review must contain a copy of the denial notice, a request for a hearing or request for written review without a hearing, and a statement setting forth the reason(s) that the denial of the social gaming license was in error. The City Manager, or designee, will set the matter for a hearing and allow the applicant to present evidence and argument to support the applicant's position. The City Manager must make a written decision within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing. The City Manager's decision is final on the matter. 
(6)  A person granted a Social Gaming License must notify the City of any changes in the information provided in the Social Gaming License application within 30 days of the change, and update such information annually. 
(Ord. No. 1425-19 , § 1, 9-9-19)  
TMC 9-11-040 - Inspection and Right of Entry. 
(1)  When it is necessary to inspect the premises to investigate or enforce the provisions of this Chapter, the City Manager may, with the owner's permission, enter the premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this Chapter, or must otherwise seek an administrative warrant. 
(2)  The process for seeking inspection of a premise is as follows: 
(a)  If the premises is occupied, the City Manager will present credentials to the occupant and request permission to enter. 
(b)  If the premises are unoccupied, the City Manager will make a reasonable effort to locate the owner, manager, or other person in charge or control of the premises and request permission to enter. 
(c)  If entry is refused or premises are unoccupied and no owner, manager, or other person in charge is available, the City Manager will obtain an administrative warrant before entry or inspection of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1425-19 , § 1, 9-9-19)  
TMC 9-11-050 - Joint and Several Liability. 
Any person who owns a business engaging in a social game is jointly and severally liable with any person that operates the social game at the business for any violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1425-19 , § 1, 9-9-19)  
TMC 9-11-060 - Violations; License Revocation. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter commits a civil infraction and is subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00. Each violation, and each day that a violation continues, is a separate civil infraction. 
(2)  The civil infraction procedures in TMC Chapter 7-01 apply to the prosecution of any violation of this Chapter. 
(3)  In addition to prosecution for a civil infraction, a person found in violation of any provision of this Chapter may have a social gaming license revoked. 
(a)  Prior to revocation, the City Manager, or designee, must provide the person with written notice of the alleged violation and an opportunity to rebut the allegations. 
(b)  The City Manager, or designee, will set the matter for a hearing and allow the applicant to present evidence and argument. 
(c)  Upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager, or designee, must make a written decision within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing. The City Manager's decision is final on the matter. 
(Ord. No. 1425-19 , § 1, 9-9-19)  
TITLE 11 - CITY COMMITTEES AND BOARDS 
Chapters:  
CHAPTER 11-01 - TUALATIN PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
TMC 11-1-010 - Establishment of Planning Commission. 
The Tualatin Planning Commission is established and created. The Commission consists of seven members appointed by the Council. 
(Ord. 342-76, §1, 7-26-76; Ord. 1340-12 §1, 1-23-12; Ord. 1405-17, 11-13-17)  
TMC 11-1-020 - Terms of Office and Membership. 
(1)  Each member appointed by the Council serves a three-year term. A member may be reappointed to additional terms at the discretion of the Council. 
(2)  In appointing members to the Commission, the Council must consider the following: 
(a)  Strive for geographic balance within the City; 
(b)  No more than three members may have the same occupation; 
(c)  No more than two members may be engaged principally in the buying, selling, or developing of real estate for profit as individuals, or be members of a partnership, or officers or employees of a corporation, that is engaged principally in the buying, selling, or developing of real estate for profit; 
(d)  No fewer than five members must reside in the City; and 
(e)  No more than two members may reside outside the City, provided the member must reside within the Urban Growth Boundary of the City. 
(3)  Commission members receive no compensation. 
(Ord. 342-76 §2, 7-26-76; Ord. 583-82, 8-23-82; Ord. 888-93 §1, 2, 3-22-93; Ord. 1017-99 §1&2, 4-26-99; Ord.1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03; Ord. 1330-11 §1, 8-22-11; Ord. 1340-12 §2, 1-23-12; Ord. 1405-17, 11-13-17)  
TMC 11-1-030 - Organization of Commission. 
(1)  At the first regular meeting of the Commission of each year, the Commission must elect a chairperson and vice chairperson. The chairperson and vice chairperson retain the right to vote on any matter before the Commission. 
(2)  The City Manager must provide a secretary who must keep an accurate record of all Commission proceedings. The Commission must file a report of all its proceedings with the City Recorder within 30 days of such proceedings. 
(Ord. 342-76 §3, 7-26-76; Ord.1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-2003; Ord. 1340-12 §3, 1-23-12; Ord. 1405-17, 11-13-17)  
TMC 11-1-040 - Meeting; Quorum; Rules and Regulations of the Commission. 
(1)  The Commission will convene when necessary to discharge its duties; however, it must meet six times within every calendar year. 
(2)  A majority of members of the Commission constitute a quorum. A quorum of the Commission may transact any business or conduct any proceedings within the jurisdiction of the Commission. 
(3)  The Commission may adopt and amend rules and regulations establishing the procedure for the conduct of proceedings before it. Any such rules and regulations must be consistent with all ordinances, resolutions or laws of the City regulating the Commission. 
(Ord. 342-76 §4, 7-26-76; Ord. 446-78, 6-12-78; Ord. 583-82, 8-23-82; Ord.1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03; Ord. 1330-11 §2, 8-22-11; Ord. 1340-12 §4, 1-23-12; Ord. 1405-17, 11-13-17)  
TMC 11-1-050 - Removal; Vacancy. 
(1)  Each Commission member serves at the pleasure of the Council and may be removed by the Council for any reason. 
(2)  In addition to other grounds for removal, the Council may remove any Commission member who: 
(a)  Has two or more unexcused absences from meetings, including regular and special work sessions, during a calendar year; or 
(b)  Has five or more absences from meetings, including regular and special work sessions, during a calendar year. 
For purposes of this section an unexcused absence is an absence where the member failed to contact the chairperson or secretary of the Commission at least 24 hours prior to a scheduled Commission meeting, unless good cause is shown. 
(3)  A vacancy on the Commission occurs in the following circumstances: 
(a)  The Council removes a member of the Commission; 
(b)  A member of the Commission resigns and the resignation is accepted by the Council; or 
(c)  A person ceases to qualify for the position to which they were appointed. 
(4)  Any vacancy on the Commission will be filled by the Council for the unexpired term of the member creating the vacancy. 
(Ord. 1405-17, 11-13-17)  
TMC 11-1-060 - Expenditure of Funds. 
The Commission has no authority to make any expenditure of funds on behalf of the City or to obligate the City for the payment of any funds without first obtaining approval for the expenditure from the City Council by resolution. 
(Ord. 342-76 §5, 7-26-76; Ord.1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-2003; Ord. 1340-12 §5, 1-23-12; Ord. 1405-17, 11-13-17)  
TMC 11-1-070 - Powers and Duties of Planning Commission. 
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Recommend and make suggestions to the Council regarding preparation and revision of plans for the growth, development, and beautification of areas both inside the corporate limits of Tualatin and also within the City's urban growth boundary, such plans to incorporate elements and sub-elements including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  Land use, including Plan Text and Plan Map Amendments (PTA and PMA); 
(b)  Economic development: 
(i)  Housing; 
(ii)  Commercial and industrial; 
(c)  Public facilities: 
(i)  Transportation; 
(ii)  Water supply; 
(iii)  Sewerage; 
(iv)  Drainage; 
(v)  Parks and open space; and 
(vi)  Institutions; and 
(d)  Historic Resources. 
(2)  Recommend and make suggestions to the Council regarding preparation and revision of community development ordinances, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  Tualatin Development Code; 
(b)  Tualatin Sign Ordinances; and 
(c)  Tree planting regulations. 
(3)  Study and propose in general such measures as may be advisable for promotion of the public interest, health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience and welfare of the City and of the area within the City's Urban Growth Boundary. 
(4)  Serve as the City of Tualatin Commission for Citizen Involvement in accordance with the State of Oregon Land Conservation and Development Goal No. 1, with the following responsibilities. 
(a)  Evaluate the effectiveness of the citizen involvement program during March and October of each calendar year. 
(b)  Recommend and make suggestions to the City Council regarding revisions in the citizen involvement program, as the Commission deems appropriate. 
(5)  To exercise any and all powers, functions, and authority delegated to or conferred upon the Commission by the laws of Oregon, the Tualatin City Charter, this Chapter, the Tualatin Development Code, and any other ordinances of the City of Tualatin. 
(Ord. 342-76 §6, 7-26-76; Ord. 454-78 §, 8-28-78; Ord. 926-94, 6-13-94; Ord.1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-2003; Ord. 1340-12 §6, 1-23-12; Ord. 1405-17, 11-13-17)  
TMC 11-1-080 - Annual Report of Commission. 
(1)  Not later than April 1 of each year, the Commission must file its annual report of the activities of the Commission with the City Council. 
(2)  The annual report must contain the following: 
(a)  Report of the Commission's activities during the preceding year; 
(b)  Recommendations to the City Council relating to the planning process, comprehensive plan implementation measures within the City, and citizen involvement; and 
(c)  The report may include any other matters deemed appropriate by the Commission for recommendation and advice to the Council. 
(Ord. 342-76 §8, 7-26-76; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03; Ord. 1340-12 §8, 1-23-12; Ord. 1405-17, 11-13-17)  
CHAPTER 11-02 - PARKS ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
Sections: 
 
TMC 11-2-010 - Establishment of Committee. 
The Tualatin Park Advisory Committee is established and created. 
(Ord. 418-77 §1, 11-28-77; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-2-020 - The Membership of Committee. 
(1)  The membership of the Committee shall be appointed by the City Council. Committee members shall receive no compensation. The Committee shall consist of seven members appointed by the Council and, except as provided in subsection (5) of this section, shall serve three-year terms or until their respective successors are appointed. A member may be reappointed to the Committee to additional terms at the discretion of the Council. 
(2)  In considering new members, the Committee and Council shall strive for geographic balance. No less than five members shall reside inside the corporate boundaries of the City and no more than two shall reside outside the City. 
(3)  Each committee member serves at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed by the Council at any time before the committee member's term expires. 
(4)  Any vacancy on the Committee shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired term of the member creating the vacancy. 
(5)  No more than one member may be less than 18 years old. A member who is appointed under this subsection shall serve a one-year term that may be renewed for one additional year. In addition to other criteria deemed relevant by the Council for appointment, the Council may consider the applicant's academic performance and the effect membership on the Committee may have on such performance. 
(6)  A committee member shall not have unexcused absences from two or more meetings, including regular and special work sessions during a calendar year, or absences from more than five such meetings held during the calendar year. An excused absence may be obtained by contacting the chairperson or secretary of the committee at least 24 hours prior to any scheduled committee meeting. 
(Ord. 418-77 §2, 11-28-77; Ord. 888-93, §4, 3-22-93; Ord. 1017-99 §1&2, 4-26-99; Ord. 1083-01 §1, 8-13-01; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03; Ord. 1330-11 §3, 8-22-11)  
TMC 11-2-030 - Organization of Committee. 
(1)  The Committee shall elect a chairman and vice chairman, who shall be voting members of the Committee, at the first regular meeting of each January. 
(2)  The Community Services Director shall provide a secretary who need not be a member of the Committee. The secretary shall keep an accurate record of all Committee proceedings. The Committee shall file a report of all its proceedings with the City Recorder within 30 days of such proceedings. 
(Ord. 418-77 §3, 11-28-77; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-2-040 - Meeting, Rules and Regulations of the Committee. 
A majority of the Committee shall constitute a quorum. A quorum of the Committee may transact any business or conduct any proceedings before the Committee. The Committee may adopt and amend rules and regulations establishing the procedure for the conduct of proceedings brought before it. Such rules and regulations shall be consistent with any ordinances, resolutions or laws of the City regulating the Committee. All meetings are open to the public. 
(Ord. 418-77 §4, 11-28-77; Ord. 1083-01 §2, 8-13-01; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-2-050 - Expenditure of Funds. 
The Committee shall have no authority to make any expenditure of funds on behalf of the City or to obligate the City for the payment of any funds without first obtaining the approval of the City Council by minute order or resolution stating the purpose of such expenditure. 
(Ord. 418-77 §5, 11-28-77; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-2-060 - Powers and Duties of Committee. 
The Committee shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Recommend and make suggestions to the City Council regarding all matters relating to public parks, playground-related activities and programs. This shall include, but not be limited to (a) the budget process, (b) immediate and long-range planning, and (c) citizen participation; and 
(2)  To formulate comprehensive and community-wide park and recreation systems and programs to serve the horticultural, environmental, historical, recreational, cultural and leisure needs of all City residents. 
(Ord. 418-77 §6, 11-28-77; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-2-070 - Administration of Parks and Recreation Department. 
The City Manager shall exercise control and supervision of all activities, departments and offices of the park and recreation program, shall have authority to appoint to and remove from established positions subordinate employees, including Department Head, and establish necessary rules and regulations for the operation and administration of the park and recreation program. 
(Ord. 418-77 §7, 11-28-77)  
TMC 11-2-080 - Coordination of Planning Activities. 
In discharging its powers and duties at the request of the Council, under TMC 11-2-060, the Committee shall consider the provisions of any comprehensive plan, project plan or agency plan of the City of Tualatin Development Commission, the Urban Renewal Agency of the City of Tualatin and other government agencies having plans or projects affecting the City of Tualatin. 
(Ord. 418-77 §8, 11-28-77; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-2-090 - Annual Report of Committee. 
Not later than February 1 of each year the Committee shall file its annual report of the activities of the Committee with the City Council. The annual report shall include a survey and report of the Committee's activities during the preceding year, in addition to specific recommendations to the City Council not otherwise requested by the City Council, relating to the planning process, program implementation measures within the City, or the future activities of the Committee. The report may include any other matters deemed appropriate by the Committee for recommendation and advice to the Council. 
(Ord. 418-77 §9, 11-28-77; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
CHAPTER 11-03 - CORE AREA PARKING DISTRICT BOARD; TAX RATE AND IMPACT FEES COMMITTEE 
Sections: 
 
TMC 11-3-010 - District Established. 
There is established in the City of Tualatin the Core Area Parking District. The district shall encompass the area as shown on Exhibit "A" and Exhibit "B" attached to this chapter and incorporated by reference. The purpose of the district shall be to construct, operate, maintain and administer public parking facilities. 
(Ord. 475-79, 6-11-79; Ord. 1147-03; Renumbered 08-25-03; Ord. 1231-07, 03-12-07)  
TMC 11-3-020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases mean: 
Annual Tax means a tax related to the annual operating costs of the district. 
Annual Tax Rate means an amount, expressed in dollars, established in accordance with TMC 11-3-060 and used to compute the annual tax. 
Gross Leasable Area means the total floor area designed for tenant, occupancy and exclusive use, expressed in square feet and measured from the center line of joining partitions and from outside wall faces. 
Impact Fee means a fee related to the capital cost of financing a parking space. 
Non-Taxable Residential Uses means detached single family residential uses, and in multi-family residential uses, only the common entryways, common hallways, out of the living unit storage areas, group dining and lounge facilities, but not common cooking facilities and vehicle storage facilities. 
Person means a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation. 
Taxable Residential Uses means residential uses, other than non-taxable residential uses, but including administrative and maintenance facilities, and commercial space of any residential development, the commercial portion of mixed-use development, and all multi-family residential development that, due to an inadequate number of onsite parking spaces as specified in the Tualatin Development Code, is designed to rely in part or wholly on public parking facilities. 
Tax Year means July 1 to June 30. 
Use means all businesses, professions, occupations, trades and fraternal and religious organizations. 
(Ord. 475-79, 6-11-79; Ord. 892-93 §1 &, 2, 4-26-93; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-3-030 - Parking District Board. 
(1)  The Core Area Parking District Board is created. At least five members of the Board must own, operate or occupy business premises in the District. The additional member of the Board shall be a member of the City Council. Each member shall be appointed by the Council for a term of three years or until a successor is appointed. 
(2)  Vacancies on the Board arising from the death, disability, resignation or loss of qualifications of any member shall be filled by the Council by appointment of a successor to serve the remaining term of office. A member may be reappointed to the Committee to additional terms at the discretion of the Council. 
(3)  Each Board member serves at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed at any time prior to the end of the Board member's term. In addition, upon the failure of a Board member to satisfy the attendance requirements established by the Board, the Council shall declare the position vacant and fill the position in the manner provided above. 
(4)  The chairman of the Board shall serve as an ex officio member of the City of Tualatin Urban Renewal Advisory Committee. 
(5)  The City Council shall annually establish a regular monthly meeting date for the Board. The chairman or a majority of the members of the Board may call special meetings. 
(6)  In addition to the regular members of the Board, the City Council may appoint not more than one ex officio member under the age of 18 years, who shall serve a one-year term which may be renewed for one additional year. Except as otherwise provided, such ex officio member shall be treated as a Board member, i.e., by receiving a copy of the agenda and staff report, and by full participation in the Board's discussion. The ex officio member shall not be counted for purposes of establishing a quorum for the conduct of Board business and shall not be permitted to vote on motions or other action taken by regular Board members. In addition to other criteria deemed relevant by the Council for appointment or removal, the Council may consider the effect of participation on the Board on such person's academic performance. 
(Ord. 475-79, 6-11-79; Ord. 583-82, 8-23-82; Ord. 888-93 §12, 3-22-93; Ord. 981-97 §1, 7-14-97; Ord. 1017-99 §5, 4-26-99; Ord. 1147-03, 08-25-03; Ord. 1330-11 §4, 8-22-11)  
TMC 11-3-040 - Board Organization and Duties. 
(1)  At its first meeting after appointment and thereafter at its first meeting of each year, the Board shall elect a chairman from its membership. The Board shall effect whatever internal organization it deems best and shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its business. 
(2)  The Council delegates to the Board the responsibility for the operation of the district. This responsibility shall include the following: 
(a)  Providing for and monitoring maintenance; 
(b)  Monitoring parking regulations; 
(c)  Recommending payment by the Council of expenses of the district, including reimbursement to the City for administrative and legal expenses; and 
(d)  Other matters which pertain to the daily operation of the district. 
The delegation in this chapter shall be subject to the condition that any contract required for the operation of the district shall be approved and executed by the Council. 
(3)  By March 1 of each year, or earlier if requested, by the City Manager, the Board shall prepare and submit to the City Budget Committee a proposed budget for the next fiscal year. The budget shall include the estimated costs of maintaining and administering the district and the annual tax rate; costs of constructing new facilities and purchasing property; and any other matter related to the budgetary needs of the district. 
(4)  The Board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the City Council on policy matters affecting the district, and the Council shall consult the board prior to taking action on the following: 
(a)  Location of new parking lots; 
(b)  Design of new lots; 
(c)  Improvements to existing lots and development of new lots; 
(d)  Regulation of parking lots; 
(e)  Capital outlays for the district, including urban renewal funds; 
(f)  Purchase of property for district purposes; 
(g)  Amount of fees, taxes, appeal of taxes and credits; and 
(h)  Other policy matters pertaining to the district. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any other provision, the City Council shall have the final determination and responsibility on all matters concerning the district. 
(Ord. 475-79, 6-11-79; Ord. 1125-02, 12-09-02; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03; Ord. 1330-11 §6, 8-22-11)  
TMC 11-3-050 - Parking District Tax. 
(1)  At such time as recommended by the Board to the Council or on July 1, 1980, and thereafter, a tax is imposed, for revenue purposes only, upon the privilege of carrying on a business, occupation, profession, trade, fraternal or religious activity, and taxable residential uses within the Core Area Parking District. 
(2)  The reason for the tax is that revenues are necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of parking facilities in the district. The tax imposed in this chapter is in addition to and not in lieu of any other tax, assessment or fee required by state or local law or ordinance, and notwithstanding any other ordinance of the City of Tualatin. The acceptance by the City of any amounts due under this chapter shall not be conditioned upon compliance with any other law or ordinance, regulatory or otherwise; nor shall such acceptance be deemed a waiver of any other law or ordinance, regulatory or otherwise. 
(3)  This being a revenue measure enacted to meet a local need, it is the intent of the City that this tax shall apply to all businesses, professions, occupations, trades, fraternal and religious organizations, and taxable residential units, located within the district, without regard to any law or ordinance purporting to exempt any particular use from business license taxes. 
(4)  Non-taxable residential uses are not subject to the annual tax. 
(5)  All money collected under this chapter shall be used for the operation and maintenance of and capital improvement investment in parking facilities in the district. 
(Ord. 475-79, 6-11-79; Ord. 634-84 §1, 5-14-84; Ord. 892-93 §3, 4-26-93; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-3-060 - Establishment of Annual Tax Rate and Credit. 
Beginning in 1983 and each year thereafter, the City Council shall, prior to the beginning of the tax year, enact an ordinance establishing the formula for calculating the annual tax rate, credit against the actual tax for the ensuing tax year, and the percentage of annual tax credit that may be received. 
(Ord. 475-79, 6-11-79; Ord. 605-83 §1, 9-12-83; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-3-070 - Returns and Payment. 
(1)  After establishment of the annual tax rate and credit pursuant to TMC 11-3-060, the City shall send a tax assessment form to those conducting a taxable use in the District. The tax assessment form shall include all information used in computation of the tax in accordance with TMC 11-3-080. 
(2)  Tax assessment returns shall be submitted to the City on or by the date indicated on the form and shall be signed by the owner or manager of the use. Such returns shall be confidential and the contents shall not be revealed except for purposes of administering or enforcing this chapter. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a tax assessment return, signed and executed, together with payment of the required tax, the City shall issue a receipt showing the name of the use, the name of the owner or manager, and the period for which the tax is paid. A use commencing within the District during the period of the tax year shall pay that part of the tax for that year which is proportional to the unexpired year, prorated to the first day of the calendar month within which the use was commenced. 
(4)  Unless a taxpayer has been delinquent in payment of the prior year taxes or any installment, the City shall allow a tax-payer to pay the annual tax in no more than three approximately equal installment payments in accordance with a schedule determined by the City and indicated upon the tax assessment form. Any unpaid balance shall bear interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month or portion of a month until paid. Interest payments shall be divided among, added to, and made part of installments. Where a taxpayer has elected to pay the tax in installments and has failed to pay the amount of the payment or has failed to pay by the scheduled due date, the City Finance Officer may, after giving ten days prior written notice by ordinary mail, accelerate the balance of tax payments, plus accrued interest. After the balance of installment payments and interest has been accelerated, the full amount of the tax plus accrued interest shall be due and payable. Failure by the City to accelerate payments in a particular instance shall not be construed as a waiver of the City's right to accelerate payment. 
(Ord. 475-79, 6-11-79; Ord. 640-84 §2, 6-25-84; Ord. 720-87 §2, 5-11-87; Ord.1147-03, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-3-080 - Computation of Tax. 
The computation of the annual tax shall be based upon a formula applying the annual tax rate as follows: 
Annual tax = (GLA) of premises * 1000 
* Multiplied by the space factor from Table A, multiplied by the annual tax rate. 
TABLE A 
Parking Space Requirement Factor 
Building Type 	Space Factor 
General Office 	3.50 
Medical/Dental Office 	5.00 
Banks/Savings and Loan 	4.50 
Retail/Service 	3.85 
Restaurant/Tavern 	5.00 
Places of Assembly 	2.00 
Vocational Training Facility 	3.50 
Retirement Housing Facility 	.50 spaces per dwelling unit 
Dwelling Units within District 	2.00 spaces per dwelling unit, including garage 
 
(1)  Table A is not a complete, final or exclusive list of all uses to be taxed or of all uses within the building types indicated. Each type shall be deemed to include, in addition to those specified, such allied and like occupations, professions, trades, businesses or other uses as in normal custom and usage would be considered to be within that classification. The final determination of a question concerning any use classification or space factor shall be decided by the Board. 
(2)  Every use which furnishes privately owned off-street parking shall be allowed a credit as established pursuant to TMC 11-3-060 against this tax for each space thus furnished. Where several uses share a common lot, the owner of the premises shall, on or before July 1 of each year, prepare and submit to the City a listing of the gross leasable area for each tenant and the number of parking spaces allocated to each tenant. The list shall state whether the spaces are exclusively assigned or a percentage of the total spaces available. A copy of the listing shall also be furnished to each tenant and shall be the basis for computing the annual tax. Whenever a building is constructed, enlarged, remodeled or office space changed, the owner shall, within 30 days of completion or receipt of an occupancy permit, submit a new listing of tenant spaces and parking allocations to the City. 
(Ord. 475-79, 6-11-79; Ord. 640-84 §1, 6-25-84; Ord. 892-93 §4, 4-26-93; Ord. 1020-99 §1, 6-14-99; Ord.1147-03, 08-25-03; Ord.1286-09, 07-13-09)  
TMC 11-3-090 - Reporting Requirements; Refunds. 
(1)  In addition to submitting any other information required by ordinance, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner, manager, and operator of leased premises within the Core Area Parking District to notify the City in writing of changes in occupancy, new occupancies of previously vacant premises or portions, partitioning of leased premises to provide additional occupancies and termination of occupancies. In addition to such occupancy information, the amount of gross leasable area of the premises assigned to each occupant and any alterations in the amount of such assigned areas shall also be provided in writing to the City. Information required by this provision shall be submitted no later than 20 days following the event which triggers the reporting requirement. 
(2)  When a use ceases operation during a tax year in which the tax, along with any interest charge and penalty, if any, has been paid, the person who paid the tax or his or her assignee shall, upon written request to the City, be entitled to a refund of the tax, but not the interest or penalty charges, in proportion to the unexpired tax year, prorated to the last day of the month within which the use ceased operation. 
(Ord. 475-79, 6-11-79; Ord. 720-87 §1, 5-11-87; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-3-100 - Reserved. 
[Repealed by Ordinance 1346-12 §1, 5-14-12)  
TMC 11-3-110 - Method of Collection. 
Any amount due the City as a tax under this chapter shall constitute a debt of the person from whom the amount is due. The City may bring action in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the debt, together with penalties and interest. 
(Ord. 475-79, 6-11-79; Ord.1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-3-120 - Tax Delinquency. 
Any tax imposed by this chapter shall become delinquent if not paid on the last day of the month in which it is due. Any person who fails to file the tax return and make payment as required by this chapter shall be charged interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month or portion of a month on the amount of tax due from the date of delinquency until the date of payment. 
(Ord. 475-79, 6-11-79; Ord.1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-3-130 - Notice of Delinquency. 
As soon as practicable after the date of delinquency, the City shall send a notice of delinquency, by certified mail, to the person responsible for the tax. The notice shall inform the person of the delinquency and state that the tax plus interest must be paid within ten days of receipt of the notice. 
(Ord. 475-79, 6-11-79; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-3-140 - Penalties for Violations. 
(1)  Any person who fails to pay the annual tax imposed by this chapter or any installment payment of the tax, after being sent a notice of delinquency by the City, commits a civil infraction and shall, in addition to being liable for the tax plus interest, be subject to a forfeiture of no more than $50.00 for each day, but no more than $1,000.00 total, so long as the tax or installment payment, including interest, remains unpaid. Where the delinquency is of a continuing nature, only a single notice need be sent. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (1), any person who fails to comply with this chapter commits a civil infraction and shall be subject to a forfeiture in an amount not exceeding $500.00. For each day on which a person fails to comply with this chapter, a separate violation is committed. 
(Ord. 475-79, 6-11-79; Ord. 611-83 §1, 11-28-83; Ord. 720-87 §3, 5-11-87; Ord.1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-3-145 - Appeal Procedure. 
(1)  A person in disagreement with a Core Area Parking District tax assessment may appeal the tax assessment to the City Council by filing a written request with the Economic Development Department describing with particularity the tax assessment from which the person appeals. 
(2)  An appeal of the tax assessment must be filed within 30 days from the date the tax bills were mailed, except for Fiscal Year 02-03 when appeals must be filed within 30 days after adoption of the appeal process. The Core Area Parking District Board must review and make a recommendation on the appeal to the City Council. The appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee as established by Council resolution. The appeal fee shall be refunded in the event the Council determines the tax assessment was incorrect. 
(3)  The appeal shall state: 
(a)  The name and address of the appellant; 
(b)  The reason the tax assessment is incorrect (required to be based on one of the following): 
(i)  Number of onsite spaces provided; 
(ii)  Gross leasable area; 
(iii)  Space factor; 
(iv)  Error in the calculation with the tax formula; 
(c)  What the correct tax should be or how the correct tax should be derived. 
An appellant who fails to file such a statement within the time permitted waives his or her objections, and his or her appeal shall be dismissed. 
(4)  The Core Area Parking District Board shall consider the matter within 45 calendar days after the appeal is received. The Core Area Parking District Board shall consider the appeal on the basis of the appellant's written statement and any additional evidence the Board deems appropriate. 
The appellant shall carry the burden of proving that the tax assessment being appealed is incorrect and what the correct tax should be or how a correct tax should be derived. 
(5)  The Core Area Parking District Board's recommendation shall be forwarded to the City Council at their next available meeting date. If the Council determines that the tax was assessed improperly, the Council shall direct that a revised tax assessment be completed. 
(Ord. 1125-02, 12-09-02; Ord.1145-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
Schedule A 
The annual Core Area Parking District tax rate for Fiscal Year 2020/2021 is hereby established as $173.03. 
The formula for the credit is as follows: 
A = (Number of on-site parking spaces provided) 
   (Gross Leasable Area) &times (Space Factor) 
If "A": is greater than or equal to 1.0, the credit is 50 percent. 
If "A": is less than 1.0, the credit is ("A" × 50 percent). 
(Ord. No. 1409-18, § 1, 5-29-18; Ord. No. 1423-19 , § 1, 6-10-19; Ord. No. 1437-20 , § 1, 5-26-20)  
CHAPTER 11-04 - LIBRARY ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
Sections: 
 
TMC 11-4-010 - Title 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as City of Tualatin Library Ordinance. 
(Ord. 758-88 §1, 10/10/88; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-4-020 - Establishment of Committee. 
The Tualatin Library Advisory Committee ("Committee") is established and created for the purposes stated in TMC 11-4-070. 
(Ord. 758-88 §2, 10/10/88; Ord. 1147-03, Amended, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-4-030 - Membership of Committee. 
(1)  The Committee shall consist of seven members appointed by the Council and, except as provided in subsection (5) of this section, shall serve three-year terms or until their respective successors are appointed. Committee members shall receive no compensation. A member may be reappointed to the Committee to additional terms at the discretion of the Council. 
(2)  In considering new members, the Council shall strive for geographic balance. No fewer than five members shall reside inside the corporate boundaries of the City, and no more than two shall reside outside of the City. 
(3)  Each committee member serves at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed by the Council at any time before the committee member's term expires. 
(4)  Any vacancy on the Committee shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired term of the member creating the vacancy. 
(5)  One member may be less than 18 years of age. A member who is appointed under this provision shall serve a one-year term that may be renewed for one additional year. In addition to other criteria deemed relevant by the Council for appointment, the Council may consider the academic performance of the member and the effect membership on the Committee may have on such performance. 
(6)  A committee member shall not have unexcused absences from two or more meetings, including regular and special work sessions during a calendar year, or absences from more than five such meetings held during the calendar year. An excused absence may be obtained by contacting the chairperson or secretary of the committee at least 24 hours prior to any scheduled committee meeting. 
(Ord. 758-88 §3, 10/10/88; Ord. 888-93 §§5, 6, 7, 3-22-93; Ord. 1017-99 §6&7, 4-26-99; Ord. 1083-01 §3, 8-13-01; Ord. 1147-03, 08-25-03; Ord. 1258-08 §1, 4-14-08; Ord. 1330-11 §6, 8-22-11)  
TMC 11-4-040 - Organization of Committee. 
(1)  At the first regular meeting of each October, the Committee shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson from its membership, who shall be voting members, and those who are then elected shall assume office at the first regular meeting in the following November. 
(2)  In the absence of the chairperson, the vice chairperson shall assume the responsibilities of and act as chairperson pro tem. 
When the office of chairperson becomes vacant, the vice chairperson shall assume the responsibilities of chairperson and an election shall be called and conducted to fill the remaining term of vice chairperson. 
When the offices of both the chairperson and vice chairperson become vacant, the Committee shall elect a chairperson pro tem to temporarily fulfill the responsibilities of such office until a special election is called and held. The special election to fill the remaining terms of vice chairperson, or chairperson and vice chairperson, shall be called not less than 20 days prior to the election. The special election shall take place in accordance with rules established by the Committee. 
(3)  The Library Manager shall serve as secretary to the Committee. The secretary shall keep an accurate record of all Committee proceedings. The Committee shall file a report of all its proceedings with the City Recorder within 30 days of such proceedings. 
(Ord. 758-88 §4, 10/10/88; Ord. 1147-03, 08-25-03; Ord. 1258-08 §2, 4-14-08)  
TMC 11-4-050 - Meeting, Rules and Regulations of the Committee. 
A majority of the Committee shall constitute a quorum. Not less than a quorum of the Committee may transact any business or conduct any proceedings before the Committee. The Committee may adopt and amend rules and regulations, governing Committee policy and procedure. Any such rules and regulations shall be consistent with any ordinances, resolutions or laws of the City regulating the Committee. The Committee shall convene when necessary to discharge its duties; however, it shall meet not less than six times within every calendar year. At its first regular meeting of the Committee in January of each year, the Committee shall establish regular meeting dates and the place for meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. 758-88 §5, Oct. 10, 1988; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-4-060 - Expenditure of Funds. 
The Committee shall have no authority to make any expenditure of funds on behalf of the City or to obligate the City for the payment of any funds without first obtaining the approval of the City Council by motion and order or resolution stating the purpose of such expenditure. 
(Ord. 758-88 §6, 10/10/88; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-4-070 - Powers and Duties of Committee. 
The Committee shall have the following powers and duties in addition to those granted by resolution of the City Council from time to time: 
(1)  Consult with and advise the Library Manager on all matters affecting operational policies of the City library; 
(2)  Make recommendations to the City Council with respect to services, facilities and all other matters pertaining to the maintenance and improvement of the City Library; and 
(3)  Hear and consider complaints about City Library policies or materials. 
(Ord. 758-88 §7, 10/10/88; Ord. 861-92 §2, 3-9-92; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03; Ord. 1258-08 §3, 4-14-08)  
TMC 11-4-080 - Annual Report of Committee. 
Not later than April 1 of each year, the Committee shall file with the City Council its Annual Report of the activities of the Committee. The Annual Report shall include a survey and report of the activities of the Committee during the preceding year, in addition to specific recommendations to the City Council not otherwise requested by the City Council. The report may include any other matters deemed appropriate by the Committee for recommendation and advice to the Council. 
(Ord. 758-88 §8, 10/10/88; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03.)  
TMC 11-4-090 - Repeal. 
(1)  Except for continuation of existing membership on the Committee as set forth in this section, Ordinance 409-77, adopted by the Council on October 10, 1977, is hereby repealed. Until a chairperson and vice chairperson are elected pursuant to this ordinance and assume their respective offices, the chairperson and vice chairperson who hold such offices on the date this chapter takes effect, shall continue to do so. 
(2)  Those who are members of the Committee at the time this chapter takes effect and whose terms are scheduled to expire in October, 1988, shall continue their membership until that time; those whose terms are scheduled to expire in October, 1989, shall continue their membership until that time; and those whose terms are scheduled to expire in October, 1990, shall continue their membership until that time. 
(Ord. 758-88 §9, 10/10/88; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
CHAPTER 11-05 - ARTS ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
Sections: 
 
TMC 11-5-010 - Establishment of Committee. 
The Tualatin Arts Advisory Committee is created within the City of Tualatin to encourage greater opportunities for recognition of arts in Tualatin; to stimulate private and public support for programs and activities in the arts; and to strive to ensure excellence in the public arts collection. 
(Ord. 967-97 §1, 1-13-97; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-5-020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
Arts includes, but is not limited to, onsite art such as sculpture, paintings, murals, earthworks, tapestry and fiber arts, crafts, photography, and graphics; performance arts such as dance, music, and drama; educational arts such as lectures and public presentations, "artist in residence" programs; literary arts such as creative writing, storytelling, and poetry; and media arts such as film, video, and audio recording; and the history, theory, criticism, and practice of each of these arts. 
Arts Professional means a person trained and practicing as a visual or performing artist, an arts critic, an arts educator, and arts administrator, or a curator. 
Committee means the Tualatin Arts Advisory Committee. 
Misconduct means that a member has been convicted of a crime or has violated the Code of Ethics, ORS 244.040. 
Nonperformance means to have two or more unexcused absences from regular and special meetings during the calendar year or three or more absences from regular meetings during the calendar year. 
(Ord. 967-97 §2, 1-13-97; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-5-030 - Membership of Committee. 
(1)  The Council shall appoint the Committee members who shall receive no compensation for their services. The Committee shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed for three-year terms or until their successors are appointed; however, of the initial seven members who are appointed, two shall be appointed for one-year terms, two shall be appointed for two-year terms, and three shall be appointed for three-year terms. A member may be reappointed to the Committee to additional terms at the discretion of the Council. 
(2)  At least two members shall have arts professional backgrounds. No fewer than five members shall reside within the corporate city limits of Tualatin and no more than two may reside outside the City. 
(3)  A Committee member may obtain an excused absence by contacting the chairperson or secretary of the committee prior to a scheduled meeting. 
(4)  Each committee member serves at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed before the end of the Committee member's term. 
(5)  The City Council shall fill any vacancy on the Committee for the unexpired term of the member creating the vacancy. 
(6)  One member may be less than 18 years of age. A member who is appointed under this subsection shall serve a one-year term that may be renewed for one additional year. In addition to other criteria deemed relevant by the Council for appointment, the Council may consider the applicant's academic performance and the effect membership on the Committee may have on such performance. 
(Ord. 967-97 §3, 01-13-97; Ord. 1017-99 §8, 4-26-99; Ord. 1083-01 §4, 8-13-01; Ord. 1147-03, 08-25-03; Ord. 1225-06, 11-27-06; Ord. 1330-11 §7, 8-22-11)  
TMC 11-5-040 - Committee Organization. 
(1)  At the first regular meeting of each December, the Committee shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from its membership, who shall be voting members, and those who are then elected shall assume office at the first regular meeting in January. 
(2)  When the chairperson is absent, the vice-chairperson shall assume the responsibilities of the chairperson and serve as chairperson pro tem. If the office of chairperson becomes vacant, the vice-chairperson shall become the chairperson and shall call an election to fill the remaining term of vice-chairperson. 
If the offices of both the chairperson and vice-chairperson become vacant, the Committee shall elect a chairperson pro tem to temporarily fulfill the responsibilities of that office until a special election is held. The special election shall be called not less than 20 days before the election, and shall be conducted in accordance with the rules established by the Committee. 
(3)  The Community Services Director shall provide a secretary to the Committee. The secretary shall keep an accurate record of all Committee proceedings and shall file a report of the proceedings within 30 days with the City Recorder. 
(Ord. 967-97 §4, 01-13-97; Ord. 1147-03, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-5-050 - Meeting, Quorum Requirements, Rules. 
A majority of the committee shall constitute a quorum. Not less than a quorum of the Committee may transact any business or conduct proceedings before the Committee. The Committee may adopt and amend rules and regulations to govern Committee policy and procedures to implement this chapter. The Committee shall convene when necessary to discharge its duties but not less than six times in a calendar year. The Committee shall establish regular meeting dates and meeting locations at the first meeting in January of each year. All meetings are open to the public. 
(Ord. 967-97 §5, 1-13-97; Ord. 1083-01 §5, 8-13-01; Ord. 1147-03, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-5-060 - Expenditure of Funds. 
The Committee shall obtain approval of the City Council by motion or resolution stating the purpose of such expenditure before expending or obligating funds on behalf of the City. 
(Ord. 967-97 §6, 01-13-97; Ord. 1147-03, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-5-070 - Powers and Duties. 
In addition to those powers specially granted by resolution by the City Council form time to time, the Committee shall: 
(1)  Make recommendations to the City Council regarding all matters involving public arts and the cultural development of the City. When an arts purchase or project is proposed for placement within a particular Department's area of responsibility, such as within a City park, the Committee shall work with and coordinate with the affected department or advisory committee to reach a recommendation. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to require the Community Services Department to seek approval or recommendation from the Committee of proposed recreation programs; 
(2)  Prepare, recommend, and implement policies, upon approval by the City Council, for the selection, placement, maintenance and preservation of public art work and programs; 
(3)  Prepare, recommend, and, upon approval by the City Council, implement policies for proposed gifts, exhibitions, and loans of artwork to the City, for de-accessioning materials, and for handling citizen concerns; 
(4)  Develop, recommend, and implement upon approval by the City Council a long range plan for the development of a public arts program for the city which shall be reviewed annually before the budget cycle of the City; 
(5)  Establish a review policy to assess the collection of public art at least every ten years from the date of this chapter; 
(6)  Explore and recommend funding sources to support the arts program; 
(7)  Provide assistance to activities and organizations in the community which provide art programs; and 
(8)  Encourage, sponsor, co-sponsor or conduct public programs to further the development and public awareness of the arts. 
(Ord. 967-97 §7, 1-13-97; Ord. 1147-03, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-5-080 - Annual Report of Committee. 
No later than August of each year, the Committee shall file its annual report with the City Council. The annual report shall include a survey and report of the Committee's activities during the preceding fiscal year and other matters and recommendations the Committee deems appropriate for the City Council. 
(Ord. 967-97 §8, 1-13-97; Ord. 1147-03, 08-25-03; Ord. 1366-14 §1, 02-24-14)  
CHAPTER 11-07 - URBAN RENEWAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
Sections: 
 
TMC 11-7-010 - Establishment of Committee. 
To assure public participation in the Urban Renewal process, the Tualatin Urban Renewal Advisory Committee is created to advise the Tualatin Development Commission. 
(Ord. 1118-02, 09-23-02; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-7-020 - Membership of Committee. 
(1)  The committee shall consist of seven members who are appointed by the City Council for a three-year term or until their respective successors are appointed. Committee members shall serve without compensation. 
(2)  No fewer than two members shall be business owners, property owners or residents whose property or business is located within the Urban Renewal Agency boundaries. At least three additional members shall be residents of Tualatin. 
(3)  Each committee member serves at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed by the Council at any time before the committee member's term expires. 
(4)  Any vacancy on the Committee shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired term of the member creating the vacancy. 
(5)  A committee member shall not have unexcused absences from two or more meetings, including regular and special work sessions during a calendar year or absences from more than four such meetings held during the calendar year. An excused absence may be obtained by contacting the chairperson or secretary of the committee at least 24 hours prior to any scheduled committee meeting. 
(Ord. 1118-02, 09-23-02; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03; Ord. 1245-07, 9-10/07)  
TMC 11-7-030 - Organization, Rules and Regulations of Committee. 
(1)  A majority of the Committee shall constitute a quorum. A quorum of the Committee may transact any business or conduct any proceedings before the Committee. 
(2)  Each January or at the first meeting of a new calendar year, the Committee shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from its members, who shall serve until the first regular meeting in the following year or until their successors are elected. 
(3)  The Committee may adopt rules and regulations governing the procedures of its meetings. 
(Ord. 1118-02, 09-23-02; Ord. 1147-03, Renumbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-7-040 - Duties of Committee. 
The Committee shall recommend and make suggestions to the Commission for the adoption of or amendment to an Urban Renewal Plan, a project plan or any plan or project implementation proceeding affecting an urban renewal area. In any such recommendation, the Committee shall consider the needs of the general City of Tualatin as expressed in the City of Tualatin Community Plan or as expressed by the Tualatin Planning Advisory Committee. The Committee shall make recommendations to the Commission on any other matters specifically requested by the Commission. 
(Ord. 1118-02, 09-23-02; Ord. 1147-03, Re-numbered, 08-25-03)  
TMC 11-7-050 - Annual Report of Committee. 
Not later than April 1 of each year, the Committee shall make and file its annual report to the Commission, which shall include a survey and report of the Committee's activities and proceedings, in addition of any specific recommendations of the Committee not otherwise requested by the Commission relating to the programs and future of the Commission. 
(Ord. 1118-02, 09-23-02: Ord.1147-03, 08-25-03)  
CHAPTER 11-08 - ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD 
Sections: 
 
TMC 11-8-010 - Architectural Review Board Established; Powers and Duties. 
(1)  The Tualatin Architectural Review Board is established and created. The Board consists of seven members. 
(2)  The primary powers and duties of the Board are to review development proposals that are subject to the architectural review process of the Tualatin Development Code. In particular, the Board is to: 
(a)  Review, comment, and conduct quasi-judicial hearings on development applications, as provided by the Tualatin Development Code; and 
(b)  Conduct any other reviews or hearings, as provided by the Tualatin Development Code, or otherwise directed by Council. 
(3)  The Council may direct the Board to review and comment on other matters the Council determines to be within the Board's expertise. 
(Ord. 1147-03, 08-25-03; Ord. No. 1426-19 , § 1, 9-9-19)  
TMC 11-8-020 - Appointment; Terms of Office; Membership. 
(1)  The Mayor, with approval by the Council, appoints each Board member. Each Board member serves a two-year term and may be re-appointed to additional terms at the discretion of the Mayor and Council. 
(2)  Board Members. The Board members consist of the following: 
(a)  One member of the City Council; 
(b)  One registered professional architect; 
(c)  One registered professional landscape architect; 
(d)  One registered professional engineer or registered engineer in training; and 
(e)  Three lay members, of which at least two must reside in the City. 
(3)  Alternate Professional Members. In addition to the Board members provided in subsection (2), there are three alternate professional Board members. The alternate professional Board members serve if a regular Board member of the same professional category is absent. The alternate professional members consist of the following: 
(a)  One registered professional architect; 
(b)  One registered professional landscape architect; and 
(c)  One registered professional engineer or registered engineer in training. 
(4)  Youth Ex Officio Member. In addition to the other Board members, the Mayor with approval by the Council may appoint one Youth Ex Officio member who is under 18 years of age at the time of appointment. The Youth Ex Officio member serves a one-year term, which may be renewed for one additional year. The Youth Ex Officio member shall receive a copy of the agenda and agenda materials, and may fully participate in the Board's discussions. The Youth Ex officio member may not be counted for purposes of establishing a quorum and may not vote on any Board action. 
(Ord. No. 1426-19 , § 1, 9-9-19)  
TMC 11-8-030 - Quorum and Voting. 
(1)  Four members of the Board constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. If an alternate member in the same professional category replaces an absent regular member, the alternate member is counted for purposes of the quorum requirements. 
(2)  Four affirmative votes are required to take any Board action. 
(3)  Each regular member has one vote. If an alternate member in the same professional category replaces an absent regular member, the alternate member may vote. If a regular member is present, the alternate member for that professional category does not vote. 
(Ord. No. 1426-19 , § 1, 9-9-19)  
TMC 11-8-040 - Meetings; Organization of the Board; Rules and Regulations. 
(1)  The Board must hold two regular meetings each month. However, the regular meetings need not be held if there are no architectural review submittals for the Board to review. 
(2)  The Councilor appointed to the Board serves as the chairperson of the Board and runs the meetings of the Board. 
(3)  At the first regular meeting of the Board of each year, the Board must elect a vice chairperson. If the chairperson is absent, the vice chairperson will run the meetings of the Board. The chairperson and vice chairperson retain the right to vote on any matter before the Board. 
(4)  The Board must conduct meetings in accordance with State law and City Code, including, but not limited to, TMC 1-04 (Public Meeting Notice). The deliberations and proceedings of the Board are public. 
(5)  The City Manager must provide a secretary who must keep an accurate record of all Board proceedings. The Board must file a report of all its proceedings with the City Recorder. 
(6)  The Board may adopt and amend rules and regulations establishing the procedure for the conduct of proceedings before the Board. Any such rules and regulations must be consistent with State law and all ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the City. 
(Ord. No. 1426-19 , § 1, 9-9-19)  
TMC 11-8-050 - Removal from Office; Vacancy. 
(1)  Each Board member serves at the pleasure of the Council and may be removed by the Council for any reason. 
(2)  In addition to other grounds for removal, the Council may remove any Board member that: 
(a)  Has two or more unexcused absences from meetings, including regular and special work sessions, during a calendar year; or 
(b)  Has five or more absences from meetings, including regular and special work sessions, during a calendar year. 
For purposes of this section, an unexcused absence is an absence where the member failed to contact the chairperson or secretary of the Board at least 24 hours prior to a scheduled Board meeting, unless good cause is shown. 
(3)  A vacancy on the Board occurs in the following circumstances: 
(a)  The Council removes a member of the Board; 
(b)  A member of the Board resigns and the resignation is accepted by the Council; or 
(c)  A person ceases to qualify for the position to which they were appointed, as determined by the Council. 
(4)  Any vacancy on the Board may be filled for the unexpired term of the member creating the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 1426-19 , § 1, 9-9-19)  
TMC 11-8-060 - Expenditure of Funds. 
The Board has no authority to make any expenditure of funds on behalf of the City, or to obligate the City for the payment of any funds, without first obtaining approval for the expenditure from the Council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1426-19 , § 1, 9-9-19)  
CHAPTER 11-09 - CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT ORGANIZATION PROGRAM (CIOP) 
Sections: 
 
TMC 11-9-010 - Citizen Involvement Organization Program (CIOP) Created. 
The Tualatin Citizen Involvement Organization Program (CIOP) is established and created. 
(Ord. 1328-11 §1, 08-22-11)  
TMC 11-9-020 - Purpose. 
The general purpose of the CIOP is to provide an opportunity for members to meaningfully cooperate with each other and with the City of Tualatin on matters affecting the neighborhoods and the City consistent with Tualatin's Principles of Citizen Involvement. A major purpose of the Citizen Involvement Organization (CIO) is to promote communication and a sense of community. Using best efforts to ensure opportunities for involvement and engagement by all CIO members, the means of accomplishing this purpose shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Provide a public forum for the review and evaluation of issues affecting the neighborhoods, the CIO, and the City; provide educational opportunities for citizens, groups and government bodies with respect to such issues; and provide for an exchange of views and opinions on such issues; and 
(2)  Provide a public forum for community members to present their views and provide input to City Council and other governmental and community bodies such as the City advisory boards and committees, service clubs, and other community organizations, and on land use and other matters affecting neighborhoods, the City, or the region; and 
(3)  Provide a formalized channel of communication and dissemination of accurate and timely information between the City government, other governmental bodies, and the CIO and the CIO's members. 
(Ord. 1328-11 §2, 08-22-11)  
TMC 11-9-030 - Citizen Involvement Organizations (CIOs). 
(1)  Citizen Involvement Organization Program (CIOP): the CIOP is composed of Citizen Involvement Organizations and the Citizen Involvement Coordinating Committee (CICC) should one be formed. 
(2)  Citizen Involvement Organizations (CIOs): CIOs are formalized and distinct groups of community members within specified boundaries. 
(3)  CIO Map: The CIO map and the CIO map boundaries are established in order to optimize and promote citizen involvement. The initial CIO Map is attached as Figure 11-9-1 and included herein by reference. 
(Ord. 1328-11 §3, 08-22-11)  
TMC 11-9-040 - Membership and Standards. 
(1)  Membership in a residential CIO is open to all persons age 16 and older who are Tualatin residents living within the recognized boundary of that CIO; membership in the commercial or the manufacturing CIO is open to a business owner or owner's representative, non-profit organization representative, or property owner within the recognized boundary of the respective CIO (i.e. anywhere within the Planning Area of the City of Tualatin - see Figure 11-9-1), without regard to income, race, color, national origin, sex, age, disability, sexual orientation, religion, political affiliation, or marital status. 
Tualatin residents living outside the boundaries of any residential CIO may belong to the residential CIO nearest to their residence. 
(2)  To be recognized by the City Council, a CIO must satisfy the standards below. The City Manager, or designee, confirms that these standards have been met and presents the application to the City Council for approval and recognition: 
(a)  Annual election of officers; 
(b)  All meetings shall be publicized at least seven days in advance of the meeting date, except in case of emergency, in which case at least 24 hours advance notice shall be given. 
(c)  A current list of the names and addresses of the officers has been provided; 
(d)  After at least one initial organizational meeting in the first year of recognition, a minimum of two general meetings each year with the time, place and purpose well publicized throughout the CIO prior to each meeting; 
(e)  CIOs must provide an executed copy of their current bylaws. 
(Ord. 1328-11 §4, 08-22-11)  
TMC 11-9-050 - Termination of Recognition. 
Recognition of a CIO may be terminated by the City Council if the association fails to abide by the standards in TMC 11-9-040. Before the Council terminates recognition, it must notify the CIO 60 days in advance of determining that the CIO is no longer in compliance with the standards. If the deficiency is not corrected after 60 days, the City Council will then hold a public hearing and allow representatives from the CIO a reasonable opportunity to be heard. 
(Ord. 1328-11 §5, 8-22-11)  
TMC 11-9-060 - Boundaries. 
Boundaries of residential CIOs are adopted by the City Council. Residential CIO areas must be mutually exclusive of other recognized residential CIOs. Residential CIO boundaries should be logical, contiguous, and follow identifiable physical features such as streets, property ownership boundaries, topographic features, boundaries of political jurisdictions, or public rights-of-way. The Commercial and Manufacturing CIOs' boundaries are designated as the boundary of the entire Planning Area of the City of Tualatin (see Figure 11-9-1). The City Manager, or designee, shall keep on file a current map of the CIO boundaries. 
Any amendment to the CIO boundaries must be adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. 1328-11 §6, 8-22-11)  
TMC 11-9-070 - City Support. 
The City may, subject to City Council's judgment concerning availability of resources and budgetary limitations, provide support and assistance which may include human, financial and information resources and access to public meeting spaces. 
(Ord. 1328-11 §7, 8-22-11)  
TMC 11-9-080 - Input to Council. 
The CIOs, or the CICC should one be formed on behalf of the CIOs, may make input to the City Council and the Tualatin Development Commission, City advisory Committees, and the City Staff on matters affecting livability and land use. 
(Ord. 1328-11 §8, 8-22-11)  
TMC 11-9-090 - Authority. 
The CIOs, or the CICC should one be formed, shall have no authority to make any expenditure of funds on behalf of the City or to obligate the City for payment of funds without first obtaining the approval of the City. 
(Ord. 1328-11 §9, 8-22-11)  
TMC 11-9-100 - Citizen Involvement Coordinating Committee (CICC). 
A Citizen Involvement Coordinating Committee (CICC) which is a volunteer group made up of the elected board members designated by their participating, recognized CIOs may be created by the CIOs. The CICC may serve as a liaison between the CIOs and between the CIOs and the City offices and departments designated by the City. The CICC is a separate and distinct entity from the City of Tualatin. 
The standards for CICC recognition by the City are: 
(1)  Annual election of officers; 
(2)  All meetings shall be publicized at least seven days in advance of the meeting date, except in case of emergency, in which case at least 24 hours advance notice shall be given. 
(3)  A current list of the names and addresses of the officers has been provided; 
(4)  After at least one initial organizational meeting in the first year of recognition, a minimum of two general meetings each year, with the time, place and purpose well publicized throughout the CIOP prior to each meeting; 
(5)  The CICC must provide an executed copy of their bylaws. 
(Ord. 1328-11 §10, 8-22-11)  
CHAPTER 11-10 - TUALATIN TOMORROW ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
Sections: 
 
TMC 11-10-010 - Establishment of Committee. 
The Tualatin Tomorrow Advisory Committee is created within the City of Tualatin. The purpose of the Committee is to promote community involvement in implementing the Tualatin Tomorrow Vision through engaging and educating citizens and other community partners; monitoring and assessing the progress made in the defined vision areas; promoting implementation of the vision, collaborating as community partners and providing forums to exchange information and create community connections; maintain and growing partner involvement, conducting meetings, events and other communication activities; participating in regional visioning activities which impact Tualatin, and overseeing the process of updating the vision as needed. 
(Ord. 1334-11 §1, 9-12-11)  
TMC 11-10-020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
Committee means the Tualatin Tomorrow Advisory Committee. 
Community means residents, property owners, businesses, social organizations and agencies that may be affected by the outcomes of Tualatin Tomorrow activities, advertisements and recommendations. 
Misconduct means that a member has been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony or has violated the Code of Ethics, ORS 244.040. 
Nonperformance means to have two or more unexcused absences from regular and special meetings during the calendar year or three or more unexcused absences from regular meetings during the calendar year. 
(Ord. 1334-11 §2, 9-12-11)  
TMC 11-10-030 - Membership of Committee. 
(1)  The Council shall appoint the Committee members who shall receive no compensation for their services. The Committee shall consist of seven voting members who shall be appointed by the City Council for three-year terms or until their successors are appointed; however, of the initial seven members who are appointed, two shall be appointed for one-year terms, two shall be appointed for two-year terms, and three shall be appointed for three-year terms. The Mayor shall appoint a member of the City Council to serve as an additional non-voting member of the Committee. In addition, a member of one of the Tualatin Tomorrow Partners shall also serve on the Committee as representative of partnering organizations of Tualatin Tomorrow. The representatives from the Chamber of Commerce and the Partner Organization or Group shall be voting members of the Committee. The representative from the City of Tualatin shall be a non-voting member of the Committee. The representative from the Partner Organization or Group shall be appointed by the City Council on an annual basis to serve a one-year term. 
(2)  To be eligible for appointment on the Committee, members shall reside within the City of Tualatin, own property within the City of Tualatin, own a business within the City of Tualatin, or work within the City of Tualatin. As much as possible, the members of the Tualatin Tomorrow Advisory Committee shall be varied in experience and representative of the City as a whole. A diversity of membership is encouraged among seniors, youth, neighborhood and/or civic leaders, business community members, minorities, and members of the community at-large. 
(3)  A Committee member representing an organization or business may select an alternate member from their organization or business to represent him or her at a Committee meeting or event. Alternates will have the same voting privileges as their primary members. 
(4)  A Committee member may obtain an excused absence by contacting the chairperson or staff liaison of the committee prior to a scheduled meeting. 
(5)  Each Committee member serves at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed before the end of the Committee member's term for reasons of misconduct or nonperformance. 
(6)  The City Council shall fill any vacancy on the Committee for the unexpired term of the member creating the vacancy. 
(Ord. 1334-11 §3, 9-12-11)  
TMC 11-10-040 - Committee Organization. 
(1)  At the first regular meeting of each December, the Committee shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from its membership, who shall be voting members, and those who are then elected shall assume office at the first regular meeting in January. 
(2)  When the chairperson is absent, the vice-chairperson shall assume the responsibilities of the chairperson and serve as chairperson pro tem. If the office of chairperson becomes vacant, the vice-chairperson shall become the chairperson and shall call an election to fill the remaining term of vice-chairperson. 
If the offices of both the chairperson and vice-chairperson become vacant, the Committee shall elect a chairperson pro tem to temporarily fulfill the responsibilities of that office until a special election is held. The special election shall be called not less than 20 days before the election, and shall be conducted in accordance with the rules established by the Committee. 
(3)  The City Manager's designee shall serve as a staff liaison to the Committee. The staff liaison shall keep an accurate record of all Committee proceedings and shall file a report of the proceedings within 30 days with the City Record. 
(Ord. 1334-11 §4, 9-12-11)  
TMC 11-10-050 - Meeting, Quorum Requirements, Rules. 
A majority of the voting members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum. Not less than a quorum of the Committee may transact any business or conduct proceedings before the Committee. The Committee may adopt and amend rules and regulations to govern Committee policy and procedures to implement this chapter. The Committee shall convene when necessary to discharge its duties but not less than six times in a calendar year. The Committee shall establish regular meeting dates and meeting locations at the first meeting of each calendar year. All meetings shall be publicized in advance of the meeting date in accordance with the Oregon Public Meetings Act; participation in meetings is open to the public including but not limited to all residents, business owners or owner's representative, non-profit organizations, or property owners within the City of Tualatin. 
(Ord. 1334-11 §5, 9-12-11)  
TMC 11-10-060 - Expenditure of Funds. 
The Committee shall obtain approval of the City Council during the City's annual budget process or by motion or resolution, stating the purpose of such expenditure before expending or obligating funds on behalf of the City. 
(Ord. 1334-11 §6, 9-12-11)  
TMC 11-10-070 - Powers and Duties. 
The Tualatin Tomorrow Advisory Committee shall be advisory and shall have powers, duties, and functions as follows: 
(1)  Engage and educate citizens and other community partners on the Tualatin Tomorrow Vision. 
(2)  Monitor and assess the progress made in the defined vision areas of the plan. 
(3)  Promote implementation of the vision and collaborate with community partners to provide forums to exchange information and create community connections. Participate in regional visioning activities that impact Tualatin. 
(4)  Maintain and grow community partner involvement through meetings, events and other communication activities. 
(5)  Review the goals of the visioning process and recommend to the City Council updating the goals, strategies, or action recommendations as needed. 
(6)  Present an annual report on the Vision Implementation to the City Council. 
(Ord. 1334-11 §7, 9-12-11)  
TMC 11-10-080 - Annual Report of Committee. 
The Committee shall file an annual report with the City Council. The annual report shall include a report of the Committee's activities during the preceding year and other matters and recommendations the Committee deems appropriate for the City Council. 
(Ord. 1334-11 §8, 9-12-11) 
  
TITLE 12 - MEASURE 37 REAL PROPERTY 
Chapters:  
CHAPTER 12-01 - MEASURE 37 REAL PROPERTY COMPENSATION CLAIMS 
Sections: 
 
TMC 12-1-010 - Definitions. 
Appraisal means a written statement prepared by an appraiser licensed by the Appraiser Certification and Licensure Board of the State of Oregon under ORS Chapter 674. For commercial or industrial property, "appraisal" also means a written statement prepared by an appraiser hold the MAI qualification and evidenced by written certificate. 
Ballot Measure 37 means the provisions added to ORS Chapter 197 by Ballot Measure 37 as approved by Oregon voters by November 7, 2004. 
Claim means the written demand for compensation made by an owner of real property in accordance with Ballot Measure 37 and this chapter. 
Exceptions to Land Use Regulation means the following land use regulations that are excluded from the application of this chapter: (a) a regulation restricting or prohibiting activities commonly and historically recognized as public nuisances under common law, and the criminal laws of Oregon and the City; (b) a regulation restricting or prohibiting activities for the protection of public health and safety, such as fire and building codes, health and sanitation regulations, solid or hazardous waste regulations, and pollution control regulations; (c) a regulation required for compliance with federal law; (d) a regulation restricting or prohibiting the use of the property for the purpose of selling pornography or performing nude dancing; or (e) a regulation enacted prior to the date of acquisition of the real property by the owner or a family member of the owner who had owned the subject property prior to acquisition or inheritance by the owner, whichever occurred first. 
Family Member means the wife, husband, son, daughter, mother, father, brother, brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, stepparent, stepchild, grandparent, or grandchild of the owner of the real property, an estate of any of the foregoing family members, or a legal entity owned by any one or combination of these family members or the owner of the real property. 
Land Use Regulation means the City's comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, land division ordinance or transportation ordinance. A land use regulation does not include any land use regulation excepted from this chapter, a City system development charge or other City development fees for charges. 
Manager means the City Manager or designee. 
Owner means the present owner of real property that is the subject of the claim for compensation, or an interest therein. The owner must be a person who is the sole fee simple owner of the real property, or all joint owners whose interests add up to a fee simple interest in property including all persons who represent all recorded interests in property, such as co-owners, holders of less than fee simple interests, leasehold owners, and security interest holders. 
Property means any private real property or interest therein. It includes a single parcel or contiguous parcels in single ownership. It does not include parcels that are under different ownerships, regardless of contiguity. 
Reduction in Value means the difference in the fair market value of the property before and after the enactment, enforcement or application of a land use regulation as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1177-04 §1, 11-22-04)  
TMC 12-1-020 - Claim Requirements. 
(1)  A claim for compensation shall be comply with the following: 
(a)  A claim must be submitted and accepted for filing only by using the forms provided by the Manager. A claim must consist of all materials required by this chapter. A claim will not be considered as filed under Ballot Measure 37 until the City accepts the claim after the requirements of this chapter are fulfilled by the owner of real property. 
(b)  The Manager will conduct a completeness review within 15 days after submittal of the claim and advise the owner in writing of any material remaining to be submitted. The owner must submit the material needed for completeness within 30 days of the written notice that additional material is required. 
(c)  The 180-day period required before accrual of a cause of action for compensation in circuit court under Ballot Measure 37 begins on the date the Manager deems the claim complete and accepts it for filing. The Manager will mark the date of completeness and filing on the claim form and provide a copy to the claimant. 
(d)  The owner may request an extension for filing a complete claim. A request for an extension or continuance will be deemed a waiver of the beginning of the 180-day period required before accrual of a cause of action for compensation. 
(2)  A claim will not be accepted for filing without all of the following: 
(a)  An application fee paid in advance of acceptance for filing to cover the costs of completeness review. Staff shall keep track of costs for claim processing. If the costs of processing the claim exceed the initial fee, staff shall prepare a bill for those costs. Claimant shall pay these costs one week before the day of the public hearing on the claim. This fee will be established by city council resolution. 
(b)  A completed claim on a form provided by the Manager. 
(c)  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners and anyone with any interest in the property, including lien holders, trustees, renters, lessees and a description of the ownership interest of each. 
(d)  The address, tax lot number, and legal description (metes and bounds) of the real property that is the subject of the claim. 
(e)  The names and addresses of all owners of property within 300 feet of the claim property, as listed on the most recent property tax assessment roll where such property is located. 
(f)  Identification of any other property owned by the owner within 300 feet of the boundary of the claim property. 
(g)  A title report demonstrating the title history, the date the owner acquired ownership of the property, and the ownership interests of all owners. The title report must also specify any restrictions on the use of the property unrelated to the land use regulation including, but not limited to, any restrictions established by covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs), other private restrictions, or other regulations, easements or contracts. 
(h)  A copy of the land use regulation that the owner making the claim believes restricts the use of the property, or interest therein, and that the owner believes has had the effect of reducing the fair market value of the property, including the date the owner claims the land use regulation was first enacted, enforced or applied to the property. 
(i)  A copy of the land use regulation in existence and applicable to the property when the owner became the owner of the property, and a copy of the land use regulation in existence immediately before the regulation that was enacted or enforced or applied to the property, that the owner claims restricts the use of the property and the owner claims caused a reduction in fair market value due to the regulation described in (h) above being more restrictive. 
(j)  A written appraisal by an appraiser, qualified as such in the State of Oregon, stating the amount of the alleged reduction in the fair market value of the property by showing the difference in the fair market value of the property before and after enactment, enforcement or application of the land use regulation described in (h) above, and explaining the rationale and factors leading to that conclusion. 
(k)  A statement by the owner explaining the effect modification, removal or non-application of the land use regulation would have on the potential development of the property, and stating the most intensive development the owner believes would be permitted on the property if the identified land use regulation were modified, removed or not applied. 
(l)  Copies of any land use actions, development applications or other applications for permits previously filed in connection with the property and the action taken. City "enforcement" or "application" of the land use regulation is a prerequisite to making a Measure 37 claim and must be described and identified by the claimant. 
(m)  A copy of the site plan and drawings in a legible 8½ by 11 inch format that relate to the proposed use of the property if the land use regulation is modified, removed or not applied. 
(n)  A statement of the relief sought by the owner. 
(Ord. 1177-04 §2, 11-22-04)  
TMC 12-1-030 - Claim Review Process. 
(1)  The Manager shall assess a claim for compensation and make a recommendation to the City Council on the disposition of the claim. The recommendation will state that the claim be: 
(a)  Denied; 
(b)  Investigated further; 
(c)  Declared valid, in which case the recommendation will further state whether the land use regulation at issue should be removed, waived or modified, or that the claimant should be compensated; or 
(d)  Evaluated in another manner not inconsistent with this chapter or Ballot Measure 37, including possible City condemnation of the property. 
(2)  The City Council will conduct a public hearing before taking final action on a recommendation from the Manager. 
(3)  Notice of the public hearing will be provided to the claimant and all record owners of the subject property, and to all owners of property within 300 feet of the subject property. Additional notice may be sent to the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development, Metro and such others as the City may designate. 
(4)  The City post the notice on the subject property at least ten days before the public hearing. 
(5)  The notice shall state the date, time and location of the hearing and will be sent no later than ten days before the hearing. The notice will describe the hearing process, and will state how evidence may be submitted. 
(6)  After the conclusion of the public hearing, and no later than 180 days from the date the claim was filed, the City Council will: 
(a)  Determine that the claim does not meet the requirements of this chapter and Ballot Measure 37, and deny the claim; or 
(b)  Adopt an order appropriate findings that supports a determination that the claim is valid and directs that the claimant be compensated in an amount set forth in the order, or remove, waive or modify the challenged land use regulation as applied to the subject property. 
(7)  The City Council's decision to remove, waive or modify a land use regulation or to compensate the claimant will be based on whether the public interest would be better served by compensating the owner, or by removing, waiving or modifying a land use regulation with respect to the subject property; or any other factors deemed relevant by the City Council. 
(8)  If the City Council removes, waives or modifies a land use regulation, it may apply the land use regulations in effect at the time the claimant acquired the property. 
(9)  The owner will bear the burden of proof relating to the claim, the devaluation of the owner's property and the owner's entitlement to just compensation. The standard of proof will be by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(10)  A copy of the City Council order will be sent by mail to the owner and to each individual or entity that participated in the City Council review process if the City was provided with a mailing address. 
(11)  The City Council may establish by resolution additional procedures related to the process of Ballot Measure 37 claims. 
(Ord. 1177-04 §3, 11-22-04)  
TMC 12-1-040 - Conditions, Revocation and Transfer. 
(1)  The City Council may establish any relevant conditions of approval for compensation, should compensation be granted, or for any other action taken under this chapter. 
(2)  Failure to comply with any condition of approval is grounds for revocation of the approval of the compensation for the claim, grounds for recovering any compensation paid and grounds for revocation of any other action taken under this chapter. 
(3)  If the owner, or the owner's successor in interest, fails to comply with all conditions of approval, the City may institute a revocation or modification proceeding before the City Council under the same process for City Council review of a claim under this chapter. 
(4)  Unless otherwise stated in the City's decision, any action taken under this chapter runs with the property and is transferred with ownership of the property. All conditions, time limits or other restrictions imposed with approval of a claim will bind all subsequent owners of the subject property. 
(5)  A land use regulation waived under this chapter will create a nonconforming use, or a nonconforming structure, as appropriate, on the property benefiting from the waiver. 
(Ord. 1177-04 §4, 11-22-04)  
TMC 12-1-050 - Waiver of Claims. 
All potential claims on a parcel or contiguous parcels that an owner knew or should have known exist as of the date a claim is submitted must be included in that claim if they are to be preserved. Any potential claim not included is waived by the property owner. 
(Ord. 1177-04 §5, 11-22-04)  
TMC 12-1-060 - Costs and Attorney Fees. 
If any owner commences an action to collect compensation and the City prevails, the City is entitled to all fees and costs it incurred, as well as any sum that a court, including any appellant court, may deem reasonable as attorney's fees. 
(Ord. 1177-04 §6, 11-22-04)  
TMC 12-1-070 - Availability of Funds to Pay Claims. 
Compensation can only be paid based upon the availability and appropriation of funds for this purpose. 
(Ord. 1177-04 §7, 11-22-04)  
TMC 12-1-080 - Review of a Decision. 
A writ of review under ORS 34.010 to 34.102 is the exclusive means to contest a final decision of the City Council under Section 3 and must be filed within 60 days of the notice. The owner of the real property that is the subject of the claim under this chapter is a necessary party in such a proceeding. 
(Ord. 1177-04 §8, 11-22-04)  
TMC 12-1-090 - Compensation by Other. 
An individual or entity other than the City may compensate the claimant for any diminution in value established under this chapter, in lieu of the City removing, modifying or waiving the land use regulation causing the diminution. A contract between the City, the claimant and the individual or entity providing the compensation is a condition precedent to compensating a claimant under this subsection, and must be approved by the City Attorney. 
(Ord. 1177-04 §9, 11-22-04)  
TMC 12-1-110 - Applicable State Law, No Independent Rights. 
For all claims filed the applicable state law is those portions of ORS Chapter 197 added by Ballot Measure 37, or as amended, modified or clarified by subsequent amendments or rules adopted by the Oregon Legislature or Oregon administrative agencies. Any claim that has not been processed completely under this chapter will be subject to any such amendments, modifications, clarifications or other state actions. This chapter is adopted solely to address claims filed under ORS Chapter 197 provisions added by Ballot Measure 37 and does not create any rights independent of those provisions. 
(Ord. 1177-04 §11, 11-22-04)  
TITLE 13 - TAX ON MARIJUANA 
Chapters:  
CHAPTER 13-01 - TAX ON THE SALE OF MARIJUANA ITEMS BY A MARIJUANA RETAILER IN THE CITY OF TUALATIN 
Sections: 
 
TMC 13-1-010 - Definitions. 
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following words and phrases used in this Chapter have the following meanings: 
Marijuana Item has the meaning given that term in Oregon Laws 2015, chapter 614, section 1. 
Marijuana Retailer means a person who sells marijuana items to a consumer in this state. 
Retail Sale Price means the price paid for a marijuana item, excluding tax, to a marijuana retailer by or on behalf of a consumer of the marijuana item. 
(Ord. 1396-16, § 1, 7-25-16)  
TMC 13-1-020 - Tax Imposed. 
As provided in ORS 475B.345, the City of Tualatin imposes a tax of three percent on the retail sale price of marijuana items by a marijuana retailer in the area subject to the jurisdiction of the City of Tualatin. 
(Ord. 1396-16, § 2, 7-25-16)  
TMC 13-1-030 - Collection. 
The tax shall be collected at the point of sale of a marijuana item by a marijuana retailer at the time at which the retail sale occurs and remitted by each marijuana retailer that engages in the retail sale of marijuana items. 
(Ord. 1396-16, § 3, 7-25-16)  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the Tualatin Code included in this Code. 
Ordinance 
Number 	Adoption Date 	Section 	Section 
this Code 
1403-17 
10- 9-2017 	1       Added 	9-10-010—9.10.090 
1409-18 	 5-29-2018 	1 	ch. 11-03, sch. A 
1415-18 	 1-14-2019 	2 	2-6-010(5) 
		3 	2-6-050 
		4 	2-6-060(1) 
		5 	2-6-120(13) 
1420-19 
 5-28-2019 	1       Added 	9-8-005—9-8-040 
1423-19 
 6-10-2019 	1 	ch. 11-03, sch. A 
1425-19 
 9- 9-2019 	1       Added 	9-11-010—9-11-060 
1426-19 
 9- 9-2019 	1 	11-8-010 
		      Added 	11-8-020—11-8-060 
1429-19 
12- 9-2019 	1 	4-1-010 
1433-20 
 4-13-2020 	1       Rpld 	1-4-010 
			1-4-030 
		      Added 	1-4-010 
1434-20 
 4-13-2020 	1 	9-10-050 
1435-20 
 4-13-2020 	1       Rpld 	2-3-010—2-3-030 
		      Added 	2-3-010—2-3-080 
1436-20 
 4-13-2020 	1       Rpld 	1-6-010—1-6-070 
		      Added 	1-6-010—1-6-070 
			1-6-100 
1437-20 
 5-26-2020 	1 	ch. 11-3, sch. A 
1441-20 
 7-13-2020 	1       Rpld 	3-3-060, 3-3-070 
		2       Added 	3-3-060 
		3       Added 	3-3-063 
		4       Added 	3-3-065 
		5       Added 	3-3-070 
 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. 	Date Adopted 	Include/Omit 	Supp. No. 
1422-19 	 7- 8-2019 	Include 	1 
1427-19 
11-25-2019 	Include 	2 
1438-20 
 6-22-2020 	Include 	3 
  
CHAPTER 1 - ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS 
 
TDC 1.010. - Interpretation. 
Where differences exist between the Plan Map and Plan Text, the Plan Map controls Plan intent unless, otherwise determined by the City Council.  
TDC 1.020. - Definitions. 
Acre. A measure of land area containing 43,560 square feet. Gross Acreage is the land area within the lot lines of a unit of land. Net Acreage is the land area within the lot lines of a unit of land after removing land for rights-of-way and tracts. 
Annexation. The formal act of adding land to the corporate limits of a City. 
Buildable Lands. Land within an Urban Growth Boundary that is vacant, has access to public streets, water and sewer services, and is not subject to natural hazards such as flooding, landslides, etc. 
City. The City of Tualatin, Oregon; a municipal corporation. 
Conditional Use. A land use category in a Planning District for land uses that may have an adverse impact on other land uses within that district. These uses require special approval procedures and may have conditions attached to their approval so they can be made compatible with surrounding land uses. 
Dedication. The act of permanently de-voting a portion of private land to a public purpose, which includes, but is not limited to, road right-of-way or a public park. 
Density: 
Gross Residential Density. The number of dwelling units per gross acre. See also Acre. 
Housing Density. The number of dwelling units per acre of land rounded to the nearest whole number. 
Maximum Net Density. Maximum net density applies only to partition, subdivision, and architectural review applications reviewed through the Expedited Process set forth in House Bill 3065, Sections 6-11, 1995 Legislature, and is the land area within the lot lines of a unit of land after land has been removed for rights-of-way and tracts. House Bill 3065's reference to 80 percent of maximum net density in Section 7(1)(a)(E) is calculated by taking the gross acreage and subtracting land removed for rights-of-way and tracts and multiplying that net acreage figure by the maximum allowed density and then multiplying that figure by 80 percent. 
Net Residential Density. The number of dwelling units per net acre. See also Acre. 
Design Standards. Specific defined criteria formulated to guide the preparation of plans for buildings, landscaping, parks, etc. 
Development Agreement. An agreement between either the City or the Tualatin Development Commission and a developer that clearly establishes the developer's responsibility regarding project phasing, the provision of public and private facilities, improvements, and any other mutually agreed to terms and requirements. 
Floodplain. See, TDC Chapter 70 (Floodplain District). 
Grade Crossing. A crossing of high-ways, railroad tracks, or pedestrian walks or combinations of these at the same ground elevation. 
Greenway. A naturally landscaped area of land usually located adjacent to watercourses and roadways. 
Growth Controls. A combination of regulations, public policy and capital expenditures designed to either limit growth or to direct growth into specific geographic areas. 
Historic Resource. See, Chapter 31 and 68 definitions. 
Housing Starts. The number of building permits issued for the construction of dwelling units for a specific period of time. 
Land-Extensive. An industrial use characterized by large storage areas or large land areas needed for manufacturing processes and relatively few employees per acre. 
Land Use Intensity. The relative concentration or activity generated on a parcel of land by a specific land use. 
Moratorium. A temporary deferment or delay of construction activity, usually based on the lack of adequate capacity for public facilities such as schools, roads, and sewer and water systems. 
Multi-Mode Transportation. A mix of transportation forms usually integrated as a system. 
Official Map. A legislatively adopted map indicating the exact location of public improvements such as streets, with the purpose of prohibiting uses within these locations that would prohibit future municipal use of the location. 
Peak Hour. A specific period of time at which traffic counts are highest. 
Planning District. See, Chapter 31 definitions. 
Right-of-Way. A strip of land reserved for public uses, which includes, but is not limited to, roadways, sewer facilities, water facilities, and stormwater facilities. 
Transportation Mode. A form of transportation such as the automobile mode, bus mode, light rail mode, etc. 
Truck Route. A selected course of travel for trucks, primarily intended to route trucks away from residential neighbor-hoods. 
Unincorporated Land. Land not within the corporate or city limits of a city. 
Urban Growth Boundary. An adopted line at or outside the current City limits defining an area that would accommodate future City growth. 
Urban Growth Management Agreement (UGMA). An agreement between the City and Clackamas County establishing a process for coordinating comprehensive planning and development in a geographically defined area composed of both area within city limits and unincorporated properties. 
Urban Planning Area Agreement (UPAA). An agreement between the City and Washington County establishing a process for coordinating comprehensive planning and development in a geographically defined area composed of both area within city limits and unincorporated properties. 
(Ord. 743-88, §34, 3-28-1988; Ord. 818-91, §1, two & 3, 1-14-91; Ord. 844-91, §1, 10-14-91; Ord. 849-91, §1 & 2, 11-25-91; Ord. 882-92, §1, 12-14-92; Ord. 890-93, §1, 4-12-93; Ord. 956-96, §1 & 2, 01-8-96; Ord. 988-97, §1, 12-8-97; Ord. 1026-99, §1, 08-9-99; Ord. 1277-09, §1, 03-9-09; Ord. 1310-10 §1, 09-13-10; Ord. 1321-11 §1, 04-25-11; Ord. 1339-12 §1, 01-23-12; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018 )  
CHAPTER 2 - INTRODUCTION 
 
TDC 2.010. - Background. 
(1)  The City of Tualatin's first Comprehensive Plan was adopted in 1972, 59 years after the City was incorporated in 1913. In 1975, the City adopted a plan for the City's Urban Renewal Area, and then produced a more detailed Renewal Plan in 1977. Since the adoption of the 1972 Plan, the City has seen rapidly changing circumstances that have created the need for a revised plan. These circumstances included the establishment of the State Land Conservation and Development Commission (LCDC), adoption of the Statewide Planning Goals, annexation of most of the industrial area west of the City in 1982, and accelerated economic development that has occurred since 1972 in the Tualatin area. 
(2)  In 1973, the Oregon Legislature passed a law establishing the Land Conservation and Development Commission (LCDC) and empowered the Commission to adopt Statewide Planning Goals. The Legislature also required all Oregon cities and counties to adopt plans and ordinances in conformance with the statewide goals and to coordinate their plans with each affected local general purpose government or special district. Each city or county also had to prepare a plan that considered state and federal government programs. To help each local government prepare a plan to meet the planning goals, the State Legislature allocated considerable sums of money to provide planning grants to the local jurisdictions. This planning effort has been achieved by using some of those grant funds. 
(3)  While the Statewide Planning Goals were being formulated, the nation was recovering from an economic recession. Tualatin was only beginning to feel the double impact of renewed economic growth. At the same time, development of the metropolitan urban fringe finally reached and went beyond Tualatin's border. Because of these factors, the City is now experiencing an unprecedented development boom that must be guided by an adequate plan that will ensure the long-term livability of the City. While the 1972 Plan was adequate for its time, a new plan, building on the strengths of the old plan, was necessary to provide an adequate guide for current and future City growth. 
(4)  After six years of work, Tualatin adopted a revised comprehensive plan on October 22, 1979, which, with amendments, was acknowledged as being in compliance with the Statewide Goals and Guidelines by the LCDC on September 24, 1981. 
(5)  The Tualatin Plan is unique in that it involves a single document integrating both the traditional comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance into a single development code. This direction is followed in the land use mapping by having only one map with planning districts rather than a zone map and a plan map. With this approach, Tualatin provides a very strong legal authority to its planning programs. 
(6)  The 1979 Tualatin Plan dealt with land, both within the City limits and in the unincorporated area, out to the Metropolitan Service District (METRO) Urban Growth Boundary (UGB). However, the acknowledgement of the plan by the LCDC was only for the City limits. Therefore, the 1979 plan was termed "complementary" in that it dealt only with land inside the limits and left the growth areas reaching to the UGB to Washington County for detailed planning and administration. It was the County's responsibility to finalize the plan for this area so that it could be acknowledged by the LCDC. 
(7)  Planning responsibility shifted to the City with the October 1982 annexation of most of the Industrial Planning Area. At that time, Tualatin and Washington County agreed that the City would assume planning responsibility for the unincorporated balance of the planning area. In order to fulfill this responsibility, the City prepared two separate land use plan amendments, one for the newly annexed industrial area and another for the unincorporated, predominantly residential balance of the planning area. At the same time, the City prepared updates to the Transportation and Sewer and Water elements of the Public Facilities Plan. These three amendments, scheduled for adoption in 1983, were intended to bring the total plan into "active" status. This means that the City was taking authority for its own growth lands and is planning for those lands so that they can be best integrated into one community. 
(8)  Map 9-2 shows the Western Industrial District, the Industrial Planning Area, and the individual industrial areas. 
(9)  Map 9-2 shows the individual Residential Planning Areas. 
(10)  The Northwest Tualatin Concept Plan technical document development occurred in 2004-05 based on a Metro Urban Growth Boundary expansion in December 2002. The concept plan focus is on industrial uses and related public infrastructure. 
(11)  The Southwest Tualatin Concept Plan (SWCP) technical document was accepted in October 2010 based on a Metro Urban Growth Boundary expansions in December 2002 and June 2004 and the 117 acre "Knife River Urban Reserve." The concept plan for industrial development of 615 acres of land in the southwestern corner of Tualatin is based on Metro Urban Growth Management Functional Plan (MUGMFP) Title IV Industrial Land Policy. Title XI Planning for New Urban Areas, a Metro Region-ally Significant Industrial Area (RSIA) designation and other conditions in Metro Ordinances specific to the SWCP area. 
The SWCP focuses on industrial uses and related public infrastructure. The SWCP requires a minimum of one 100-acre and one 50-acre parcel for industrial development within the properties designated as RSIA and provides for a limited commercial area in the properties north of SW Blake Street that is intended as local services for SWCP industrial facilities and employment. 
(Ord. 590-83, 04-13-83; Ord. 592 83, §22, 06-13-83; Ord. 1191-05, 06-27-05; Ord. 1321-11 §2, 04-25-11; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 2.020. - Purpose. 
(1)  The general purpose of this Plan is to guide the physical development of the City so as to preserve the natural beauty of the area while accommodating economic growth. Specifically, the Plan is intended to define locations for both private and public land uses and to arrange these uses in a manner that reduces conflicts and provides convenient movement between individual land uses. The Plan is also intended to provide for diverse living and working environments of the highest quality. 
(2)  When adopted by the City Council, this Plan and the City's Urban Renewal Plan will be an official land use guide for City development. After the adoption of this Plan, there will not be the construction of any building, structure or use, used or occupied contrary to the provisions of this plan. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 2.030. - Plan Format. 
(1)  The format is intended to organize the Code's content into a logical sequence. The first chapter contains definitions of planning terms. Chapter two provides general background on the reasons for the plan revision, explains the plan's format, and discusses matters such as citizen involvement and agency coordination. Chapter 3 provides a description of the data that was generated as a part of the planning process and was used to provide an objective analysis of planning alternatives. 
(2)  Chapter 4 discusses general community growth and describes growth characteristics. It also defines community growth objectives. The next four chapters deal specifically with individual land use categories, providing rationale for their location and explaining their purpose. 
(3)  Chapter 9 contains the plan map and shows the specific location of private and public land uses. It also provides a graphic description of the City's Urban Growth Boundary, and also provides a narrative description of each plan area. 
(4)  Chapter ten provides a description of community design objectives relating to the physical appearance of the City. 
(5)  Chapters 11 through 15 comprise the public facilities element of the plan. Subjects addressed include transportation, water service, sewer service, and parks and recreation. 
(6)  Chapter 16 provides objectives relating to the preservation of the City's identified historic landmarks. 
(7)  Chapter 20 provides objectives related to sign design. 
(8)  Chapters 40 through 80 contain the Planning District Standards. These Standards are equivalent to what is generally referred to as a "Zoning Ordinance" in most cities and counties. Under the system adopted by the City of Tualatin, the traditional comprehensive plan map and zoning map have been combined into a single map, and what used to be called "zones" are referred to as planning districts. 
(Renumbered by Ord. 844-91, §2, 10-14-91; Ord. 1191-05, 06-27-05; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 2.040. - Planning Area Description. 
(1)  The beginning of any planning effort includes a definition of the area to be studied. This planning effort studied an area that is described on the Plan Map in Chapter 9 and referred to as the Study Area. 
(2)  Subsequent modifications to the original Study Area include Urban Reserve Area 43 in 1998 and the Northwest Tualatin Concept Plan (2005) areas. 
(3)  The study area corresponds to the Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) adopted by the Columbia Region Association of Governments (CRAG) in 1976 or as modified by Metro in 1981, 1986, 1991, 1998, 2002 and 2004. In the eastern and southern portions of the City the line follows the 1976 UGB and the Metro 2002 and 2004 UBG Expansion Decision and the Urban Reserve recommended by Metro in 2010. The western portion of the Study Area corresponds to a line generally following Cipole Road, Pacific Highway and the Bonneville Power Administration right-of-way, while the northern portion of the Study Area follows the natural divide of the Tualatin River and the political boundaries of the cities of Durham, Tigard, Lake Oswego and Rivergrove. 
(Ord. 1191-05, 06-27-05; Ord. 1321-11 §3, 04-25-11)  
TDC 2.050. - Citizen Involvement. 
(1)  The first Statewide Planning Goal is the Citizen Involvement Goal. This goal provides that each community must adopt, implement and periodically review a citizen involvement program. In 1976, the Tualatin City Council appointed a seven member Committee for Citizen Involvement (CCI) to draft a Citizen Involvement Program. This program was adopted by the City Council on April 12, 1976, and has been the basis for the City's citizen involvement activities. After the adoption of the Citizen Involvement Program, the City Council formed two new advisory committees to provide recommendations to the Council on planning matters. These new groups were the Tualatin Planning Advisory Committee (TPAC), which became the Planning Commission in 2012, and the Urban Renewal Advisory Committee (URAC). URAC provides planning assistance to the Tualatin Development Commission on matters within the Urban Renewal Area, and the Planning Commission provides planning recommendations for the general community. 
(2)  The City Council transferred the Citizen Involvement Program responsibility to the Tualatin Planning Advisory Committee in 1976. This responsibility was transferred to the Tualatin Planning Commission in 2012. 
(3)  Another advisory group influencing the plan is the Tualatin Park Advisory Committee (TPARK). This committee over-sees the City's park and recreation pro-grams and thus has an interest in the park and recreation element of the Public Facilities Plan, which is also reflected on the community's General Land Use Plan. Both TPAC (changed to the Tualatin Planning Commission) and TPARK have met regularly to review the plan proposals and to take actions recommending this plan to the City Council. Meeting minutes and recordings are available for public review at the Tualatin City Hall. The powers, duties and organizational structure of TPAC (changed to the Tualatin Planning Commission) and TPARK are described in The Tualatin Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1119-02, 10-14-02; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 2.060, 2.070. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1406-17, adopted November 13, 2017, repealed §§ 2.060 and 2.070.  
TDC 2.080. - Agency Coordination. 
(1)  Numerous public agencies have been involved in the planning process. This Plan, as well as Phase I Technical Memoranda, the data base for this Plan, and subsequent modifications to this Plan, were sent to the following public agencies for comment. This coordination is required by statewide planning legislation, and agency comments are on file at the Tualatin City Hall. 
(a)  Land Conservation and Development Commission. 
(b)  Columbia Region Association of Governments. 
(c)  Metropolitan Service District (Metro). 
(d)  Portland Metropolitan Area Local Government Boundary Commission. 
(e)  Tri-Met. 
(f)  Washington County Planning Commission. 
(g)  Clackamas County Planning Commission. 
(h)  Cities of Durham, Lake Oswego, Rivergrove, Sherwood, Tigard, Wilsonville. 
(i)  Tigard-Tualatin School District 23 J. 
(j)  Sherwood School District 88. 
(k)  Tualatin Valley Fire and Rescue (Tualatin Rural Fire Protection District). 
(l)  Clean Water Services (Unified Sewerage Agency). 
(m)  Oregon State Highway Division (Oregon Department of Transportation). 
(n)  Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. 
(o)  Federal Environmental Protection Agency. 
(p)  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(q)  Oregon Division of State Lands. 
(2)  Additionally, the planning process included the following private utility companies: 
(a)  Verizon (General Telephone Company of the Northwest, Inc.) 
(b)  Northwest Natural Gas Company. 
(c)  Portland General Electric Company. 
(d)  Comcast 
(Ord. 1191-05; 06-27-05; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
CHAPTER 3 - TECHNICAL MEMORANDA 
 
TDC 3.010. - Background. 
(1)  The development of the Plan for Tualatin was based as much as possible on objective data that measured conditions within the planning area. To obtain this data, the planning process was divided into two phases, with the first phase being data collection and the second phase being the preparation of a plan based on the collected data. The data was collected in a document entitled Phase I—Technical Memoranda. The Technical Memoranda described data concerning numerous topics. Those topics are described as follows: 
(a)  Citizen Involvement: 
Citizen Participation 
(b)  Land Use: 
Natural Resource Inventory 
Geological Resources 
Flood Plains, Drainage and Wetlands 
Fishery Resources 
Wildlife Resources 
Wetland Protection Regulations 
Ecologically Significant Natural Areas 
Vegetation 
Soils Inventory, Urban/Rural Conflicts 
Air Quality, Pollution Potentials 
Noise Quality, Pollution Potentials 
Groundwater Resources, High Groundwater and Weak Soils 
Historical and Cultural Resource Inventory 
Land Use Summary 
Existing Land Use 
Buildable Land Summary 
Residential, Commercial and Industrial Demand 
Population Forecast 
Housing 
Commercial/Industrial 
Urbanization 
Housing Inventory 
Energy Conservation 
(c)  Public Facilities: 
Transportation 
Public Services 
Water Supply 
Sewerage 
Storm Drainage 
Flooding and Natural Hazards 
Recreation and Open Space 
Schools 
Electrical, Gas and Utilities 
(2)  To portray material lending itself to graphic description, a series of clear mylar overlays were produced. This series of overlays was useful in describing to the advisory committees and the public much of the information necessary to reach planning decisions. The graphic overlays cover the following topics and are available for review at the Tualatin City Hall. 
(a)  Slope Analysis (indicates areas that may be natural hazard areas). 
(b)  Soils Classifications (indicates areas that may be natural hazard areas). 
(c)  Water Areas and Wetlands (indicates areas that may be natural hazard areas). 
(d)  Vegetation and Wildlife. 
(e)  Recreation and Open Space Inventory. 
(f)  Street Classifications and Capacities. 
(g)  Major Street Inventory. 
(h)  Existing Land Use. 
(i)  Water Service Areas. 
(j)  Sewer Service Areas. 
(3)  To briefly acquaint the reader with some of the data that has been used in the Plan, the following summary has been written. The summary briefly describes the data and initial findings produced in the first planning phase. For a detailed review of data used in this Plan, please refer directly to Phase I—Technical Memoranda, City of Tualatin Historic Resource Technical Study and Inventory 1992-1993, City of Tualatin Natural Resource Inventory and Local Wetlands Inventory 1995, 2001 Transportation System Plan (TSP) and 2012 TSP Update (TSP Technical Memorandum, December 2012), and NW Tualatin Concept Plan 2005. 
(Ord. 1103-02, 03-25-02; Ord. 1191-05, 6-27-05, Ord. 1354-13 §2, 02-25-13)  
TDC 3.020. - Citizen Participation. 
Two questionnaires were used to aid the development of planning objectives. One assessed general community attitudes and asked residents to list Tualatin's assets and liabilities. The other polled commercial and industrial employees in the planning area regarding the need for housing for people who work in Tualatin.  
TDC 3.030. - Natural Resources. 
Renewable and nonrenewable natural resources were listed along with an inventory of soil types, air pollution potentials, and noise pollution potentials. 
(1)  Geology. 
(a)  Uplands. The southern half of the Study Area consists of irregular uplands varying from 250 feet to 550 feet in relief, with several small creeks draining to the north. These uplands grade into a northward-sloping terrace at an estimated elevation of 250 feet. 
(b)  Low-Lying Areas. Columbia River Basalt underlies the valley and is covered with a fine-grain sedimentary material consisting of silts and clays. Flood-deposited sand, gravel and boulders occur over some parts of the area. 
(c)  Tualatin River. The Tualatin River originates on the eastern slope of the Coast Range. The watershed averages 40 miles long and 25 miles wide, draining 711 square miles before entering the Willamette River. About 1/2 of the watershed is in the valley, where the stream is flat with wide flood plains. 
(d)  Drainages. Numerous minor drainages into the Tualatin River within the Study Area have required the development of a Drainage Plan for the City of Tualatin. Major drainage basins within the Study Area are Hedges Creek and Nyberg Creek. Saum Creek and Athee Creek also have substantial drainage areas within the planning area. The majority of drainage structures within the City of Tualatin are open ditches and creeks combined with culverts at road crossings. 
(e)  Wetlands. Wetlands are mapped as areas of shallow groundwater tables subject to frequent inundation that have developed vegetation tolerant of abundant soil moisture. Wetlands are often transition areas between uplands and waterways. These areas commonly store flood waters, provide wildlife habitat, and supply primary protection to the adjacent waterway ecosystems. Hedges Creek Wetland is the largest wetland area in Washington County. The Army Corps of Engineers regulates any filling or dredging of the Hedges Creek Wetland. 
(2)  Fish. A wide variety of fish live in the Tualatin River system. The river supports both migratory fish and resident fish populations. 
(a)  Migratory. Migration lasts from late August to early September. During low water periods, flow of the Tualatin River is diverted for irrigation and municipal water use upstream from the Oregon Iron and Steel Company Dam. When low flow periods extend into October and November, migratory fish are prevented from entering the Tualatin River. Increased flow from impoundment of the Scoggins Dam has improved fish passage conditions. 
(b)  Resident. Warmwater fish caught near the City of Tualatin are primarily large-mouth bass, bluegill, brown bullhead and black crappies. Crayfish are a good indicator of water quality. The crayfish population declined during the late 1950's and early 1960's. 
(3)  Wildlife. Within the Study Area, there are a variety of habitats that support diverse wildlife fauna. The habitats are composed of a mosaic of forest, grasslands, wetlands, and farm land. The diverse and little-disturbed habitats provide living space for a wide variety of wildlife species. The Technical Memoranda contains a detailed list of species of wildlife in the Study Area from the Oregon Department of Fish and Wild-life. The areas of particular importance to wildlife species are wetlands and riverbank habitats along the Tualatin River and its tributaries. 
(a)  Hedges Creek. The large wetland directly west of the Tualatin City Center and south of the Southern Pacific Railroad line is one of the most important ecologically significant natural areas. This area has generated considerable interest because of its extensive wildlife and water fowl habitat in close proximity to Portland. 
(b)  Saum Creek. Saum Creek, located at the eastern end of the Study Area, contains both deciduous and coniferous forest land and is characterized by forests along the Creek. 
(c)  Tualatin River. The Tualatin River and its flood plain from the western boundary of the Study Area to just past its junction with Fanno Creek has been identified as a wetland and marsh area. The River itself is an important fish migration route. The river and its associated vegetation are important natural habitats. 
(d)  Tualatin River National Wildlife Refuge. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service established the refuge to protect, enhance, and manage an area of high quality and diverse habitats for a variety of migratory birds and resident fish and wildlife. The 3090-acre refuge is located in an area adjacent to the western city limits of Tualatin and includes the Rock Creek drainage and Onion Flats area adjoining SW Cipole Road. One tributary of Rock Creek originates within Tualatin's city limits in an area designated General Manufacturing. The refuge is of particular importance to Tualatin and the metropolitan region as a fish and wildlife habitat and valuable open space. 
(4)  Vegetation. Vegetation plays a crucial role in the natural processes. It furnishes living space and food for animals, cleanses the environment by acting as a filter for dust and air pollutants, and binds the soil to prevent erosion. 
(a)  Uplands. Both, conifer forest and mixed conifer/deciduous forest are found on the upland areas. Cleared uplands support pasture or field crops. 
(b)  Lowlands. Lowlands are characterized by riverbank forests, swamp or marsh. 
(5)  Soils. Soil types have been mapped from aerial photographs obtained from the Soil Conservation Service. Soils are classified into eight broad groups designated by Roman Numerals I through VIII, indicating progressively greater limitations for crop production. Soil classification expresses the suitability of soils for most kinds of field crops. 
(a)  Fertility. Over 95 percent of the soils within the Study Area are within Classes I through IV. The Tualatin Valley is a very fertile area with a long history of agricultural use. 
(b)  Suitability. Most of the soils in the Study Area are not suitable for farming due to the potential for erosion, high water tables, or their shallow, droughty nature. 
(6)  Water Quality. In the past, the major water quality problem in the City has been pollution of Tualatin River waters. A 1976 report prepared for the Columbia Region Association of Governments by Portland State University states that "the lower Tualatin River appears to be nutrient enriched, eutrophic but not polluted." The report states that the improved water quality is due primarily to summer low-flow augmentation now allowed by the new Scoggins Dam and improved sewage treatment facilities recently constructed along the River. Consequently, the City's major water pollution problem has been solved. The City could have some water quality problems on Tualatin River tributaries due to erosion during construction. These problems are difficult to quantify. However, the City does have some control options over this potential problem. 
(Ord. 937-95, §1, 1-9-95)  
TDC 3.040. - Natural Hazards. 
(1)  Flooding. The last three miles of the Tualatin River, about five and one-half miles downstream from the City of Tualatin, consists of a narrow gorge with a vertical drop of nearly 40 feet. Natural reefs occurring upstream limit the River's ability to pass flood flows. The reefs create a natural dam, forcing water to back up and flood into the Tualatin Valley. 
(a)  Season. Flooding usually occurs between mid-November and mid-February, due to rainfall and snow melt. Unlike most Oregon streams, the wide, flat flood plains of the Tualatin Valley store large volumes of water that cause the River to peak slowly and remain above flood stage for several days. 
(b)  Affected Area. The core area of the City of Tualatin is highly vulnerable to flooding of the Tualatin River. A 100-year frequency flood would cause extensive flooding in the City of Tualatin. It would also flood a large area west and east of the City's downtown and a large area in the northwest portion of the Study Area. 
(c)  Existing Flood Control. Present flood control projects on the Willamette River do not appreciably affect flood conditions of the City of Tualatin. Upstream flood control measures on the Tualatin River will provide only limited benefits to the Tualatin Valley, as the key physical constraints occur at the natural reefs downstream. 
(2)  Air Pollution. The major source of air pollution in Tualatin is motor vehicle traffic. Industrial sources are minor. The Durham sewerage treatment plant is the largest single point source of pollution in the area. 
(a)  Existing Air Quality. Existing air quality in Tualatin is estimated to be well within allowable limits everywhere except in the immediate vicinity of Nyberg Road and the freeway. 
(b)  Future Air Quality. Projections to 1990 suggest that concentrations of all pollutants will meet standards, due to increasingly effective emission controls on new vehicles. 
(3)  Noise Pollution. 
(a)  Noise created by traffic is currently the City's most serious noise problem. New industrial uses will increase industrial noise pollution potential. 
(b)  Residential. The control of traffic sounds near residential property needs to be required by ordinance. This can be accomplished through various techniques such as buffering, setbacks and vehicular noise control ordinances. 
(c)  Industrial. The City's present industrial noise control ordinance is very restrictive and should be reviewed. 
(d)  Railroad. Specific control measures for railroad noise and vibration should be the subject of a study before action is taken on this potential problem. 
(4)  High Groundwater. 
(a)  Wetlands. The high groundwater area approximates the Tualatin River flood plain and encompasses all the present wetland area. There are many areas of high groundwater with levels at or near the surface of the ground. This is particularly true during the winter months, when the river level is high and the wetlands are filled with standing water. 
(b)  Weak soils. The high groundwater is particularly troublesome in sandy soils, as a "quick" condition may result during excavation for footings and utilities. Organic or plastic clays and peat (all weak soils) may be found almost anywhere throughout the high groundwater area, particularly near present or past wetlands. Since weak soils can result in extraordinary construction requirements and methods, any new construction in the high groundwater area should include a detailed soils investigation and report by a qualified soils engineer or engineering geologist. 
(c)  Springs. Springs are prevalent along a line that approximates the southern boundary of the high groundwater area and at other areas identified in the Technical Memoranda. Any construction there requires special treatment to provide for drainage of the springs.  
TDC 3.050. - Historical and Cultural Resources. 
Few reminders of the first settling and growth of Tualatin remain. 
(1)  Identified. Most of the buildings with historical value are in the downtown area. The Tualatin Urban Renewal Plan identifies seven structures: four residences, one commercial building, a church, and the old City Hall. The Urban Renewal Plan has designated a portion of the downtown as a historic district. 
(2)  Unidentified. There are numerous opportunities to identify historical sites by markers and remember early settlers by naming new developments for them. Avery Street could be publicly recognized as an old Indian trail. Preservation of the old structures and sites acknowledges them as a cultural resource.  
TDC 3.060. - Land Use. 
(1)  In August, 1977, an updated survey of existing land use within the Study Area was conducted by City staff. This was done by a combination of driving the area, utilizing previously developed land use information, and checking against aerial photographs. This information is mapped and summarized in the Technical Memoranda and is included in Tables 3-1, 3-2 and 3-3 of this Plan. As of September 1977, approximately 46 percent of the land within the City was urbanized, while only 15 percent of the land outside of the City was urbanized. 
(2)  Also inventoried and analyzed was the amount of land in the Study Area zoned in various categories compared to land actually in use. Within the City limits, approximately 45 percent of residential land, 48 percent of commercial land, and only 19 percent of industrial land is being utilized. 
(3)  An analysis was conducted to identify the amounts and locations of buildable land remaining within the Study Area. 
(a)  East. Generally, most of the buildable land remaining within the City limits is located east of the I-5 Freeway. Since this area has not received City services, development has been only in those areas which connect to a sanitary facility. 
(b)  South. In the southern Tualatin area, much buildable land remains outside of the City limits in prime residential areas. Services to this area are close to potential new development and were the basis for the inclusion of this area within the Immediate Growth Boundary. 
(c)  West. In the west Tualatin area, most of the remaining buildable lands would easily serve industrial uses. Presently, lack of sewer and water services and flooding problems have caused this area to remain undeveloped. Until these problems are solved, industrial growth will be limited in this portion of the City. Additional residential growth can be accommodated in the west Tualatin area north of Tualatin Road and west of 105th Avenue. 
Table 3-1 
Existing Land Use Area 
September 1977 
	Approximate Acreage 1 
Land Use 	Within City 	Outside City, Within Study Area 	Total 
NON-URBANIZED LAND 	1,214.02 	2,341.31 	3,555.33 
RESIDENTIAL 			
 RA Agriculture, Residential 2 	62.22 	203.50 	265.72 
 LDR Low Density Residential 	498.80 	.00 	498.80 
 MDR Medium Density Residential 	12.29 	.00 	12.29 
 HDR High Density Residential 	19.34 	.00 	19.34 
 M Mobile Home, Trailer Parks 	14.22 	24.42 	38.64 
Total Residential 	606.87 	227.92 	834.79 
COMMERCIAL 			
 LC Local Commercial 	.00 	.00 	.00 
 CC Central Commercial 	26.14 	.00 	26.14 
INDUSTRIAL 3 			
 LI Light Industrial 	22.24 	19.38 	41.62 
 HI Heavy Industrial 	101.46 	161.74 	263.20 
 Total Industrial 			
PUBLIC FACILITIES 			
 ES Elementary School 	30.58 	.00 	30.58 
 HS High School 	.00 	.00 	.00 
 CC Civic Center 	1.21 	.00 	1.21 
 H Hospital 	48.31 	.00 	48.31 
 T Cemetery 	- 	- 	- 
 S Sewer Plant 	.55 	.00 	80.65 
 W Water Reservoir 	- 	- 	- 
 Total Public Facilities 	80.65 	.00 	80.65 
PARK AND OPEN SPACE 			
 Private Recreation Area 	.00 	9.56 	9.56 
 NP Neighborhood Park 	3.00 	.00 	3.00 
 CP Community Park 	20.58 	.00 	20.58 
 RP Regional Park 	.00 	.00 	.00 
 Total Parks 	23.58 	9.56 	33.14 
SEMI-PUBLIC/OTHER 			
 Churches 	.92 	7.59 	8.51 
 PGE Substation 	2.07 	.00 	2.07 
 Golf Course 	134.08 	.00 	2.07 
Total Semi-Public/Other 	137.07 	7.59 	144.66 
Grand Total Urbanized 	1,027.08 	431.98 	1,459.06 
TOTAL LAND AREA 	2,241.10 	2,773.29 	5,014.39 
 
1. This land use summary does not include major street right-of-ways. 
2. RA uses were computed at an average of one acre per unit, based upon existing patterns in the study area. 
3. An approximation of that portion of industrial land actually in use was made, since industries usually include substantial reserves for expansion. 
Table 3-2 
Existing Zoned Area Summary 
September 1977 
	Approximate Acreage 1 
Zoning Category 	Within City 	Outside City, Within Study Area 	Total 
 RA1 Residential, Agriculture (Clackamas County) 	195.97 	189.80 	385.77 
 SR Suburban Residential (Golf Course) 	134.08 	.00 	134.08 
 R7 Low Density Residential 	863.50 	84.19 	947.69 
 R15 Low Density Residential 	.00 	.00 	.00 
 R30 Low Density Residential 	.00 	.00 	.00 
 A-1 High Density Residential 	162.65 	.00 	162.65 
 A-2 Medium Density Residential 	13.50 	.00 	13.50 
 PUD Planned Unit Development 	106.59 	.00 	106.59 
Total Residential 	1,476.29 	273.99 	1,750.28 
 CC Central/Retail Commercial 	59.82 	.00 	59.82 
 GC General Commercial 	54.72 	4.50 	59.22 
 Total Commercial 	114.54 	4.50 	119.04 
 M-1 Heavy Manufacturing 	455.68 	.00 	455.68 
 M-2 General Manufacturing 	.00 	.00 	.00 
 M-3 Light Manufacturing 	144.97 	.00 	144.97 
 M-4 Industrial Park 	49.62 	.00 	49.62 
 Total Industrial 	650.27 	.00 	650.27 
 FP Flood Plain District 	.00 	.00 	.00 
MAE Manufacturing Extensive (Washington County) 	.00 	1,197.63 	1,197.63 
MA2 Intensive Manufacturing (Washington County) (Similar to M-1) 	.00 	127.38 	127.38 
RS1 Suburban Residential (Washington County) (Similar to SR) 	.00 	954.00 	954.00 
RU4 Urban Residential (Washington County) (Similar to R7) 	.00 	63.32 	63.32 
RU20 Urban Residential (Washington County) (Similar to A-2) 	.00 	98.58 	98.58 
 AF5 Agricultural and Forest District 	.00 	53.89 	53.89 
 Total Other Categories 	.00 	2,494.80 	2,494.80 
Grand Total 1 	2,241.10 	2,773.29 	5,014.39 
 
1.  These figures do not include most of the right-of-way area in the City for streets. 
Table 3-3 
Comparison: Existing Land Use vs. Zoned Land 
	Within City 	Outside City, Within Study Area 
Category 	Land Use 	Zoned 	% Utilized 	Land Use 	Zoned 	% Utilized 
Low Density Residential 	575.25 	1,059.47 A 	54.30% 	203.50 	1,291.31 	15.80% 
Medium Density Residential 	12.29 	120.09 B 	10.20% 	24.42 	98.58 	24.80% 
High Density Residential 	19.34 	162.65 	11.90% 	.00 	.00 	.00% 
Total 	606.87 	1,342.21 	45.20% 	227.92 	1,389.89 	16.40% 
Central Commercial 	26.14 	59.82 	43.70 	.00 	.00 	.00 
General Commercial 	29.07 	54.72 	53.10 	5.79 	4.50 	126.60 C % 
Total 	55.21 	114.54 	48.20% 	5.79 	4.50 	126.60 C % 
Light Industrial 	22.24 	194.59 	11.40% 	19.38 	1,197.63 	1.60% 
Heavy Industrial 	101.46 	455.68 	22.30% 	161.74 	127.38 	126.90 C % 
Total 	123.70 	650.27 	19.00% 	181.12 	1,325.01 	13.70% 
Public Facilities 	107.22 	D 				
Semi-Public Facilities 	137.07 	D 				
 
A.  134.08 acres zoned SR have been deleted since its use in the golf course. 
B.  This figure includes the Schnitzer PUD, not yet built. 
C.  Reflects a condition of non-conforming uses. 
D.  Public and semi-public facilities are located within various zoning categories as conditional uses.  
TDC 3.070. - Economics, Housing and Employment. 
(1)  Population. The Technical Memoranda provides information on the factors relating to the economy of Tualatin. Pat-terns of growth in the City of Tualatin are related to trends in the 4-county area com-prising the Portland SMSA. During the period of 1940 to 1970, the population in the Portland SMSA approximately doubled. The greatest population growth increase in the metropolitan area occurred in Washing-ton County. Population changes are a combined result of birth, death and migration. Rapid growth patterns in the City of Tualatin are due primarily to net migration. Tualatin's rapid growth is attributable to several major factors: 
(a)  Moratoriums and restrictive growth policies in surrounding, larger jurisdictions; 
(b)  Availability of land for development in a rural area at less than normal market rates; 
(c)  A build-up of industry and a need for housing; and 
(d)  A municipal attitude supportive of developers. 
(2)  Most of these factors are still in effect, except that raw land prices are reaching market level. Restrictive growth policies, unavailability of utilities, and lengthy and costly development processing are still in effect in unincorporated Washington County and Clackamas County. New industries, the popularity of Westside living, and the availability of large parcels of land make Tualatin attractive to developers. The market pressures that were present during 1970 to 1975, to develop in the Tualatin area, are still in force. 
(3)  Two sets of population projections to the year 2000 were provided. The larger, approximately 29,000 people, is based on unrestricted market growth. The smaller projection, approximately 22,000 people, is a projection at an annual growth rate of 7.8 percent and assumes a con-trolled approach to community growth. 
(4)  Housing. Indicators of housing growth in the City of Tualatin include annexations, housing starts, land subdivision, and lot development. 
(a)  Existing Housing. In 1975 and 1976, the Center for Population Research and Census at Portland State University conducted a census in the City of Tualatin. The census data, together with the data on annexations, subdivisions, and lot development in the City, formed a basis for projecting future housing needs. In 1976 the distribution of housing by type of unit was approximately 56.6 percent single-family, 37.0 percent multi-family and 6.4 percent mobile homes. 
(b)  Projected Need. 
(i)  Housing constructed over the next ten years is generally predictable in terms of type, form and density. Long-term housing development is less predictable and, given historical patterns, it is realistic to assume that long-term housing development will take the form of smaller units and higher densities. 
(ii)  Factors that will affect the long-term development of housing in the City are the mix between single-family and multi-family housing, the declining household size, the amount of household income, and divorce rates. If current predictions regarding the trends occurring in the region hold true, it is estimated that between 1990 and 1995 a reversal in the current pattern of the ratio between single-family and multi-family housing will begin to occur. By the year 2000, it is projected that the City could actually have approximately 1,300 more multi-family housing units than single-family housing units. 
(iii)  To convert projected housing starts into land requirements for planning purposes involves the development of assumptions about future housing types and densities. These assumptions appear in Chapter 4, Community Growth. 
(5)  Employment. 
(a)  Jobs in Portland. Employment in the City of Tualatin is closely tied to economic prospects in the Portland Metropolitan Area. There has been a rapid growth in the commercial and governmental categories in the Portland area. Employment trends there reflect the shift from blue collar to white collar jobs. In 1970, 20,000 Washington County residents were employed in finance, insurance, real estate, and miscellaneous service jobs, while in 1960 only 4,000 of these jobs were available within the County. 
(b)  Jobs in Washington County. In 1970 Washington County had 49,600 jobs. Half of the available jobs were in manufacturing, primarily because Tektronix employs 8,500 to 9,000 people in Washington County. Although Tualatin has more land in industrial zones than other communities of its size, future industrial growth can be expected to slow down as the standards for development increase. But, by the year 2000, an estimated 200 acres of future industrial land will be required in Tualatin. With current employment in industry at 1,165, it is projected that by the year 2000 there will be 7,210 industrial employees.  
TDC 3.080. - Public Facilities and Services. 
(1)  Transportation. The following is a summary of the current condition of the transportation modes serving Tualatin from the 2012 Tualatin Transportation System Plan Update (TSP) Technical Memorandum, December 2012): 
(a)  Pedestrian: Pedestrian facility needs include: fill sidewalk gaps on several arterials and collector streets; narrow or obstructed sidewalks; wide or angled crosswalks at intersections; and difficult crossing on major roadways (SW Boones Ferry Road, SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road, and roadways in the downtown core). Most of the pedestrian crashes reported in the 5-year crash study time frame occurred on SW Boones Ferry Road, generally when a vehicle failed to yield for pedestrians. Most crashes occurred when a vehicle was turning. 
(b)  Bicycle: Existing bicycle facilities in Tualatin have a few gaps and challenging connections such as: difficult left-turn maneuvers; constrained environment; difficult areas with low bike visibility; bike lanes outside of turn lanes; obstacles within the bike lanes; and gaps in the network. In addition to these needs, there are a number of high-crash locations. Most crashes result in an injury to the bicyclist, and most occur on a dry roadway surface in daylight conditions. High-crash locations include SW Boones Ferry Road and SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road, as well as the SW Nyberg Road interchange ramps at I-5. 
(c)  Multi-Use Paths: Additional bicycle and pedestrian connections over the Tualatin River are needed to connect with existing regional paths, as well as to provide alternate routes to the one existing Ki-a-Kuts bridge that is exclusively for bicycles and pedestrians (from Tualatin Community Park to Durham City Park in Durham). Additionally, many of the existing multi-use paths are fragmented and do not connect; signs and other way-finding guides are needed to inform bicyclists or pedestrians how to move among the various pathways, and from the pathways to on-street facilities. The planned multi-use path network is only half constructed; once the system is complete, the multi-use path network will be more comprehensive. 
(d)  Transit: TriMet does not provide transit service within all areas of Tualatin or on all major corridors. No transit service is provided on SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road or SW Tualatin Road, and many residents in the western portion of the City live more than a mile from the nearest transit line. Many residents who do live near a bus line are not served by transit at regular intervals during the day. Because of the limitations of service during off-peak hours, non-commuting trips may be more difficult to complete using transit in Tualatin. Community feedback indicated the following specific needs for transit: service connecting the west side of Tualatin to the downtown core; Park-and-rides in the west and south areas of Tualatin; extended service hours, including weekend service; and more direct connections to places other than downtown Portland. 
(e)  Roadways: Some of the existing roadways do not meet City, County, or State design standards. Further, a number of major roadways intersect with other roadways at a skew. This creates sight distance limitations and, thus safety concerns. 
The two most highly-traveled roadways are SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road and SW Nyberg Road with over 20,000 vehicles per day. SW Tualatin Road and SW Boones Ferry Road corridors have 10,000 vehicles daily at multiple locations. Additionally, SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road carries a large amount of heavy vehicles, around 11.5 percent, with SW Boones Ferry Road carrying 8.4 percent heavy vehicles (compared with the average road in the Portland Metro area, which typically carries 2-4 percent heavy vehicles). Appendix B of the TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012) provides a full description of existing (2011) roadway conditions, while Appendix C provides a description of future (2035) forecasted roadway conditions. 
In the existing conditions analysis only two intersections—SW Martinazzi Avenue and SW Sagert Street, as well as SW Teton Avenue and SW Tualatin Road, were found to have greater congestion than mobility standards allow. In the future (2035) the number of intersections not meeting operations standards grew to twelve. 
Key needs identified for the street system include: improved roadway connectivity; improved travel time along congested corridors; intersection improvements; and upgrading roadway geometries. Additionally, safety is a concern for the community, and safety issues were identified at the following intersections: SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road and SW Boones Ferry Road, and SW Nyberg Street and I-5 southbound off ramps. 
(f)  Freight Routes: The needs of the freight system are consistent with those identified in the Street System Plan. Projects that address needs related to truck routes, either directly or by providing alternate routes that improve traffic operations along truck routes, serve the needs of the freight system. 
(g)  Rail: Portland and Western Railroad (PNWR) owns and operates two freight rail lines within the City. One track (running north-south) accommodates both freight and the WES commuter rail, and an east-west line runs along the south side of SW Herman Road. As of November 2012 the east-west line carries one train daily in each direction, and the north south has two freight trains daily in addition to the WES trains. PNWR has no current plans to increase freight service through Tualatin. Although the east-west track runs adjacent to manufacturing areas, no rail sidings or other access to businesses are planned. 
(h)  Pipelines and Transmission Systems: A natural gas transmission pipeline and a gasoline pipeline cross through the City. There is no anticipated need to increase pipeline capacity or construct new pipelines through the City, and therefore no such improvements are proposed in the TSP. 
(i)  Air: There are no airports within the City of Tualatin, although several airports are located within 30 miles of the City: the Aurora State Airport, Hillsboro Municipal Airport, and Portland International Airport. These airports meet the commercial, freight, and business aviation needs of Tualatin residents. No plans are proposed to construct airport facilities within the City of Tualatin; existing airports are anticipated to continue serving the citizens of Tualatin adequately. 
(j)  Water: The Tualatin River is the only large waterway within the City of Tualatin. The river is used primarily for recreation and is open for canoeing and kayaking. Therefore, the TSP does not include any specific policies, programs or projects for the Tualatin River as part of the transportation network. However, several projects are proposed in other sections of the TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012) to increase access to the river for recreation purposes. 
(2)  Sewer Service Areas. To assist in determining areas most suited to urban development, a sewer service area overlay was prepared to illustrate the feasibility of providing sewer service throughout the Tualatin Planning Area. The Study Area was divided into four categories of sewer service availability in order of increasing complexity and expense of service. In addition, properties that can be served by existing pumping stations are considered to have gravity-flow service available. 
(3)  Water Service Areas. As in the case of sewer service, the Tualatin Study Area was divided into four categories of water service availability. The four categories agreed closely with the four categories of sewer service. In addition to showing the degree of water service complexity and expense, the water service overlay depicts main trans-mission lines, reservoirs, water supply sources, and the approximate dividing line between the City's upper and lower water service levels. 
(4)  Storm Drainage. The Tualatin Drain-age Plan defines and describes areas of inadequate drainage throughout the Tualatin Study Area. The Plan, which was originally prepared in 1972, will need to be updated as part of the City's planning revision work, but the overall drainage patterns have not changed. The City's core area and the area along Boones Ferry Road, south of the core area, are the most critical from the standpoint of drainage. The former will be dealt with in conjunction with Urban Renewal Area improvements. 
(5)  Electrical Service. The Study Area is well served with major Portland General Electric Co. (PGE) transmission lines. Line extensions to newly developing areas do not appear to be a problem. 
(6)  Gas Service. The Tualatin area is well served by several large-capacity natural gas lines. The Northwest Natural Gas Co. has main trunk lines in the Bonneville Power Administration (BPA) right-of-way west of the Study Area. The City presently has a high percentage of natural gas use, which should be reviewed in light of probable future supply and cost. 
(7)  Telephone Service. The Tigard-Tualatin area telephone system is presently overloading, causing delays in calling and some dissatisfaction among residents and businesses. The area is served by the General Telephone Co. A new central office is in operation in the Wilsonville area, reducing the overloading of the 638-exchanges. Because of recent and expected future growth in Tualatin, General Telephone Co. is proposing the development of a new central office in Tualatin, or the expansion of their Stafford office to handle the load. 
(8)  Schools. At this time, the existing Tualatin Elementary School is overcrowded. A new school in south Tualatin is planned to be completed for fall of 1979. This, according to the School District, will relieve the overcrowding. There are no sites now for a third school, although the existing Comprehensive Plan indicates several potential locations. There are three general areas developing for residential use in the City. The southern part of the City will be served by the new school opening in 1979, as well as the existing school, which also serves the central area of the City. The two other areas are east of the freeway and west of the Tualatin Country Club. These should be the areas for future sites, depending upon projected population from future residential development. High school students in Tualatin are currently served by Tigard High School. According to the School District, a major high school in Tualatin is still many years away, but preliminary thinking for a site has begun. One small portion of the Study Area in the far southwest corner of the City is served by the Sherwood School District. A revision of boundaries may be necessary in this portion of the Study Area to conform the Tigard School District boundaries to those of the City. 
(9)  Parks. 
(a)  Developed. The only developed City park within the corporate City limits is the 23-acre Tualatin Community Park and a new 6.48-acre nature park. The Community Park provides for a broad range of activities for all ages and includes the Tualatin Community Center. Both parks are in the process of being improved. 
(b)  Undeveloped. There are eight existing City park sites which are currently being developed. 
(c)  Future. Conceived as recreational possibilities for neighborhood and broader community use, 14 sites were inventoried. These sites are scattered throughout the urbanized areas of the City. Each site is unique in its own fashion, i.e., setting, topography, views, vegetation, access, or natural wildlife resources. 
(10)  Conservation Management Areas. These areas comprise some of the City's richest natural and scenic assets and should be maintained in their present rural character. Briefly, these areas are: 
(a)  The wetland marsh, bog and ponds. 
(b)  All the flood plain area generally below the 100-year flood line. 
(c)  All creek and drainageways. 
(d)  The Tualatin riverbank areas. 
(11)  Bikepaths and Footpaths. 
(a)  An existing bike and footpath system has been implemented in some sections of the City. 
(b)  Future extensions of the existing bike and footpath systems were proposed to provide the City with a complete network of trails. This system was mapped in over-lay fashion as part of the Technical Memoranda. 
(12)  School Recreational Facilities. 
(a)  These are areas suitable for play areas for small children and some field activities for older children and adults. These sites would have to be developed via a joint use agreement between the City and the Tigard School District. 
(b)  Existing. Tualatin Elementary School. 
(c)  Future. New elementary school in south Tualatin and any additional elementary school sites. 
(13)  Other Recreational Facilities. 
(a)  Private. The Tualatin Country Club golf course provides a major private recreational facility in the City. 
(b)  Public. The City of Tigard maintains Cook Park across the Tualatin River, which is available to residents of Tualatin but has no direct access from Tualatin. The Tigard School District maintains a swim center at Tigard High School that is available for use by Tualatin residents. 
(14)  Views. 
(a)  Unlike the more distinctly contoured geographic sections of other parts of the urban area, Tualatin does not have spectacular views. Views of scenic areas in Tualatin are very subtle. 
(b)  Features. The most important views are of the drainages, bogs and wetlands; the Tualatin River; and outstanding groups of trees. 
(c)  Location. The most important view areas are the marsh and wetlands running in an east-westerly direction. In the southern portion of the City, there are occasional views through the vegetation to Mt. Hood, Mt. Scott, Kerr Mountain, Bull Mountain and Cooper Mountain. Particularly important views of Mt. Hood occur when looking easterly along Nyberg, Sagert and Avery Streets. 
(Ord. 1103-02, 03-25-02; Ord. 1354-13 §3, 02-25-13)  
CHAPTER 4 - COMMUNITY GROWTH 
 
TDC 4.010. - Background. 
(1)  It is the purpose of this chapter to portray the reasons for Tualatin's rapid economic growth; to generally define the need and proportion of specific types of land use; to define public service and natural environmental constraints to development; to describe specific growth assumptions and objectives; and to define a specific growth boundary for the City. Overall, this chapter provides a guide to how much land the City needs in what proportion, where, why and how fast. 
(2)  The process used to answer these questions revolves around the data developed in the Technical Memoranda. The available market data was analyzed to determine how much land for each use would be required by the year 2000 and this demand balanced against specific assumptions of land use density and proportion. At the same time, this demand was compared to natural development constraints such as agricultural soil suitability, flood plains and weak foundation soils, and to public service constraints such as the ease of serving particular parcels of land with water, sewer and road services. Also reviewed was the distribution and relationship of specific land uses to the growth assumptions and objectives described in this chapter and TDC Chapters 5, 6, 7 and 8. The analysis and balancing of all these factors, after review and revision by the citizen advisory committees, resulted in the Plan Map contained in TDC Chapter 9.  
TDC 4.020. - The Demand for Land. 
(1)  Population movement to the suburbs was very strong during the 1960's and early 1970's, especially in the Tualatin area. During the period between 1960 to 1975, the average annual growth rate here was 50.2 percent, compared to 7.6 percent in the surrounding areas. Tualatin's rapid growth is attributable to several major factors: 
(a)  Moratoriums and restrictive growth policies in surrounding, larger jurisdictions; 
(b)  Availability of land for development in a rural area at less than normal market rates; 
(c)  A build-up of industry and a need for housing; and 
(d)  A municipal attitude supporting development. Though land prices are now reaching market level, the other factors are still very much in effect. In addition, new industries, the popularity of Westside living, availability of large parcels of land, and other factors further reinforce the desirability of Tualatin for development. This resulting great demand for new residential, commercial and industrial land is causing a rapid transition from rural to urban land uses in Tualatin today. 
(2)  Specific information regarding projected community growth was developed in the Technical Memoranda. The Memoranda made two population projections, one based on market growth and another based on an adopted growth policy. The projections show the City's expected population growth, under the two assumptions, to the year 2000 and are shown on Table 4-1 and Figure 4-1. The first assumption uses a growth policy of 7.8 percent population growth annually, while the second assumption uses the economic land market to determine the expected growth within the Tualatin area. 
(3)  It should be noted that the City's growth will exceed the market growth predicted for 1980 based on the City's current rate of residential building permits issued. The City's December 1978 population is estimated to be 6,000 people. It should also be noted that interest groups such as the Oregon Homebuilders Association and the 1000 Friends of Oregon may oppose any type of growth restrictions on the basis of the effect of those restrictions on housing costs. The Land Conservation and Development Commission has also expressed extreme interest in any move by the City toward adoption of growth controls. 
(4)  Tualatin, Washington County, and regional population growth relates directly to the demand for residential, commercial and industrial land within the City's planning area. Residential land demand, in average terms, is dependent on assumed housing densities as well as population growth. Housing densities are discussed in TDC Chapter 5. Commercial and industrial land needs are less dependent on density assumptions and were estimated in the Technical Memoranda as follows: 
(a)  Demand for commercial land: 
Growth policy—17.2 acres in year 2000 
Market growth—30.4 acres in year 2000 
(b)  Demand for industrial land: 
9 to 11 acres per year 
210 to 250 total acres in year 2000 
(c)  If the demand for the three major land use types is compared to the existing land available (see Table 3-3), it becomes apparent that there is sufficient land for commercial and industrial uses, but insufficient land for residential uses within the City limits. 
Table 4-1 
Projected Growth Assumptions 
		GROWTH POLICY 		MARKET TREND 
Year 	Number 	Average Annual 
Percent Growth 	Average Annual 
Population Growth 	Number 	Average Annual 
Percent Growth 	Average Annual 
Population Growth 
1970 	750 	- 	- 	750 	- 	- 
1975 	3,241 	55.4% 	415 	3,241 	55.4% 	415 
1980 	4,760 	7.8% 	253 	6,390 	16.2% 	525 
1985 	7,000 	7.8% 	373 	10,990 	12.0% 	767 
1990 	10,280 	7.8% 	547 	16,270 	8.0% 	880 
1995 	15,100 	7.8% 	803 	22,615 	6.5% 	1,058 
2000 	22,180 	7.8% 	1,180 	28,721 	4.5% 	1,018 
  
TDC 4.030. - Buildable Lands—Development Constraints. 
(1)  This section describes those areas of the planning area vacant and available for new development that are easily served by public services and are not adversely affected by natural hazards. This information is depicted on the Buildable Lands—Development Constraints Map, which summarizes the following overlays that were developed for the Phase I—Technical Memoranda Buildable Land Inventory. 
(a)  Slopes Analysis; 
(b)  Water Areas and Wetlands; 
(c)  Existing Land Use; 
(d)  Water Service Areas; 
(e)  Sewer Service Areas; 
Table 4-2 of this Plan describes the actual acreage figures derived from the Buildable Land Inventory. 
(2)  One development constraint not easily portrayed graphically is traffic congestion. The Tualatin area will likely be dependent upon the automobile as its major form of transportation in the year 2000. A traffic analysis of various growth alternatives was conducted as a part of the planning process, and the analysis indicated that the City could not accommodate all the traffic generated by full development of the planning area, particularly in the Nyberg Street Corridor connecting to the interstate freeways. 
Table 4-2 
Buildable Land Inventory 
	Approximate Acreage 
Item 	Within City 	Outside City Within Study Area 	Total 
A. Present Urbanized Land 	1,027.08 	431.98 	1,459.06 
B. Non-Urbanized Land 	1,214.02 	2,3471.31 	3,555.33 
C. Total Acreage 	2,241.10 	2,773.29 	5,014.39 
D. Non-buildable Land 			
 1. Areas with slopes greater than 20% 	47.54 	123.99 	171.53 
 2. Areas in 100-year flood plain 	221.20 	146.28 	367.48 
 3. Areas in wetlands (not included above) 	80.29 	56.51 	136.80 
 4. Areas not served without sewer line extensions in excess of 10,000 feet (not included in above) 	.00 	721.77 	721.77 
 5. Areas not served without water main extension of 5,2000 feet (not included in above) 	.00 	417.04 	417.04 
 6. Soils—does not apply 	- 	- 	- 
 7. Geology—does not apply 	- 	- 	- 
 8. Elevation—does not apply 	- 	- 	- 
 9. Public Lands—included in 40% non-residential land 	- 	- 	- 
 10. Private Institutional Lands—included in 40% non-residential land 	- 	- 	- 
 11. Other Private Lands—included in 40% non-residential land 	- 	- 	- 
 12. Passed-Over Land—does not apply 	- 	- 	- 
 13. Zoning—does not apply 	- 	- 	- 
Total 	349.03 	1,465.59 	1,814.62 
E. Buildable Land (B minus D) 	864.99 	875.72 	1,740.71 
F. Assumed Land for Non-Residential Purposes @ 40% (.40 times E) 	345.99 	350.29 	696.28 
G. Buildable Land for Residential Purposes (E minus F) 	519.00 	525.43 	1,044.43 
  
TDC 4.040. - General Growth Assumptions. 
To begin the composition of a planning map, certain assumptions must be made, based on available data. The following are the general growth assumptions used to develop this Plan, based on the data generated in the Phase I—Technical Memoranda: 
(1)  The approximate proportion of residential land to commercial and industrial land should be 60 percent residential and 40 percent commercial and industrial. 
(2)  A portion of buildable land within the City will be unavailable for development (i.e., not available for sale). In 1985, 25 percent of the land will not be available for development because of owners' holdings, but this is estimated to decrease to ten percent by the year 2000. 
(3)  A portion of the planning area will not be available for development because of natural hazards such as flooding and the need to preserve natural areas such as wetlands, river and streambanks. 
(4)  A portion of the planning area will not be available for development because of the need to provide corridors for roads and utilities. 
(5)  Traffic congestion and the ease of providing water and sewer services will constrain the amount and direction of growth within the planning area. 
(6)  There is a need for land in the planning area to provide for a population in the year 2000 of between 22,000 and 29,000 people, depending on the adoption of a controlled growth program and future density assumptions made in subsequent Plan revisions. Adoption of a controlled growth program will be difficult to achieve because of interest groups and state agency opposition. 
(7)  There will be a solution to Tualatin's flood problem that will create additional buildable land at an indefinite time before the year 2000. 
(8)  Existing land use will necessarily be a strong locational influence on the land use map to avoid future land use conflicts. 
(9)  There is no need to expand the City's area to provide additional land for new commercial and industrial development. 
(10)  The amount and location of additional residential development will be based on the objectives and density assumptions described by TDC Chapter 5.  
TDC 4.050. - General Growth Objectives. 
The following are general objectives used as a guide to formulate the Plan. The objectives are positive statements to de-scribe the Plan's intent to: 
(1)  Provide a plan that will accommodate a population range of 22,000 to 29,000 people. 
(2)  Cooperate with the Metropolitan Service District to reach regional consensus on population growth projections within the Tualatin area. 
(3)  Conform to Metropolitan Service District (Metro) procedures for initiating amendments to the Metro Urban Growth Boundary. 
(4)  Provide a plan that will create an environment for the orderly and efficient transition from rural to urban land uses. 
(5)  Convert agricultural land only if needed for urban uses. 
(6)  Arrange the various land uses so as to minimize land use conflicts and maximize the use of public facilities as growth occurs. 
(7)  Prepare a balanced plan meeting, as closely as possible, the specific objectives and assumptions of each individual plan element. 
(8)  Define the urban growth boundary. 
(9)  Prepare a plan providing a variety of living and working environments. 
(10)  Encourage the highest quality physical design for future development. 
(11)  Coordinate development plans with regional, state, and federal agencies to assure consistency with statutes, rules, and standards concerning air, noise, water quality, and solid waste. Cooperate with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to minimize adverse impacts to the Tualatin River National Wildlife Refuge from development in adjacent areas of Tualatin. 
(12)  Adopt measures protecting life and property from natural hazards such as flooding, high groundwater, weak foundation soils and steep slopes. 
(13)  Develop regulations to control sedimentation of creeks and streams caused by erosion during development of property. 
(14)  Develop a separate growth program that controls the rate of community growth and is acceptable to the Land Conservation and Development Commission. 
(15)  Arrange the various land uses in a manner that is energy efficient. 
(16)  Encourage energy conservation by arranging land uses in a manner compatible with public transportation objectives. 
(17)  Maintain for as long a period as possible a physical separation of non-urban land around the City so as to maintain its physical and emotional identity within urban areas of the region. 
(18)  Fully develop the industrial area located in Washington County west of the City only when adequate transportation facilities are available and the area has been annexed to the City and served with water and sewer services. 
(19)  Cooperate with Washington County to study the methods available for providing transportation, water and sewer service to the industrial area west of the City, designating this area as a special study area. 
(20)  Initiate annexation of property within the Urban Growth Boundary planned for residential development only when petitioned to do so by owners of the affected property, including cases involving unincorporated "islands" of property surrounded by land annexed previously. 
(21)  Territories to be annexed shall be in the Metro Urban Growth Boundary. 
(22)  Address Metro's Urban Growth Management Functional Plan, Title 13, Nature in Neighborhoods, through the conservation, protection and restoration of fish and wildlife habitat, including Metro's Regionally Significant Fish and Wildlife Habitat, through the Tualatin Basin Natural Resource Coordinating Committee and the Tualatin Basin Program. 
(a)  Support and implement the elements of the Tualatin Basin Program to: 
(i)  Develop and adopt local policies and regulations to implement the provisions of the Tualatin Basin Program. 
(ii)  Adopt low impact development (LID) provisions to reduce environmental impacts of new development and remove barriers to their utilization. 
(iii)  Coordinate with Clean Water Services (CWS) to implement their Healthy Streams Action Plan and other programs such as their Stormwater Management Plan and Design and Construction Standards. 
(iv)  Coordinate with CWS, Metro and others to develop and support the funding, voluntary and educational components of the Tualatin Basin Program. 
(v)  Coordinate with CWS, Metro and others to develop and support the monitoring and adaptive management components of the Tualatin Basin Program. 
(b)  Continue active participation in the Tualatin Basin Natural Resources Coordinating Committee and the Steering Committee to support and implement the Tualatin Basin Program. 
(c)  Coordinate with CWS and Metro to update Metro's Regionally Significant Fish and Wildlife Habitat Inventory Map. Changes to the Inventory Map will be on-going as on-site inventories are conducted as part of private and public construction projects. 
(d)  Support and implement provisions allowing public access to planned public facilities. 
(Ord. 610-83, 11-15-83; Ord. 937-95, §2, 1-9-95; Ord. 1146-03, 7-28-03; Ord. 1224-06, 11-13-06)  
TDC 4.060. - Urban Growth Boundary. 
(1)  A long-range growth boundary is necessary to predict the amount and location of urban land needed in the future. The establishment of this boundary provides a framework for the orderly conversion of rural land to urban uses. The growth boundary establishes the City's intent to annex and provide urban services to specific properties over a specific period of time. Thus, the growth boundary establishes the basis of a City annexation policy and provides landowners with some assurance as to the City's intent for the future uses of their land. 
(2)  This boundary was first established through a cooperative intergovernmental process established by the Columbia Region Association of Governments in 1976. The boundary is a line establishing the limits of urban and agricultural use within the metropolitan Portland area. 
(3)  The Urban Growth Boundary is defined by applying the following criteria to the data developed by the Phase I—Technical Memoranda. 
(a)  Land needed to accommodate urban growth to the year 2000 using the assumption of this Plan: 
(i)  Urban land needs criteria. 
(b)  Agricultural land as defined by Statewide Goal 3 must conform to one of the following categories: 
(i)  Land developed for nonagricultural purposes. 
(ii)  Land irrevocably committed to nonfarm use. 
(iii)  Land justified under exception procedures of Statewide Goal 2. 
(c)  Urban Growth Boundary feature determinants are as follows and shall be used whenever possible: 
(i)  Creeks with narrow flood plains, due to their barrier effect and definability. 
(ii)  The edge of a wide flood plain, due to its limiting effect on urban land use. This criterion may be unsuitable if the flood plain is in agricultural use. 
(iii)  Railroad tracks, due to their barrier effect, especially where road or highway crossings are involved. 
(iv)  Power lines or easements due to their definability. 
(v)  Roads due to their definability and barrier effect, but unsuitable with respect to service provision. 
(vi)  Rear property lines, due to their definability and service provision.  
TDC 4.065. - Requirements. 
(1)  Metro Code Urban Growth Management Functional Plan (MUGMFP) TDC 3.07.1120 requires the City to adopt comprehensive plan provisions and land use regulations for areas added to the Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) that are identified as the responsibility of the City. The adopted plan provisions and regulations are to address the requirements of Section 3.07.1120(c). 
(2)  In December, 2002 (Metro Ordinances No. 02-969B & 02-990A (and June, 2004 (Metro No. 04-1040B) Metro expanded the UBG to include 382 acres of land in the southwestern corner of Tualatin. Of this area, 302 acres were designated as Regionally Significant Industrial Area (RSIA) and the remaining acreage was designated as Industrial. Specific conditions were placed by Metro relating to compliance with MUGMFP Titles 3, 4, & 11, lot sizes, and commercial restrictions. The Southwest Tualatin Concept Plan (SWCP) area was accepted by the City in October, 2010, en-compassed the 382 acres added to the UGB in 2002 and 2004, a 50 acre property within the Tualatin Planning Area, 117 acres identified in Metro's 2010 Urban Re-serve process as the "Knife River Area" and 66 acres south of Tonquin Road east of the railroad brought into the UGB in 2004. 
(3)  In March 2011, Plan Amendments implementing the SWCP for the 431 acre Southwest and Regionally Significant Industrial Area portion of the SWCP Area were approved by the City Council. The amendments were not applied to the 117.5 acre "Urban Reserve" designated by Metro and the 65.5 acre "Basalt Creek" area to be considered in the Basalt Creek Concept Plan. 
(4)  In April 2019, Plan Amendments implementing the Basalt Creek Concept Plan were adopted by the City Council. The Concept plan included a 330-acre buildable area south of Tualatin (the entire Concept Plan is 330 buildable acres, 194.23 buildable acres of which are within the Tualatin UGB). 
(Ord. No. 1418-19, § 1, 4-22-19)  
TDC 4.070. - Urban Reserve Plans. 
(1)  The Metropolitan Service District (Metro) Code requires the Urban Reserve Plans for Urban Reserve Areas to be adopted as a component of the comprehensive plan of the city to which the Urban Reserve Area will be annexed. 
(2)  The Urban Reserve Plan for Urban Reserve Area 43 (SE corner of Grahams Ferry Road and Helenius Road; 23000 Block of Grahams Ferry Road; 2S1 35CB, Tax Lot 100) prepared by Matrix Development and dated October 27, 1998, is incorporated as a separate document into the Tualatin Development Code. Although the Urban Reserve Plan was developed in 1998 to meet the Metro Code requirements for Urban Reserve Plans and it was known the property was considered a site for residential development, the specific type of development was not known. Development of the property need not be in conformance with the Urban Reserve Plan. The property can be used for any of the permitted outright or conditional uses allowed in the planning district applied to it. Once annexed to the City of Tualatin, development of the property shall be in conformance with the applicable City standards, and other applicable standards, for the type of development proposed. 
(Ord. 1051-00 §1, 3-13-00)  
CHAPTER 5 - RESIDENTIAL PLANNING GROWTH 
 
TDC 5.010. - Background. 
(1)  The most controversial issue discussed during the preparation of the Plan was housing, particularly the issues of housing type and density. Over the last two years, the community has seen extremely rapid apartment growth in the City that has created considerable negative feelings toward additional apartment development. These feelings are related to the community's concern about the esthetic quality of existing apartment development; concern about a large transient population within the City; concern about the effect of apartments on traffic congestion; and a concern about the effect apartment development has on single-family neighborhoods and the general livability of the City. 
(2)  Community feelings have coalesced into an increasing demand for fewer multi-family housing units and even demand for a moratorium on additional apartment development. At the same time community concern has increased over the amount and type of apartment construction, interest groups such as the 1000 Friends of Oregon have shown concern for any action that would narrow the housing opportunities available to the region's residents. Statewide Planning Goal 10, the Housing Goal, states that "plans shall encourage the availability of adequate numbers of housing units at price ranges and rent levels which are commensurate with the financial capabilities of Oregon households and allow for flexibility of housing location, type and density." 
(3)  (a) To meet the community's concern for the increasing amount of multi-family housing and to meet the State Housing Goal, the Plan proposes five residential land use categories, one single-family and four multi-family. For background, the following figures show single-family to multi-family proportions in the region as well as the City of Tualatin: 
	Single-Family % of Dwelling Units 	Multi-Family % of Dwelling Units 
Portland Metro Region* 		
Existing 	72 	28 
Year 2000 	65 	35 
City of Tualatin 		
Existing—Built (City Limits) 	55 	45 
Existing—Potential (City Limits) 	40 	60 
Year 2000 (City Limits and 
Urban Growth Boundary) 	68 	32 
 
*Source: Metropolitan Service District 
(b)  It is clearly shown in the above numbers that the City is more than accommodating the region's share of multi-family housing. The long-term objective of the Plan is to produce housing units that meet the regional projections as well as the community's desire for multi-family units that minimize any adverse impacts within the City's single-family neighborhoods. This has been accomplished by reviewing various housing density alternatives and other technical data that are defined in the Phase I—Technical Memoranda. This analysis indicated that the amount of land available for multi-family housing is nearing depletion, and the present amount of land planned and zoned for this type of housing is minimal compared to demand. As evidenced by the regional figures, there will be an increasing need for multi-family residential units because of the national trend toward smaller families, more single-parent families, and the sharply rising costs of new single-family residential construction. 
(4)  To accommodate this need for additional multi-family land, the Plan proposes four medium-to-high density housing categories, as follows: 
	Plan Density 
RML—Residential Medium-Low Density 	6-10 dwelling units per acre 
RMH—Residential Medium-High Density 	11-15 dwelling units per acre 
RH—Residential High Density 	16-25 dwelling units per acre 
RH/HR—Residential High Density/High Rise 	26-30 dwelling units per acre 
 
(5)  The multi-family areas described on the Plan Map referred to in TDC Chapter 9 indicate that, wherever possible, multi-family areas were located close to the City's commercial core area where supporting commercial and transportation services are readily available. The multi-family areas are also located close to the City's arterial and collector street system and have good access to the City's park and open space system. 
(6)  For an overall perspective on housing density, please refer to Tables 5-1, 5-2, 5-3, 5-4, 5-5, 5-6 and 5-7, which summarize the acreage requirements, dwelling unit proportions, and population, as shown on the Plan Map, for each residential plan designation. The figures in these tables were derived from the variables of housing density, vacancy rates, buildable land, land not available for sale, and the need for road and utility corridors. 
(7)  As evidenced by these figures, the City in the year 2000 will be predominantly a city of low-density residential development. Low-density residential development will comprise 68 percent of the City's dwelling units and 79 percent of its population. Multi-family development in the year 2000 will comprise 32 percent of the City's dwelling units and 21 percent of its population. 
(Ord. 868-92, § 1, 5-11-92) 
Table 5-1 
Buildable Residential Land Within City Limits (1977) 
Use 	Gross Buildable Acres 	Percent 	Market Factor -.25 (25%) 	Net Available Acres (rounded) 
RL 	369.9 		70% 		277.4 	277 
RML 	58.3 		11.0% 		43.7 	44 
RMH 	49.0 		9.3% 		36.7 	37 
		=158.5 		=30.0 		
RH 	13.2 		2.5 		9.9 	10 
RH/HR 	38.0 		7.2 		28.5 	29 
Totals 	528.4 		100.0% 			397 
 
Table 5-2 
Residential Unit and Population Projections within City Limits* 
Use 	Gross Buildable Acres 	Number of Units 	Percent 	Vacancy
Deduction	Population
Projections	Percent 
RL 	277 		1,385 @ 5 du/ac 	39.6% 	1,343 @ .970 (3%) 	4,029 @ 3.0-unit 	54.8% 	
RML 	44 		440 @ ten du/ac 	12.6% 	418 @ .950 (5%) 	1,003 @ 2.4-unit 	13.6% 	
RMH 	37 		555 @ 15 du/ac 	15.8% 	522 @ .940 (6%) 	992 @ 1.9-unit 	13.5% 	
		=120 						=45.2% 
RH 	10 		250 @ 25 du/ac 	7.1% 	239 @ .955 (4.5%) 	335 @ 1.4-unit 	4.8% 	
RH/HR 	29 		870 @ 30 du/ac 	24.9% 	831 @ .955 (4.5%) 	997 @ 1.2-unit 	13.5% 	
Totals 		=528.4 	3,500 	100.0% 				=100.0% 
 
*Revised November 1980. 
Table 5-3 
Total Existing Residential Units and Population within City Limits 
Use 	Net Acres 	Number of Units 	Percent 	Vacancy Deduction 	Population
Estimate 	Percent 
Existing, as of August 1977: 
RA 	62.22 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
LDR 	498.80 	1,104 	54.9% 	973 @ 4% 	3,062 	64.9% 
MDR 	12.29 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
HDR 	19.34 	834 	45.1% 	801 @ 4% 	1,658 	35.1% 
M 	14.22 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Totals 	606.87 	1,848 	100.0% 	1,774 	4,720 	100.0% 
Approved, not under construction in 1977 to December 1978: 
SF 	* 	234 	34.4% 	191 @ 6% 	601 	55.3% 
MF 	* 	447 	65.6% 	242 @ 20% 	485 	44.7% 
Totals 		681 	100.0% 	- 	1,086 	100.0% 
 
*Included in acreage above. 
Table 5-4 
Combined Summary, Tables 5-2 and 5-3, within City Limits 
Use 	Net Acres 	Number of Units 	Percent 	Vacancy Deduction 	Population
Estimate 	Percent 
SF 	1,995 	8,418 	67.8% 	8,119 	24,528 	78.3% 
MF 	212 	4,001 	32.2% 	3,628 	6,777 	21.7% 
Totals 	2,207 	12,419 	100.0% 	11,747 	31,305 	100.0% 
 
Table 5-5 
Buildable Residential Land within City and Urban Growth Boundary to the Year 2000 
Use 	Gross Buildable Acres 	Percent 	Market Factor -.2 (20%) 	Net Available Acres (rounded) 
RL 	1,792.5 		89.0% 		1,434.0 	1,434 
RML 	120.5 		6.0% 		96.4 	96 
RMH 	49.0 		2.4% 		39.2 	36 
		=220.7 		=11.0% 		
RH 	13.2 		.7% 		10.6 	11 
RH/HR 	38.0 		1.9% 		30.4 	30 
Totals 		=2,013.2 		=100.0% 		1,600 
 
Table 5-6 
Residential Unit and Population Projections within City Limits and Urban Growth Boundary to the Year 2000 
Use 	Gross Buildable Acres 	Number of Units 	Percent 	Vacancy
Deduction 	Population
Projections 	Percent 
RL 	1,434 		7,170 @ 5 du/ac 	72.5% 		6,955 @ .970 (3%) 	20,865 @ 3.0-unit 	81.8% 
RML 	96 		960 @ ten du/ac 	9.7% 		912 @ .950 (5%) 	2,189 @ 2.4-unit 	8.6% 
RMH 	36 		585 @ 15 du/ac 	5.9% 		550 @ .940 (6%) 	1,045 @ 1.9-unit 	4.1% 
		=176 			=27.5% 			
RH 	11 		275 @ 25 du/ac 	2.8% 		263 @ .955 (4.5%) 	368 @ 1.4-unit 	1.4% 
RH/HR 	30 		900 @ 30 du/ac 	9.1% 		860 @ .955 (4.5%) 	1,032 @ 1.2-unit 	4.1% 
Total $ 	1,6000 		9,890 		100.0% 		25,499 	100.0% 
 
Table 5-7 
Combined Summary, Tables 5-3 and 5-6, within City Limits and Urban Growth Boundary 
Use 	Net Acres 	Number of Units 	Percent 	Vacancy Deduction 	Population Estimate 	Percent 
SF 	1,995 	8,418 	67.8% 	8,119 	24,528 	78.3% 
MF 	212 	4,001 	32.2% 	3,628 	6,777 	21.7% 
Totals 	2,207 	12,419 	100.0% 	11,747 	31,305 	100.0% 
  
TDC 5.020. - Assumptions. 
The following are general objectives used to guide the development of the residential housing element of the Plan. The Plan's intent is to: 
(1)  Provide for the housing needs of existing and future City residents. 
(2)  Provide housing opportunities for residents with varied income levels and tastes that are esthetically and functionally compatible with the existing community housing stock. 
(3)  Cooperate with the Housing Authority of Washington County and the Housing Division of Clackamas County to identify sites, projects and developers to provide the City's fair share of assisted housing units for low and moderate income households, and participate in the region's Housing Opportunity Plan. 
(4)  Locate higher density development where it is convenient to the City's commercial core, near schools and transit corridors, adjacent to arterial and collector streets and, as much as possible, in areas with existing multi-family housing and provide residential opportunities in selected commercial areas through the Mixed Use Commercial District. 
(5)  Provide areas that are suitable for manufactured dwelling parks and areas that are suitable for subdivisions that will accommodate manufactured homes. 
(6)  Provide areas that will accommodate small lot subdivisions. 
(7)  Develop specific and enforceable design standards for multi-family developments, townhouses, manufactured homes, manufactured dwelling parks and small lot subdivisions. 
(8)  Encourage owner occupancy of multi-family developments and other housing units within the City. 
(9)  Encourage subdividers and other residential developers to consider the need for solar access on residential construction sites. 
(10)  Provide for the raising of agricultural animals and agricultural structures in areas that are presently used for this purpose and that are not buildable due to their location in the 100-year flood plain. 
(11)  Require that all residential development adjacent to Expressways be buffered from the noise of such Expressways through the use of soundproofing devices such as walls, berms or distance. Density transfer to accommodate these techniques is acceptable. 
(12)  Encourage the development of attached housing in accordance with the RML Planning District in the area of the Norwood Expressway/Boones Ferry Road intersection. 
(13)  Provide truck routes for industrial traffic that provide for efficient movement of goods while protecting the quality of residential areas. 
(14)  Protect residential, commercial, and sensitive industrial uses from the adverse environmental impacts of adjacent industrial use. 
(15)  Protect adjacent land uses from noise impacts by adopting industrial noise standards. 
(16)  Protect the Tonquin Scablands from adverse impacts of adjacent development. This includes the main Scabland area in the vicinity of the Burlington Northern Railroad tracks which is preserved through the use of the Wetlands Protection District and the Greenway and Riverbank Protection District. This also includes other elements of the Scabland formations found farther to the east. These latter areas will be preserved on a case-by-case basis as development occurs through preservation in their natural state, allowing residential density transfer through the small lot subdivision, common wall housing, and condominium conditional use processes. 
(17)  Protect wooded areas identified on the Natural Features Map found in the Technical Memorandum by requiring their preservation in a natural state, by integrating the major trees into the design of the parking lots, buildings, or landscaping areas of multi-family complexes and non-residential uses, or in low density areas through the small lot, common wall, or condominium conditional use. If it is necessary to remove a portion or all of the trees, the replacement landscape features shall be subject to approval through the Architectural Review process, except for conventional single family subdivisions. 
(18)  Permit home occupations in a residence that do not detract from the residential character of an area. 
(Ord. 592-83, § 24, 6-13-83; Ord. 635-84, § 3, 6-11-84; Ord. 818-91, § 4 & 5, 1-14-91; Ord. 988-97, § 2, 12-8-97; Ord 1026-99, §3, 8-9-99; Ord 1062-00, §1, 12-11-00; Ord. 1129-03, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 1, 6-22-20)  
TDC 5.030. - General Objectives. 
The following are general objectives used to guide the development of the residential housing element of the Plan. The Plan's intent is to: 
(1)  Provide for the housing needs of existing and future City residents. 
(2)  Provide housing opportunities for residents with varied income levels and tastes that are esthetically and functionally compatible with the existing community housing stock. 
(3)  Cooperate with the Housing Authority of Washington County and the Housing Division of Clackamas County to identify sites, projects and developers to provide the City's fair share of assisted housing units for low and moderate income households, and participate in the region's Housing Opportunity Plan. 
(4)  Locate higher density development where it is convenient to the City's commercial core, near schools and transit corridors, adjacent to arterial and collector streets and, as much as possible, in areas with existing multi-family housing and provide residential opportunities in selected commercial areas through the Mixed Use Commercial District. 
(5)  Provide areas that are suitable for manufactured dwelling parks and areas that are suitable for subdivisions that will accommodate manufactured homes. 
(6)  Provide areas that will accommodate small lot subdivisions. 
(7)  Develop specific and enforceable design standards for multi-family developments, townhouses, manufactured homes, manufactured dwelling parks and small lot subdivisions. 
(8)  Encourage owner occupancy of multi-family developments and other housing units within the City. 
(9)  Encourage subdividers and other residential developers to consider the need for solar access on residential construction sites. 
(10)  Provide for the raising of agricultural animals and agricultural structures in areas that are presently used for this purpose and that are not buildable due to their location in the 100-year flood plain. 
(11)  Require that all residential development adjacent to Expressways be buffered from the noise of such Expressways through the use of soundproofing devices such as walls, berms or distance. Density transfer to accommodate these techniques is acceptable. 
(12)  Encourage the development of attached housing in accordance with the RML Planning District in the area of the Norwood Expressway/Boones Ferry Road intersection. 
(13)  Provide truck routes for industrial traffic that provide for efficient movement of goods while protecting the quality of residential areas. 
(14)  Protect residential, commercial, and sensitive industrial uses from the adverse environmental impacts of adjacent industrial use. 
(15)  Protect adjacent land uses from noise impacts by adopting industrial noise standards. 
(16)  Protect the Tonquin Scablands from adverse impacts of adjacent development. This includes the main Scabland area in the vicinity of the Burlington Northern Railroad tracks which is preserved through the use of the Wetlands Protection District and the Greenway and Riverbank Protection District. This also includes other elements of the Scabland formations found farther to the east. These latter areas will be preserved on a case-by-case basis as development occurs through preservation in their natural state, allowing residential density transfer through the small lot subdivision, common wall housing, and condominium conditional use processes. 
(17)  Protect wooded areas identified on the Natural Features Map found in the Technical Memorandum by requiring their preservation in a natural state, by integrating the major trees into the design of the parking lots, buildings, or landscaping areas of multi-family complexes and non-residential uses, or in low density areas through the small lot, common wall, or condominium conditional use. If it is necessary to remove a portion or all of the trees, the replacement landscape features shall be subject to approval through the Architectural Review process, except for conventional single family subdivisions. 
(Ord. 592-83, § 24, 6-13-83; Ord. 635-84, § 3, 6-11-84; Ord. 818-91, § 4 & 5, 1-14-91; Ord. 988-97, § 2, 12-8-97; Ord 1026-99, §3, 8-9-99; Ord 1062-00, §1, 12-11-00; Ord. 1062-00, 01-03-01; Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 2, 6-22-20)  
TDC 5.040. - Planning District Objectives. 
This section describes the purpose of each residential planning district. 
(1)  Low Density Residential Planning District (RL). To provide areas of the City suitable for single-family dwellings and manufactured homes. Commonwall dwelling units and small lot subdivisions may be allowed by conditional use permit. Except for retirement housing and nursing and convalescent homes which shall not exceed ten dwelling units per net acre and small lot subdivisions and partitions and subdivisions affected by TDC 40.055, which shall not exceed 7.5 dwelling units per net acre, the maximum density of any residential use in this district shall not exceed 6.4 dwelling units per net acre. The raising of agricultural animals and the construction of agricultural structures may be allowed by conditional use permit in those portions of the District designated on the Plan Map. 
(2)  Medium-Low Density Residential Planning District (RML). To provide areas of the City suitable for commonwall dwellings such as condominiums, townhouses, duplexes, triplexes, and other multi-family dwellings. Condominiums and small lot subdivisions may be allowed by conditional use permit. Owner occupancy of dwelling units shall be encouraged. Parks for manufactured dwellings shall be allowed in those portions of the district designated on the Plan Map. Except for retirement housing and nursing and convalescent homes which shall not exceed 15 dwelling units per net acre and manufactured dwelling parks with single-wide manufactured dwellings which shall not exceed 12 dwelling units per net acre, the maximum density of any residential use shall not exceed ten dwelling units per net acre. The raising of agricultural animals and the construction of agricultural structures may be allowed by conditional use permit in those portions of the District designated on the Plan Map. 
(3)  Medium-High Density Residential Planning District (RMH). To provide areas of the City suitable for townhouses, garden apartments and condominium developments. Except for retirement housing and nursing and convalescent homes, which shall not exceed 22.5 dwelling units per net acre, the maximum density of any residential use shall not exceed 15 dwelling units per net acre. The raising of agricultural animals and the construction of agricultural structures may be allowed by conditional use permit in those portions of the district designated on the Plan Map. 
(4)  High Density Residential Planning District (RH). To provide areas of the City suitable for townhouses, high density garden apartments and condominium developments. Except for retirement housing and nursing and convalescent homes, which shall not exceed 37.5 dwelling units per net acre, the maximum density of any residential use shall not exceed 25 dwelling units per net acre. 
(5)  High Density Residential/High Rise Planning District (RH-HR). To provide areas of the City suitable for high density apartment or condominium tower development to provide a maximum amount of preserved open space. Except for retirement housing and nursing and convalescent homes, which shall not exceed 45 dwelling units per net acre, the maximum density of any residential use shall not exceed 30 dwelling units per net acre. 
(Ord. 818-91, § 6 & 7, 1-14-91; Ord. 828-91, § 1, 3-25-91; Ord. 868-92, § 2, 5-11-92; Ord. 921-94, § 1, 4-25-94; Ord. 956-96, § 3, 1-8-96; Ord. 956-96, § 3, 2-8-96; Ord. 1026-99, §4, 8-9-99; Ord. 1272-08 §1, 11-10-08)  
CHAPTER 6 - COMMERCIAL PLANNING DISTRICTS 
 
TDC 6.010. - Background. 
(1)  Commercial development in Tualatin has occurred primarily in the downtown area and near the City's two Interstate 5 Freeway interchanges at Lower Boones Ferry Road and Nyberg Street. Downtown development consists mostly of retail, service, and office uses ranging in size from small, locally owned firms to large national chain stores such as K-Mart. Development near the interchanges is predominantly automobile-oriented and includes motels, automobile service stations, and restaurants. 
(2)  At present, there are approximately 165 acres of land zoned for commercial use, but only a little over ⅓ of this land is developed. Two factors account for the bulk of the undeveloped commercial land. First, much of this land is in large parcels (ten or more acres) owned by a few major developers such as Schnitzer Investment Corporation. These firms have held their land in anticipation of economic conditions favorable to large-scale commercial development. Second, much of the undeveloped commercial land is in the 100-year flood plain of the Tualatin River and is thus subject to additional development costs necessary to comply with applicable flood plain regulations. 
(3)  Despite the large amount of undeveloped commercial land, a number of factors suggest that this land will be needed for commercial use during the planning period. First, the demand for additional goods and services will increase as Tualatin's population increases. Greater concentrations of population and the relatively high incomes of the area's residents will support increasingly specialized types of retail and service establishments. It should be noted that the adjoining communities of Durham, Rivergrove and Lake Grove are predominantly residential in character, with relatively little commercial development. Consequently, growth of these cities will increase the demand for available commercial land in Tualatin, particularly near the Lower Boones Ferry Road interchange with I-5. Second, the Lower Boones Ferry Road interchange area is subject to continued development pressure because of its accessibility for freeway travelers looking for gasoline, food, or lodging on their way to and from Portland. And finally, the City is located adjacent to three of the region's major transportation routes, the Interstate 5 and 205 Freeways and the State Highway 217 Expressway. This access to the remainder of the region and to the Willamette Valley provides an opportunity for larger-scale commercial and freeway-oriented developments. 
(4)  It should be noted that while most of Tualatin's residents work elsewhere, they will more likely work in the City if diversified job opportunities are available. Tualatin's supply of commercial land will thus eventually create additional diverse job opportunities and hopefully decrease Tualatin residents' needs to travel out of the community to find jobs. 
(5)  As mentioned above, the area north of the Tualatin River around the Lower Boones Ferry Road interchange is attractive for freeway-oriented commercial development. The present Comprehensive Plan designates most of the area as General Commercial, and considerable development has occurred in the area since 1970. However, a number of industrial firms are located throughout the area as a result of zoning established prior to the adoption of the existing Comprehensive Plan, creating land use conflicts between existing and potential commercial development. This Plan expands commercial use in two areas and preserves for light industrial use those areas that are already committed to industrial development. This was done because it was felt that the City had sufficient industrial land in the Western Industrial District and that proximity to the freeway interchange and the residential character of the area better lent itself to commercial use than industrial use. 
(6)  As much of the City's commercial land area is visible from the Interstate 5 Freeway and because all residents of Tualatin must pass through a commercial area before reaching their homes, it is important that esthetic design in commercial areas be sensitively handled. Generally, the design of a community's commercial area defines much of the community's character. Fortunately, the City has an Architectural Review process and an Urban Renewal Agency to help prevent inappropriate, unattractive development, but much more could be done to increase the quality of architectural and landscape design in commercial areas. Because much of Tualatin's commercial land is forested, is visible from the freeway, or is adjacent to residential uses, land-extensive commercial uses, such as automobile, truck and machinery sales and rental, would be more appropriately located in the City's Western Industrial District where there are relatively large, flat and un-forested parcels of land. This area will have good access to freeways, and land-extensive commercial uses would not affect the industrial uses planned for this area. 
(7)  The Roamer's Rest commercial area is unique in its character and history. It has served the needs of the traveling and recreating public for many years and forms a part of the history of the Portland metropolitan area. It is appropriate to continue the general land use pattern of highway and recreation oriented commercial activity in this area, even including the provision of housing in a mixed-use type of development. A specialized Planning District is necessary to accommodate the desired commercial activity without allowing other uses that are not oriented either to the river or the highway. 
(8)  As Tualatin grows in terms of residents and employees, and as these individuals disperse more throughout the City rather than concentrating near the downtown area, there is an ever-increasing demand for commercial services in close proximity to the people. This demand is primarily for day-to-day shopping and service needs such as small grocery purchases, hair cutting and styling, etc. The creation of neighborhood commercial centers, through the use of the new Neighborhood Commercial (CN) Planning District, will not only provide these services to the residents and employees, it will work to reduce traffic by eliminating trips to the downtown commercial areas. This concept is not seen as having any negative impact on the downtown area, as the types of goods and services to be provided are small and limited in nature. It is critical, however, that the design of neighborhood commercial uses be such that they are of a residential character and enhance rather than detract from neighborhoods. 
(9)  The provision of medical services to health care customers has changed rapidly since 1970. New equipment and procedures are now used as a result of fast-developing medical technology. More services and new community outreach activities are provided to customers. The doctor/hospital concept has evolved into a health-care-provider/medical center system. Stand-alone hospitals cannot now provide the facilities and services expected and needed by health care customers. In their place are multi-use medical centers providing a full range of medical facilities and health care services. The Meridian Park medical facility at SW 65th Avenue and SW Borland Road is an example of the conversion from individual hospital to full service medical center. In addition to the traditional hospital facilities, community outreach programs such as personal counseling, weight control, post operative rehabilitation and substance abuse counseling are provided. Doctors now prefer their offices adjacent to the hospital building, rather than in a distant office district or in a downtown location as in the past. 
A medical center should be located in a Medical Center Planning District. Medical centers are major employment centers which provide a stable employment base that is not as vulnerable to economic swings as most commercial and industrial employment centers. Meridian Park Hospital is a major employment center in Tualatin. It serves the City's residents as well as thousands of people in the south metropolitan Portland area and beyond. The City of Tualatin has but one medical center providing a large number of medical facilities and health care services. It will expand in the future. A Medical Center District is provided to ensure that today's medical services and tomorrow's new medical technology will be available to the residents of Tualatin and the surrounding area. 
(Ord. 592-83, §25, 6-13-83; Ord. 849-91, §3, 11-25-91; Ord. 827-91, §1, 3-25-91)  
TDC 6.020. - Assumptions. 
The following are general assumptions used to formulate this Plan: 
(1)  Demand for the City's commercial land will increase. 
(2)  Large-scale commercial enterprises will find Tualatin an increasingly attractive location. 
(3)  The City will become a commercial center serving a population much larger than its own. 
(4)  Retail commercial enterprises will locate primarily in the City's downtown area. 
(5)  Freeway service establishments and offices will locate adjacent to the City's freeway interchanges or will be visible from the Interstate 5 Freeway. 
(6)  Demand for hospital-related commercial development will occur near Meridian Park Hospital. 
(7)  The creation of residential and employment concentrations away from the downtown core will create the need for neighborhood commercial centers. These centers are intended to provide for day-to-day shopping and service needs and are not intended to be serious competition with businesses in the downtown area. 
(Ord. 592-83, § 26, 6-13-83)  
TDC 6.030. - Objectives. 
The following are general objectives used to guide the development of this Plan: 
(1)  Encourage commercial development. 
(2)  Provide increased employment opportunities. 
(3)  Provide shopping opportunities for surrounding communities. 
(4)  Locate and design commercial areas to minimize traffic congestion and maximize access. 
(5)  Continue to utilize specific and enforceable architectural and landscape design standards for commercial development. 
(6)  Encourage developers to consider solar access when designing commercial development projects. 
(7)  Provide for limited and carefully designed neighborhood commercial centers. 
(8)  Provide for the continued development of major medical services facilities in the City of Tualatin, especially at the Meridian Park Hospital site. The Medical Center Planning District shall be applied only to a property, or a group of contiguous properties, of no less than 25 acres and shall have frontage on an arterial as designated in TDC Chapter 11, Tualatin Community Plan. 
(Ord. 592-83, §27, 6-13-83; Ord. 827-91, §2, 3-25-91; Ord. 1062.00, §2, 12-11-00; Ord. 1133-03, 3-24-03; Ord. 1062-00, 1-03-01; Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 3, 6-22-20)  
TDC 6.040. - Commercial Planning District Objectives. 
This section describes the purpose of each commercial planning district. 
(1)  Office Commercial Planning District (CO). To provide areas suitable for professional office uses adjacent to or across from residential areas. Restaurants may be allowed by conditional use permit when designed as an integral part of a major office complex. It is the intent of this district to provide for office development ranging in size from small buildings with one or two tenants to large complexes housing business headquarters offices. In the design of development in this district, care shall be taken to preserve significant natural resources and to provide extensive perimeter landscaping, especially adjacent to residential areas and streets. 
(2)  Neighborhood Commercial Planning District (CN). To provide locations for commercial uses within close proximity to residential areas. It is to provide for opportunities to serve the needs of residents for convenience shopping and services. Such uses will be limited to professional offices, services, and retail trade that are oriented to the day-to-day commercial needs of the residential neighborhood. Neighborhood commercial uses are intended to be pedestrian oriented and should serve to reduce automobile trips and energy consumption. The purpose is also to assure that such development is of a scale and design so that it is compatible with the residential environment and is an enhancement to neighborhood areas. It is not the purpose of this district to create large scale commercial facilities that will compete with similar uses, such as large grocery or department stores, located in the downtown area. 
(3)  Recreational Commercial Planning District (CR). To recognize the unique and valuable physical, scenic, cultural, and historic character of the Roamer's Rest area located between the Tualatin River and Pacific Highway (99W) north of the highway's intersection with Tualatin Road. It is intended to preserve that area by allowing and encouraging commercial and related uses that are oriented to the traveler on the highway or that are oriented toward and relate well with the river. 
(4)  Central Commercial Planning District (CC). To provide areas for a full range of retail, professional and service uses of the kinds usually found in downtown areas patronized by pedestrians. Civic, social and cultural functions that serve the general community are also appropriate. The Central Commercial Planning District is almost entirely within the downtown portion of the urban renewal area. The Urban Renewal Plan contains extensive development policies and design standards that apply to this district. These policies and standards are intended to help create a village atmosphere in the downtown area. Multiple-family housing is appropriate in certain areas of this district, as specified in the Urban Renewal Plan. 
(5)  General Commercial Planning District (CG). To provide areas suitable for a full range of commercial uses, including those uses that are inappropriate for neighborhood, office or central commercial areas. This district is particularly suitable for automobile/service-oriented businesses, excluding automobile, truck and machinery sales and rental, located along the freeway and major arterials. Because of their location, these uses are highly visible to large numbers of passing motorists. Commercial development along the freeway provides perhaps the only lasting impression of Tualatin for many travelers. Therefore, careful attention shall be given to site and structure design for development in this district, including signs, choice of materials, and landscaping, particularly in and around parking areas. 
(6)  Mixed-Use Commercial Planning District (MUC). To provide areas suitable for a mix of office, retail commercial, and high-density housing. Development standards in this district shall encourage a range of complementary and integrated uses oriented toward pedestrian activity. 
(7)  Mid Rise/Commercial Office Planning District (CO/MR). To provide areas suitable for professional Class A Mid Rise offices. The CO/MR District shall be applied to appropriate lands west of Interstate 5 and south of the Tualatin River. Since the potential application of this district extends over most of the City's incorporated area, considerations such as proximity to established residential districts and preservation of significant views and visual corridors shall be encouraged. 
(8)  Medical Center Planning District (MC). To provide areas for major medical centers providing medical facilities and health care services for the residents of Tualatin and the surrounding area, and to provide limited supporting retail and service uses for the convenience of patients, patient visitors and staff. The Medical Center District shall be no less than 25 acres and front on an arterial as designated in TDC Chapter 11, Tualatin Community Plan. 
(Ord. 592-83, §28, 6-13-83; Ord. 783-89, §1, 10-23-89; Ord. 827-91, §3, 3-25-91; Ord. 1026-99, §5, 8-9-99; Ord. 1062.00, §3, 12-11-00; Ord. 1062-00, 1-3-01; Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 4, 6-22-20)  
CHAPTER 7 - MANUFACTURING PLANNING DISTRICTS 
 
TDC 7.010. - Background. 
(1)  Tualatin's relationship to road and rail access has provided a favorable environment for industrial development. The City's industrial area is bisected by two railroads, the Burlington Northern and the Southern Pacific, and is served by the Interstate 5 Freeway which, in turn, provides access to the Interstate 205 Freeway and the State Highway 217 Expressway. These transportation facilities provide good multi-mode access to the whole of the Portland Metropolitan Area, the Willamette Valley, and to national markets. Because the area has good access to the transportation system, large areas of land have been zoned for industrial use, both in the City and west of the City in Washington County. 
(2)  Most of the existing industrial land use in the Tualatin area is located between or adjacent to the Burlington Northern and Southern Pacific rail lines. Smaller pockets of industrial land occur immediately north of downtown Tualatin and in the vicinity of the Lower Boones Ferry Road/Interstate 5 Freeway interchange. The amount of land zoned for industrial use is substantial. The amount actually used is small. Data developed in the Phase I—Technical Memoranda, together with supplementary information developed by the City's economic consultants, indicate that the Portland region annually absorbs 240 acres and Tualatin can be expected to utilize nine to 15 acres of industrial land per year. There are 1,975 acres of industrially zoned land within the Tualatin Study Area, and 304 acres are currently being used. The City contains 650 acres of industrially zoned land, with 577 of those acres now vacant. While some of Tualatin's industrially zoned land is poorly drained or has weak foundation soils, the majority of the industrially zoned land is either buildable or can be made buildable. Subtracting existing industrial uses and the worst-drained areas, the City has approximately 450 acres of vacant industrial land within its City limits. While this industrial land supply exceeds that needed to meet the City's needs for the year 2000, few land parcels that were originally planned for industrial use were converted to other uses in the Plan. This was because industries that owned the land were committed to future development of their particular sites, and because most of the area is impacted by existing scattered industrial development. Additionally, the City wishes to maximize industrial development within the City to produce revenue for public amenities in the City. A surplus of additional industrial land will help to maintain Tualatin's competitiveness in the industrial land market. 
(3)  The existing scattered distribution of industrial uses is a problem because it restricts choice of land use alternatives and makes it expensive to provide appropriate urban services such as public water and sewer service and fire protection. Consequently, this Plan emphasizes the short-term concentration of industrial development within the City limits. 
(4)  Industrial development in Washington County will affect Tualatin's industrial future. This area west of the City now contains scattered industrial development without public water or sewer services and minimum fire protection. While current County zoning allows only uses that have a minimum capital equipment investment and are not labor-intensive, the amount of industrially zoned land exceeds 1,000 acres, and the aggregate effect on traffic could impact the development of industrial land within the City. This is because most traffic traveling to and from this outlying industrial area must pass through the City's Nyberg Street/Tualatin-Sherwood Road corridor to reach the region's freeway system. As stated in the Transportation Plan, additional transportation access must be developed to minimize the effect of industrial development west of Tualatin. The proposed I-5-Norwood Road interchange would help to alleviate a portion of this problem. Additionally, it is anticipated that, because land values for land without standard urban public services are approximately ½ those values inside the City, there will be pressure to develop inexpensive County land before land in the City. More industrial growth west of the City could eventually place the City's roadway system at capacity before it has developed its proportionate share of industrial land, thus making it difficult to develop the remainder of the City's industrial land. In other words, the continued availability of inexpensive County industrial land could place City industrial land at a competitive disadvantage in the industrial land marketplace. 
(5)  Despite the problems described above, it is expected that lower-intensity industrial growth will continue to occur in Washington County west of the City, and that there will be increasing pressure to convert this land to full industrial development. Consequently, this area is eventually expected to become a part of the City of Tualatin, if the problems of transportation access can be solved. Consequently, it is an objective of this Plan to study methods of eventually accommodating, within the City, the industrial growth that is expected to occur in this area. 
(6)  Specific problems related to the development of land inside the City include poor drainage, poor north/south roadway access, lack of sewer and water services, and noise and other environmental problems. The central portion of the industrial area between Herman and Tualatin/Sherwood Roads is poorly drained and contains the Hedges Creek Marsh, the largest wetland area in Washington County. The Plan proposes the preservation of a portion of this approximately 80-acre natural area and anticipates the definition of an area surrounding the Marsh in which industrial development would be allowed. Currently, industrial traffic in Tualatin's central industrial area must travel long distances through downtown or on Cipole Road to travel from southern to northern industrial areas. As many local industries utilize each others' services, it is inconvenient and uneconomic to continue this arrangement of roadways. Consequently, the Transportation Plan proposes a new north-south roadway through the central industrial area in the 102nd—104th corridor. Lack of sewer services in the northwestern portion of the City's main industrial area also has been a handicap to industrial development. Two newly formed local improvement districts, one for new roadway, sewer and water improvements in the 102nd—104th corridor, and one for a major interceptor sewer paralleling Tualatin and Herman Roads, have been implemented to solve the major utility and traffic circulation problems in the industrial area. Industrial noise and odors have already begun to affect adjacent residential areas. One of the objectives of this Plan element and other elements is to develop specific and enforceable design standards that minimize future environmental conflicts between industrial, commercial and residential land uses. 
(7)  One of the most efficient methods of minimizing industrial impacts on commercial and residential uses is to restrict the types and location of uses that are allowed in the City's industrial districts. The types of industrial uses contemplated by the Plan eliminate those uses which are considered most obnoxious, such as creosote treatment of products, manufacture of harmful chemicals, forge plants, and auto wrecking. Uses that are allowed will be in the medium-to-light intensity range, although they will be specifically referred to as "light" and "general" for ease of understanding. The light industrial uses are arranged in the Plan to be adjacent to residential areas to minimize environmental conflicts as much as possible. Because industrial processes change rapidly due to new technology, it is also intended that some industrial uses proposed in the general use category may be appropriate in a lighter use area, if properly designed to mitigate adverse environmental impacts. 
(8)  While most of Tualatin's industrial land is located between Tualatin Road and Avery Street in the western portion of the City, there are small amounts of industrial land located in the northern portion of the City and lying on either side of the Lower Boones Ferry Road/Interstate 5 Freeway interchange. The Plan has maintained, as industrial use, those areas that are now committed to industrial development. However, some land previously zoned industrial has been converted to a commercial designation because of the residential character of the area and proximity to the freeway. The industrial land in this area is designated on the Plan as light industrial because of the area's proximity to commercial and residential areas. 
(9)  In December 2002 METRO expanded the Urban Growth Boundary adding land west of Cipole Road and south of the north right-of-way line of SW Pacific High-way for industrial development to assist in meeting the overall regional need for a 20-year supply of industrial land. 
(10)  In December 2002 and June 2004 Metro expanded the Urban Growth Boundary to include 382 acres of land south of SW Tualatin Sherwood Road in the area east of a future 124th Avenue. 302 acres of this area were designated by Metro as Regionally Significant Industrial Area (RSIA) and the remaining acreage was designated Industrial. The area was addressed in the Southwest Tualatin Concept Plan and was accepted by the City in October 2010. 
(11)  In 2004, Metro expanded the Urban Growth Boundary to include the Basalt Creek Planning Area. The portion of this area within the City Urban Planning Area is generally south of SW Norwood Road and SW Helenius Street, east of 124th Avenue, west of I-5, and north of Basalt Creek Parkway. This area was addressed in the Basalt Creek Concept Plan and was accepted by the City in August 2018. 
(Ord. 1191-05; 6-27-05; Ord. 1321-11 §5, 4-25-11; Ord. No. 1418-19, § 1, 4-22-19)  
TDC 7.015. - Manufacturing Planning Area Overview. 
This section describes the history and nature of the Manufacturing Planning Area. 
(1)  The Industrial Planning Area is located in the southeastern portion of Washington County and immediately west of the developed portion of the City of Tualatin. It is within the Urban Growth Boundary and was annexed to Tualatin in November, 1982, except for a few individual parcels. 
(2)  The Industrial Planning Area is served by Pacific Highway (Highway 99W) as a direct route to Portland. It also is tied directly by Tualatin-Sherwood Road, and indirectly by Tualatin Road and Herman Road, to Interstate 5 with direct ties to the east via Interstate 205. It is crossed by Southern Pacific and Burlington Northern railroad lines. 
(3)  The area lies in the relatively flat lowlands of the Tualatin Valley, with farmland scattered throughout. Although the area is currently rural and suburban in nature, increasing pressure for development is occurring. This is noted by the construction of several new industrial uses within the planning area during the last ten years and the rapid growth of industrial use in the western portions of the City. 
(4)  The first settlement in the area was established in the mid-1800's. By the 1850's, all the land along the Tualatin River bank had been claimed and settlement began in earnest. The Technical Memoranda of The Tualatin Development Code provides a more detailed history of the City and its surrounding area. 
(5)  The Industrial Planning Area encompasses approximately 1,096 acres. Coupled with the industrial land that was already in the western portion of the City, the total Western Industrial District has 1,775 acres of land. 
(6)  The Tualatin area has experienced tremendous growth in the last decade. Population increased rapidly due to several factors, including land availability and buildup of employment opportunities through industrial development. 
(7)  The economy of the planning area is tied directly to that of Washington County and the Portland metropolitan area. At this time only 12 percent of Tualatin residents work in the City, while approximately 75 percent of the employees within the community live outside. Again, the City has determined that it is a community goal to expand as a regional employment center, increasing its percentage of total jobs in the region, and at the same time, providing additional residential and commercial opportunities so that more people can both live and work in Tualatin. 
(Ord. 592-83, §29, 6-13-83. Ord. 1026-99, §6, 8-9-99)  
TDC 7.016. - Planning Context. 
This section describes the legal and political context for the planning work leading to the adoption of the Industrial Planning Area Plan Amendment. 
(1)  Introduction. The preparation of the West Tualatin Industrial Planning Area Plan Amendment is not an isolated planning effort. There are many other policies on the local, regional and state level that provide the framework for this planning effort. 
(2)  Local Plans. Of primary importance is the City's comprehensive plan, the Tualatin Community Plan. This plan amendment must be set in a direction that complies with and helps to implement the goals, policies and objectives of that document. Since the plan was adopted on October 22, 1979, the City has continued to experience a high rate of growth and has maintained an aggressive posture toward economic development. The addition of these industrial lands to the City is a direct result of the Goals and Objectives of the Plan. This amendment is designed to continue the advances that the Plan charted and the City has followed. 
(3)  Regional Plans. 
(a)  The Industrial Planning Area and the entire City are part of the Metropolitan Service District (METRO), a regional government with jurisdiction for the urban portion of the tri-county metropolitan area. METRO is authorized by state law (ORS 197) to: 1) establish regional planning goals; 2) develop various functional plans for the district concerning housing, transportation, solid waste, drainage, and other region-wide issues; and 3) ensure that member jurisdictions conform to any regional planning elements which have been adopted by the METRO Council. 
(b)  METRO is responsible, specifically, for regional transportation planning and for defining and maintaining a regional Urban Growth Boundary (UGB). The UGB essentially delineates urban lands from rural and natural resource lands. Designed to include those lands needed to accommodate growth to the year 2000, the UGB must be respected and supported by METRO counties and cities in order for their comprehensive plans to achieve compliance with LCDC Goal 14—Urbanization. The UGB forms the southwest boundary of the Industrial Planning Area. 
(c)  Another regional planning effort that helps define this plan amendment is the work of Washington County embodied in the Comprehensive Framework Plan. This plan "allocates" the growth anticipated within the County to various geographic areas. This growth, in terms of both resident population and employment, was "assigned" on the basis of land availability, opportunities for economic development, transportation and utility availability, and other locational factors. The City will use these allocations as one of the bases for developing this plan amendment. 
(d)  In order to require and maintain effective coordination between Washington County and its various cities, including Tualatin, Urban Planning Area Agreements (UPAAs) have been drawn up. These identify areas of mutual planning interest and establish procedures allowing the cities and the County to exchange information and comments on development and to coordinate planning for development in these areas. 
(4)  Statewide Planning Goals. Finally, at the State level, are the Statewide Planning Goals and Guidelines adopted by the Land Conservation and Development Commission (LCDC). The comprehensive plans of all cities and counties in the state must be directed towards meeting the goals. This amendment will address each of these goals as appropriate. However, it is not organized goal by goal, rather, it follows the format of the existing Community Plan and will deal with each goal in that framework. The Goals include: 
(a)  Citizen Involvement; 
(b)  Land Use Planning; 
(c)  Agricultural Lands; 
(d)  Forest Lands; 
(e)  Open Spaces, Scenic and Historic Areas, and Natural Resources; 
(f)  Air, Land and Water Resources Quality; 
(g)  Areas Subject to Natural Disasters and Hazards; 
(h)  Recreation; 
(i)  Economy of the State; 
(j)  Housing; 
(k)  Public Facilities and Services; 
(l)  Transportation; 
(m)  Energy Conservation; 
(n)  Urbanization. 
(Ord. 592-83, §30, 6-13-83)  
TDC 7.017. - Planning Concept for the Manufacturing Planning Area. 
This section describes the general intentions or concept for the Manufacturing Planning Area Plan: 
(1)  Land Use Pattern. 
(a)  Washington County has been working for many years in determining appropriate locations and configurations for various land uses throughout the County. The basic concept decisions have involved the major delineation between rural and urban land uses, and the appropriate locations for the various urban uses. These concepts, which are included in the Comprehensive Framework Plan, are based on professional analysis and input from a series of public hearings held in the fall of 1981. The conclusions for the basic concept all indicated that industrial development was and continues to be the most appropriate land use for the study area. 
(b)  With the annexation of the Industrial Planning Area to the City of Tualatin, the responsibility for determining this planning concept has shifted from the County to the City. However, Tualatin has determined that the County's basic analysis and conclusions are sound, and will continue to support and plan for future industrial use in this area. This is recognized as being totally in compliance with the City's goal of becoming a major employment center, and forms a natural extension of the existing industrial areas bordering the western edge of the former City limits. 
(2)  Housing and Employment Allocations. 
(a)  Allocations of new housing units and employment opportunities in terms of residential, commercial and industrial acreage have been made for each community planning area within the entire METRO UGB by METRO with the cooperation of each local government. This distribution of potential growth is necessary to show how future growth can be made compatible with the development concept and consistent with state, regional, and local plans and regulations. 
(b)  These area allocations together reflect the total County's share of the regional growth estimated for the year 2000 and beyond. For the existing unincorporated area of the County within the UGB (i.e., all land inside the UGB but outside the City limits of all cities in the county) approximately 90,000 additional people, 39,500 new homes, and 38,800 new jobs are expected by the year 2000. This allocation applies to the incorporated study area as it was prepared prior to the annexation. 
(c)  The Tualatin Development Code contains population projections that formed a basis of that planning effort and are also used in this process. 
Those projections indicated that, if market trends are followed, the City of Tualatin will have a population of 28,721 by the year 2000, or an increase of 22,331 from the year 1980. This indicates that the City, meaning all lands within the total planning area, will absorb 24.8 percent of the growth that is projected for the unincorporated portions of the County within the UGB. 
(d)  The growth allocations are basically intended to be a planning tool that assures that the projected growth is accommodated in a manner that provides for adequate housing, public facilities and services and employment opportunities, "spreading" the need to absorb this growth fairly throughout the metropolitan area. Every jurisdiction has a legal responsibility to allocate enough land to meet the projected needs. Each community is to designate land in various use categories to accommodate the acreage totals assigned to it by METRO for a variety of housing densities and employment opportunities. 
(e)  In order to help assure that the rapidly changing needs for housing options were being met, the LCDC adopted an administrative rule setting certain "standards" for planning for new housing within the Portland metropolitan area, (known as the Metro Housing Rule). The City must provide the opportunity for a new residential construction mix of 50 percent detached units to 50 percent attached units. In addition, the housing rule established an average residential density target for new construction of at least eight units per net buildable (acre). 
(f)  The County draft of the plan for the study area included an allocation of 8,372 new employees. This is distributed mostly at a density of five employees per acre. The City finds that this density projection is extremely low based on the current pattern in the area which is approximately 15 employees per acre. With the acreage available, the transportation and utility facilities available, and the very supportive attitude of the City, industrial land uses are anticipated that will generate three or more times the number of employees within the industrial planning area within the planning period. 
(g)  Therefore, the City recognizes the employment allocations of the County, but, finding them too small, will not be bound by them in planning for the industrial area or in encouraging and fostering economic development. 
(Ord. 592-83, §31, 6-13-83; Ord. 1026-99, §7, 8-9-99)  
TDC 7.020. - Assumptions. 
The following are general assumptions used to formulate the Plan: 
(1)  The City can be expected to use a minimum of 25 acres of industrial land annually. 
(2)  Traffic access and sewer and water service problems associated with the Western Industrial District will be remedied as the area is developed. 
(Ord. 592-83, §32, 6-13-83)  
TDC 7.030. - Objectives. 
The following are general objectives used to guide development of the Plan and that should guide implementation of the Plan's recommendations: 
(1)  Encourage new industrial development. 
(2)  Provide increased local employment opportunity, moving from 12 percent local employment to 25 percent, while at the same time making the City, and in particular the Western Industrial District, a major regional employment center. 
(3)  Improve the financial capability of the City, through an increase in the tax base and the use of creative financing tools. 
(4)  Preserve and protect, with limited exceptions, the City's existing industrial land. 
(5)  Cooperate with Washington County, METRO, and the State of Oregon to study the methods available for providing transportation, water, and sewer services to the Western Industrial District. 
(6)  Fully develop the Western Industrial District and the Southwest Tualatin Concept Plan Area (SWCP), providing full transportation, sewer, and water services prior to or as development occurs. 
(7)  Improve traffic access to the Western Industrial District and SWCP area from the Interstate 5 freeway and State Highway 99W through regional improvements identified in the 2035 Regional Transportation Plan. 
(8)  Cooperate with the Department of Environmental Quality and METRO to meet applicable air quality standards by 1987. 
(9)  Construct a north/south major arterial street between Tualatin Road and Tualatin-Sherwood Road and SW Tonquin Road in the 124th Avenue alignment to serve the industrial area. 
(10)  Rebuild the Tualatin Road/Pacific Highway intersection to allow for substantially greater traffic flows. 
(11)  Provide truck routes for industrial traffic that provide for efficient movement of goods while protecting the quality of residential areas. 
(12)  Protect residential, commercial, and sensitive industrial uses from the adverse environmental impacts of industrial use. 
(13)  Protect adjacent land uses from noise impacts by adopting industrial noise standards. 
(14)  Continue to protect the Hedges Creek Wetland and Tonquin Scablands from adverse impacts of adjacent development. 
(15)  Continue to administer specific and enforceable architectural and landscape design standards for industrial development. 
(16)  Encourage industrial firms to use co-generation as a means to utilize waste heat from industrial processes and consider solar access when designing industrial facilities. 
(17)  Protect wooded areas identified on the Natural Features Map found in the Technical Memorandum by requiring their preservation in a natural state or by integrating the major trees into the design of the parking lots, buildings, or more formal landscaping areas of an industrial development. If it is necessary to remove a portion or all of the trees, the replacement landscape features shall be subject to approval through the Architectural Review process. 
(Ord. 592-83, 6-13-83; Ord. 1212-06, 6-26-06; Ord. 1321-11 §6, 04-25-11)  
TDC 7.040. - Manufacturing Planning District Objectives. 
This section describes the purpose of each manufacturing planning district. 
(1)  Manufacturing Park Planning District (MP). 
(a)  The purpose of this district is to provide an environment exclusively for and conducive to the development and protection of modern, large-scale specialized manufacturing and related uses and research facilities. Such permitted uses shall not cause objectionable noise, smoke, odor, dust, noxious gases, vibration, glare, heat, fire hazard or other wastes emanating from the property. The district is to provide for an esthetically attractive working environment with park or campus-like grounds, attractive buildings, ample employee parking and other amenities appropriate to an employee oriented activity. 
(b)  It also is to protect existing and future sites for such uses by maintaining large lot configurations and limiting uses to those that are of a nature to not conflict with other industrial uses or surrounding residential areas. 
(c)  It also is intended to provide for a limited amount of commercial uses designed for the employees of the primary uses and to provide for a limited amount of retail selling of products manufactured, assembled, packaged or wholesaled on the site provided the retail sale area, including the showroom area, is no more than five percent of the gross floor area of the building not to exceed 1,500 square feet. 
(2)  Light Manufacturing Planning District (ML). 
(a)  Suitable for warehousing, wholesaling and light manufacturing processes that are not hazardous and that do not create undue amounts of noise, dust, odor, vibration, or smoke. Also suitable, with appropriate restrictions, are the retail sale of products not allowed for sale in General Commercial areas, subject to the Special Commercial Setback from arterial streets and Commercial Services Overlay as generally illustrated in Map 9-5 and specifically set forth in TDC 60.035, and office commercial uses where any portion of a legally created lot is within 60 feet of a CO Planning District boundary. Also suitable is the retail sale of products manufactured, assembled, packaged or wholesaled on the site provided the retail sale area, including the showroom area, is no more than five percent of the gross floor area of the building not to exceed 1,500 square feet. Also suitable for the retail sale of home improvement materials and supplies provided it is not greater than 60,000 square feet of gross floor area per building or business and subject to the Special Commercial Setback from arterial streets as generally illustrated in Map 9-5 and specifically set forth in TDC 60.035. Rail access and screened open storage allowed in these areas will conform to defined architectural, landscape and environmental design standards. 
(b)  The following uses within the Light Manufacturing District shall comply with the following size limits established by Metro. Retail sale, retail service and professional service uses shall be no greater than 5,000 square feet of sales or service area per outlet, or not greater than 20,000 square feet of sales or service area for multiple outlets in a single building or in multiple buildings that are part of the same development project, with the following exceptions. 
(i)  Application of the Industrial Business Park Overlay District (TDC Chapter 69). 
(ii)  The retail sale of products manufactured, assembled, packaged or wholesaled on the site is allowed provided the retail sale area, including the showroom area, is no more than five percent of the gross floor area of the building not to exceed 1,500 square feet. 
(iii)  Within the Special Commercial Setback from arterial streets (TDC 60.035) the retail sale of home improvement materials and supplies is allowed provided it is not greater than 60,000 square feet of gross floor area per building or business and subject to the Special Commercial Setback from arterial streets as generally illustrated in Map 9-5 and specifically set forth in TDC 60.035. Rail Access and screened open storage allowed in these areas will conform to defined architectural, landscape and environmental design standards. 
(c)  The purpose of this district is to provide sites for manufacturing uses that are more compatible with adjacent commercial and residential uses and would serve to buffer heavy manufacturing uses. The purpose is also to allow the retail sale of products manufactured, assembled, packaged or wholesaled on the site provided the retail sale area, including the showroom area, is no more than five percent of the gross floor area of the building not to exceed 1,500 square feet. Certain heavier manufacturing uses may be allowed as conditional uses. 
(d)  In accordance with the Industrial Business Park Overlay District, TDC Chapter 69, selected office and retail uses are allowed to provide services to businesses and employees. The purpose is also to allow certain commercial service uses in the Commercial Services Overlay shown in the specific areas illustrated on Map 9-5 and selected commercial uses subject to distance restrictions from residential areas and subject to the Special Commercial Setback from arterial streets as generally illustrated in Map 9-5 and specifically set forth in TDC 60.035. 
(3)  General Manufacturing Planning District (MG). 
(a)  Suitable for light manufacturing uses and also for a wide range of heavier manufacturing and processing activities. Such areas could be expected to be more unsightly and to have more adverse environmental effects. Rail access and screened open storage would be allowed in this area, conforming to defined architectural, landscape and environmental design standards. Also suitable is the retail sale of products manufactured, assembled, packaged or wholesaled on the site provided the retail sale area, including the showroom area, is no more than five percent of the gross floor area of the building not to exceed 1,500 square feet. Also suitable for the retail sale of home improvement materials and supplies provided it is not greater than 60,000 square feet of gross floor area per building or business and subject to the Special Commercial Setback from arterial streets as generally illustrated in Map 9-5 and specifically set forth in TDC 61.035. 
(b)  The following uses within the General Manufacturing District shall comply with the following size limits established by Metro. Retail sale, retail service and professional service uses shall be no greater than 5,000 square feet of sales or service area per outlet, or not greater than 20,000 square feet of sales or service area for multiple outlets in a single building or in multiple buildings that are part of the same development project, with the following exceptions. 
(i)  Application of the Industrial Business Park Overlay District (TDC Chapter 69). 
(ii)  The retail sale of products manufactured, assembled, packaged or wholesaled on the site provided the retail sale area, including the showroom area, shall be no more than five percent of the gross floor area of the building not to exceed 1,500 square feet. 
(iii)  Within the Special Setbacks for Commercial Uses Area (TDC 61.035) the retail sale of home improvement materials and supplies is allowed provided it is not greater than 60,000 square feet of gross floor area per building or business and subject to the Special Commercial Setback from arterial streets as generally illustrated in Map 9-5 and specifically set forth in TDC 61.035. 
(c)  In accordance with the Industrial Business Park Overlay District, TDC Chapter 69, selected office and retail uses are allowed to provide services to businesses and employees. The purpose is also to allow certain commercial service uses in the Commercial Services Overlay shown in the specific areas illustrated on Map 9-5 and allow selected commercial uses subject to distance restrictions from residential areas and subject to the Special Commercial Setback from arterial streets as generally illustrated in Map 9-5 and specifically set forth in TDC 61.035. 
(d)  The heaviest manufacturing uses that are environmentally adverse or pose a hazard to life and safety will not be allowed. 
(4)  Manufacturing Business Park Planning District (MBP). 
(a)  The purpose of the MBP Planning District is to provide an environment for industrial development consistent with the Southwest Tualatin Concept Plan (accepted by the City in October 2010) and as a Metro-designated Regionally Significant Industrial Area (RSIA) consistent with Metro's Urban Growth Boundary expansion decisions of 2002 and 2004. 
(b)  The MBP Planning District will be a mix of light industrial and high-tech uses in a corporate campus setting, consistent with MBP Planning District development standards. The RSIA-designated area requires at least one 100-acre parcel and one 50-acre parcel for large industrial users. The remainder of the area is likely to include light industrial uses with some limited, local-serving commercial services. 
(c)  The district is intended to provide for an esthetically attractive working environment with campus-like grounds, attractive buildings, ample employee parking and other amenities appropriate to an employee oriented activity. It also is intended to protect existing and future sites for such uses by maintaining large lot configurations, a cohesive planned-development design and limiting uses to those that are of a nature that will not conflict with other industrial uses or nearby residential areas of the City. 
(Ord. 592-83 §34, 6-13-83; Ord. 942-95, 3-27-95; Ord. 1003-98, 4-27-98; Ord. 1026-99, 8-9-99; Ord. 1046-00, 2-14-00; Ord. 1133-03, 3-24-03; Ord. 1212-06; 6-26-06; Ord. 1321-11 §7, 4-25-11)  
CHAPTER 8 - PUBLIC, SEMI-PUBLIC AND MISCELLANEOUS LAND USE 
 
TDC 8.010. - Background. 
(1)  There are several land uses that do not neatly fit into the normal residential, commercial or industrial land use categories. These are uses such as government offices, utility facilities, schools, churches and retirement homes. TDC 8.020 to 8.060 define the objectives for these miscellaneous facilities. 
(2)  Trends in land development, particularly related to religious institutions, schools, and public parks, have shifted over time, away from development of relatively small structures and facilities located on relatively small lots, which serve a single purpose, towards large campus-style developments consisting of multiple structures or facilities located on large parcels of land, which often serve multiple purposes and provide multiple services. Religious institutions, schools, and parks are also increasingly exhibiting a trend towards constantly changing programs, uses, and facility improvements to reflect and respond to shifting demographic patterns and evolving needs of the community they serve. The particular needs of, and the City's assumptions and objectives for, development of large campus-style institutional uses which may not readily conform with development patterns and standards in normal residential, commercial or industrial land use categories are set forth in TDC 8.090 and 8.100. 
(Ord. 849-91, §4, 11-25-91; Ord. 1216-06, 7-24-06)  
TDC 8.020. - General Government Services. 
This category includes a variety of dissimilar uses from general offices to public works shops. The objectives for the location of these uses are to: 
(1)  Locate, when possible, general government offices in the Urban Renewal Area, preferably in a common building on the City's proposed Civic Center site. 
(2)  Locate facilities such as the City's Operations Center in the City's western industrial area.  
TDC 8.030. - Utility Facility. 
This category includes land uses such as public utility facilities, e.g., water reservoirs, water and sewerage pump stations, pressure reading stations; electrical substations; telephone exchange or switching facilities; and natural gas pumping facilities owned, operated and maintained either by a public agency or for profit entity. These facilities generally cannot be placed in a single planning district, but must be placed to best serve the utility system. Consequently, these uses may be located in any planning district, but must meet the following objectives: 
(1)  Be designed attractively to blend with adjacent development, particularly in residential areas. 
(2)  Be located and designed, if of a hazardous nature, to protect adjacent development from potential harm or damage. 
(3)  Subject aboveground utility facilities, i.e., buildings, tanks, fencing, screen walls and landscaping, to review through the City's Architectural Review process. 
(Ord. 965-96, §1, 12-9-96)  
TDC 8.040. - Schools. 
(1)  This category includes land uses associated with services generally provided by the public school system, although in some cases educational services may be provided by religious or business organizations. The objectives for these facilities are to: 
(a)  Cooperate with local school districts to plan for adequate educational services commensurate with the growth of the City. 
(b)  Locate elementary school sites, wherever possible, adjacent to neighborhood park sites, and integrate the location of such schools into the residential neighborhoods they are designated to serve. 
(c)  Locate junior high or high school sites adjacent to arterial or collector streets. 
(d)  Locate all schools providing primary and secondary education as far as possible from commercial and industrial districts, unless the education provided would be vocational in nature. 
(e)  Locate vocational schools in commercial or industrial districts commensurate with the type of education being provided. 
(f)  Work collaboratively with the Tigard-Tualatin School District, the City of Tigard, Washington County and other interested parties to address the requirements of Senate Bill 908 passed by the 1993 Legislature (Oregon Revised Statutes 195.110). The City of Tualatin shall work collaboratively to revise the Tigard-Tualatin School District's School Facility Plan adopted November 2, 1995. 
(g)  The City shall enter into an intergovernmental agreement with the Tigard-Tualatin School District to agree, to the greatest extent possible, on the criteria for the capacity of school facilities. 
(h)  The City accepts those school facility capacity criteria as set forth in the School Facility Plan as its own for purposes of evaluating applications for a comprehensive plan amendment or for a residential land use regulation amendment. 
(i)  The City shall provide notice to the Tigard-Tualatin School District when considering a plan or land use regulation amendment that significantly impacts school capacity. 
(2)  It should be noted that a discussion of public schools in the Tualatin area occurs within TDC 3.080(8) of this Plan. The general locations of neighborhood elementary school/park sites are indicated on the Park, Greenways and Bikeways Map contained in TDC Chapter 15, Parks and Recreation. 
(Ord. 964-96, §3, 6-24-96)  
TDC 8.050. - Churches, Retirement Homes, Residential Facilities and Hospitals. 
This range of land uses has varied locational requirements because of the frequency of use, the nature of the use, and other factors. None of these uses should be located in an industrial planning district. They should be located in commercial and residential districts, with certain restrictions. Congregate care facilities, assisted living facilities, residential care facilities, and hospitals should also be located in the Medical Center District. Because their locational possibilities and character are so varied, they should be considered as conditional uses in all commercial and residential planning districts, except where such a requirement would violate land use or other provisions of Oregon state statutes or federal laws such as the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, should be located with good access to arterial or collector streets, and should be close to the City's park areas. Churches, or religious institutions, should be considered as permitted uses in the Institutional Planning District. Congregate care facilities, assisted living facilities and residential care facilities and hospitals should be considered as permitted uses in the Medical Center District. Consequently, the objectives for these uses are to: 
(1)  Prohibit uses such as residential facilities, retirement homes and hospitals in industrial planning districts. 
(2)  Allow uses such as churches, retirement homes and hospitals in commercial and residential planning districts, subject to conditional use approval, and allow congregate care facilities, assisted living facilities and residential care facilities and hospitals as permitted uses in the Medical Center District. 
(3)  Allow residential facilities and residential homes as permitted uses in all residential planning districts, and allow residential facilities as a conditional use in planning districts where multiple family development is a conditional use. 
(4)  Locate uses such as churches, retirement homes and hospitals that are in residential planning districts adjacent to arterial or collector streets and close to the City's park areas. 
(5)  Cooperate with the appropriate federal, state and regional agencies to assess health care services for the area. 
(6)  Provide Institutional Planning District areas of the City that are of an appropriate size, have access to a collector or arterial street, and are served by adequate public facilities in order to accommodate churches, or religious institutions, as permitted uses. 
(Ord. 827-91, §4, 3-25-91; Ord. 849-91, §5, 11-25-91; Ord. 970-97, § 1 and 2, 2-10-97; Ord. 1133-03, 3-24-03; Ord. 1216-06, 7-24-06)  
TDC 8.060. - Solid Waste Disposal Sites. 
(1)  Solid waste disposal is a regional concern requiring regional solutions. The City recognizes MSD's responsibility and authority to prepare and implement a solid waste management plan, supports the MSD "Procedures for Siting Sanitary Landfills," and will participate in these procedures as appropriate. 
(2)  The City contains one identified solid waste site north of Bridgeport Road. This site is known as the "Durham Pits" site, as identified in an MSD report entitled "Disposal Siting Alternatives."  
TDC 8.070. - Day Care Facilities. 
Because day care is needed both by residents and employees who commute into the City, day care facilities should be located in areas convenient for commuters as well as residents, including commercial, residential, and some industrial areas. Day care centers should be located with good access to arterial or collector streets, and should be close to the City's park areas. Day care facilities should not be located close to automobile service stations, or where they will be surrounded by industrial uses. However, industrial perimeter areas where they can easily serve both residents and employees of nearby firms are suitable. The impact of a day care center on a residential neighborhood, in terms of noise and traffic generation, differs from that of residences and should be reviewed before it is permitted there. Consequently, the objectives for day care centers are to: 
(1)  Facilitate creation of adequate child care facilities within the community by limiting local requirements, recognizing the role of the state's Children's Services Division in certifying such facilities. Accordingly, day care centers should be allowed as permitted uses in commercial and light industrial areas. 
(2)  Encourage family day care providers to operate in residential and commercial areas by permitting them outright. 
(3)  Protect residential areas from potential adverse impacts of day care centers through the conditional use process. 
(4)  Locate day care centers adjacent to arterial or collector streets and close to the City's park areas. 
(5)  Allow child day care centers as a conditional accessory use in the Institutional Planning District in order that residents utilizing the services of the school, church or park in the Institutional Planning District may also have access to on-site day care services, while still ensuring that any potential impacts are adequately mitigated through the conditional use process. 
(Ord. 849-91, §6, 11-25-91; Ord. 1216-06, 7-24-06)  
TDC 8.080. - Wireless Communication Facilities. 
This category includes land uses that transmit or receive radio frequency signals through the airwaves. The objectives for these facilities are: 
(1)  To minimize the visual impacts associated with wireless communication facilities. 
(2)  To provide a wide range of locations for wireless communication facilities. 
(3)  To encourage creative approaches in locating wireless communication facilities that will blend with their surroundings. 
(4)  To coordinate the review of new wireless communication facilities with the Federal Communication Commission, Federal Aviation Administration and Oregon Department of Transportation Aeronautics Division. 
(5)  To comply with the requirements of the 1996 Federal Telecommunications Act. 
(6)  To encourage co-location of wireless communication facilities to reduce the number of facilities in the community. 
(Ord. 965-96, §2 12-9-96)  
TDC 8.090. - Institutional Planning District Assumptions. 
The following are general assumptions used to formulate this Plan: 
(1)  The City recognizes that religious institutions, schools, and public parks play an important role in the community by providing a multitude of services and hosting a wide variety of activities. 
(2)  Religious institutions, schools, and public parks can have particular land development needs to accommodate large-scale campus-style improvements, which may not readily conform with development patterns and standards in normal residential, commercial or industrial land use categories. 
(3)  The City's population is projected to continue to grow. Demand for large campus-style religious institutions, schools, and public parks, designed to serve multiple purposes and provide multiple services to the community, will increase as the City's population continues to increase. 
(4)  Development of large-scale campus-style religious institutions, schools, and public parks in normal residential, commercial or manufacturing planning districts results in consumption of large parcels of land in those planning districts, and thereby precludes utilization of land in those districts for the primary purposes for which they are intended, which is housing, retail, office, and manufacturing uses. Creation of an Institutional Planning District helps to preserve land in residential, commercial, and manufacturing districts for the primary purposes for which those districts are intended. 
(Ord. 1216-06, 7-24-06)  
TDC 8.100. - Institutional Planning District Objectives. 
This section describes the purpose of the Institutional Planning District, and includes the objectives used to guide development of the Planning District Standards and to guide application of the planning district to particular areas of the City. 
(1)  The purpose of this district is to provide an environment exclusively for, and conducive to, the development and operation of religious institutions, schools, public parks, and related uses, in a manner that is harmonious with adjacent and nearby residential, commercial, or manufacturing planning districts and uses. 
(2)  The district is intended to accommodate large-scale campus-style developments, owned and operated by governmental or nonprofit entities, consisting of multiple structures or facilities, which may serve multiple purposes and provide multiple services to the community. 
(3)  Permitted and conditional uses shall be developed and operated in a manner that promotes and protects the health, safety, and general welfare of all adjacent and nearby planning districts and uses. Additionally, conditional uses shall be allowed provided that the use is developed and operated in a manner that is consistent with the intent of the planning district, and that promotes and protects the health, safety, and general welfare of all adjacent and nearby planning districts and uses. 
(4)  The district may be applied to land that is able to accommodate large-scale campus-style development and operation of religious institutions, schools, public parks, and related uses, as follows: 
(a)  Contiguous land one and one-half acre in size or greater; 
(b)  Access to a collector or arterial street; 
(c)  Adequate public facilities are available to the property. 
(Ord. 1216-06, 7-24-06)  
CHAPTER 9 - PLAN MAP 
 
TDC 9.010. - Background. 
This Plan section includes the Plan Map, (Map 9-1) classification of planning district boundaries, and brief descriptions of the land uses in each Plan area. The Plan Map is a synthesis of the objectives contained in each Plan element that can be portrayed graphically in map form. The Map is based on an analysis of data contained in the Phase I—Technical Memoranda, Northwest Tualatin Concept Plan 2005 and an analysis of Plan objectives and the Statewide Planning Goals of the Land Conservation and Development Commission. 
(Ord. 635-84, §4, 6-11-84; Ord. 1191-05, 6-27-05)  
TDC 9.020. - Planning District Boundaries. 
The boundaries between planning districts, as portrayed on the Plan Map, are intended to follow property lines (or extensions thereof), roadways, or natural features such as creeks. Where such definition was not possible, the Map is drawn to scale and district boundaries can be determined by using this scale. It should be noted that property lines shown on the Plan Map were derived from County Assessor's Maps and are therefore relatively accurate. Consequently, the planning districts shown on the Plan shall be considered zoning districts, as normally termed. This eliminates the need for two sets of maps and simplifies the understanding of what land uses may be allowed on an individual property.  
TDC 9.025. - Tualatin Design Type Boundaries. 
(1)  Map 9-4, Tualatin Design Type Boundaries, shows the City's final location of the Metropolitan Service District's Growth Concept Design Types. Metro adopted the general location of the Design Types as part of adopting the Urban Growth Management Functional Plan (UGMFP) (Metro Code, Chapter 3.07). The UGMFP, Title 1, says, "For each of the following 2040 Growth Concept design types, city and county comprehensive plans shall be amended to include the boundaries of each area, determined by the city or county consistent with the general locations shown on the 2040 Growth Concept Map: " Map 9-4 shows the location of the applicable Design Types consistent with the general locations shown on the 2040 Growth Concept Map. The boundaries are intended to follow the Planning District Boundaries, property lines, rights-of-way centerlines and water features. 
(2)  Rural Reserves and Green Corridors. The City recognizes that green corridors, as described in the 2040 Growth Concept, are critical to interurban connectivity. If the City, at some future date, annexes an area that includes a green corridor, it will be the City's policy to do the following: 
(a)  Allow access, in a controlled manner, to the green corridor to maintain the function, capacity and level of service of the transportation facility and to enhance safety and minimize development pressures on rural reserve areas; and 
(b)  Provide appropriate vegetative screening and buffering of adjacent development and limit signage in such a way as to maintain the rural character of the green corridor. 
(Ord. 1026-99, §9, 8-9-99)  
TDC 9.030. - Area Descriptions. 
To clarify the Plan Map, the Map has been divided into 14 plan areas, and the following describes, in narrative form, the permitted uses for each plan area. All Plan Areas with the exception of those comprising commercial and industrial lands, provide the framework for neighborhood organizations. It was with this in mind that the plan areas were drawn. Each area, with the exception stated above, was viewed as a potential neighborhood unit, having its own area of interest, comprising a population of 3,000 to 5,000 persons and served, as much as possible, by common facilities such as schools or parks. 
(Ord. 635-84, §5, 6-11-84)  
TDC 9.031. - Area 1. 
This portion of the Plan comprises the City's central area and is described in the City's adopted Central Urban Renewal Plan. The Central Urban Renewal Plan is a separate plan, but considered an element of this Plan. This Plan has been drafted to minimize any land use conflicts between uses on the periphery of the Central Urban Renewal Area. Map 9-3, "Central Tualatin Urban Renewal Area Planning Districts," shows the Central Urban Renewal boundary, the Core Area Parking District boundary, land use blocks within the Central Urban Renewal Area, minimum lot sizes for blocks within the Central Urban Renewal Area, and the designation of which blocks require a Master Plan to be submitted for development. 
(Ord. 694-86, §1, 5-27-86; Ord. 1109-02, 4-22-02)  
TDC 9.032. - Area 2. 
Located directly south of the Urban Renewal Area and west of the Interstate 5 Freeway (I-5), this area comprises most of the City's residential land west of I-5 and north of Avery Street. Being close to downtown, the area has a higher proportion of multi-family dwellings than other areas, with the northern and eastern portions of the area comprising medium-low, medium-high and high density multi-family residential development. The southern portion of the area is predominantly low density residential. The Tualatin Elementary School is located in the center of the area at the intersection of Boones Ferry Road and Sagert Streets. The northeasterly portion of the area includes large-scale commercial uses that are included in the Schnitzer Investment Corporation Planned Unit Development (PUD). The commercial uses in this section of the PUD are proposed to include primarily headquarters office space for major firms and supporting commercial services such as restaurants. The western side of this area is bordered by a Light Industrial Plan designation, while a portion of the area's northern boundary is bordered by the Burlington Northern Railway tracks and mixed industrial and commercial designations.  
TDC 9.033. - Area 3. 
This area is characterized by low density residential development. Part of the City's greenway loop system traverses the area. A new neighborhood park is proposed for this area. The area's northwestern corner is bordered by a Light Manufacturing Planning District, while the western and southwestern boundaries are bordered by land outside the Urban Growth Boundary.  
TDC 9.034. - Area 4. 
This area lies south of Avery Street, between the Interstate 5 Freeway and Boones Ferry Road. The predominant land use is low density residential. A new elementary school located east of Boones Ferry Road, between Blake and Ibach Streets, is currently being constructed and will serve students from the south Tualatin area. A large greenway loop passes through this area to connect with the remainder of the loop in Area 3. The area is bordered on the east by the Interstate 5 Freeway and on the south by land outside the Urban Growth Boundary.  
TDC 9.035. - Area 5. 
Located east of the Interstate 5 Freeway, this area is primarily designated for low density residential uses, but contains substantial multi-family and commercial use north of Sagert Street and west of SW 65th Avenue. Meridian Park Hospital is located in this area on the northeast corner of SW 65th Avenue and Borland Road. Commercial land uses are located along the Interstate 5 Freeway, and on Nyberg Street from I-5 to SW 65th Avenue. A major greenway loop surrounds a majority of the area's perimeter, including a greenway shown along the Tualatin River frontage. A new neighborhood park is proposed. The eastern and southern boundaries of this area are adjacent to land outside the Urban Growth Boundary.  
TDC 9.036. - Area 6. 
Encompassing the northwestern quadrant of the City, this area's land uses are predominantly low density residential. An area designated medium-low density residential paralleling SW 108th Avenue is shown as appropriate for mobile residential unit parks. A greenway extends along the Tualatin River, and a new neighborhood park is proposed. Lands north of Hazelbrook Road are within the 100-year and 10-year flood plain area and thus have restricted development potential.  
TDC 9.037. - Area 7. 
This area comprises the majority of the City's industrial land. The edges of this area are designated light industrial where the area abuts residential use. The central portion of this area is designated heavy industrial and surrounds a portion of the Hedges Creek Marsh, which is proposed for preservation. The eastern portion abuts the Urban Renewal Area.  
TDC 9.038. - Area 8. 
This area includes the portion of the City and study area located north of the Tualatin River. Interstate 5 bisects the area and crosses SW Lower Boones Ferry Road at one of the City's two interchanges. The area is characterized by mixed land uses, with commercial and industrial uses being the predominant types of development. Automobile-oriented uses such as motels, restaurants and automobile service stations are concentrated adjacent to the interchange, together with some commercial office buildings. Industrial uses are located further away from the interchange. Except for two mobile home parks, a duplex subdivision (Pipers Run) and mixed residential uses in the Mixed Use Commercial Overlay District on the Durham Quarry Site in the Durham Quarry Area, no new residential development is planned for Area 8. The Plan proposes additional general commercial and light manufacturing uses south of Jean Road, and general commercial, light manufacturing and heavy manufacturing uses north of Jean Road. 
(Ord. 849-91, §7, 11-25-91; Ord. 1062.00, §4, 12-11-00; Ord. 1062-00, 1-03-01)  
TDC 9.039. - Area 9 Leveton Industrial Area. 
The Leveton area is marked by a great diversity of land uses and opportunities. Much of the frontage along Highway 99W has been developed for many years. The largest single undeveloped parcel within the Industrial Planning Area, and, at 217 acres, one of the largest in the entire Portland metropolitan region, is here. There is a great deal of vacant land available in a variety of acreage. The area includes approximately 522 acres of land of which approximately 33 are developed. In 2002 an additional 23 acres were added to the area. A detailed discussion of the existing land uses, and planning issues and considerations is given in the Technical Memorandum and Northwest Tualatin Concept Plan 2005. There are three sub-areas in this area. Each has a different character and is described separately below: 
(1)  The Highway 99W Frontage—This area is marked by industrial uses as listed in the planning district standards and includes the Quarry Sector subarea and Northwest Tualatin Concept Plan 2005 area. It is important to recognize the character of these properties as industrial, but to assure that the land use does not conflict with or discourage development on nearby properties. The properties are designated General Manufacturing (MG) and Light Manufacturing (ML) on the plan map. The right-of-way area of Highway 99W west of Cipole Road is not developable and is designated as General Manufacturing (CG) on the plan map. 
(2)  Herman Road Frontage—This area is largely undeveloped with industrial activities. The General Manufacturing (MG) Planning District is assigned here since this area is well separated from the residential areas. The MG designation will give the area maximum flexibility for development. 
(3)  Leveton Property—The Leveton property presents unique planning opportunities that must be protected in order to assure the greatest benefit to the community from development of the property. Neither the ML nor the MG planning districts are appropriate for the property as they include uses that are not compatible with a campus industrial setting. Also, the ML and MG districts have development standards that neither encourage nor mandate the campus environment. It is clear that a special district needs to be created for this property. This plan amendment includes the creation of the Manufacturing Park (MP) Planning District and applies it to the Leveton property as a way to encourage a campus industrial environment. 
(Ord. 592-83, §35, 6-13-83. Ord. 1023-99, §1, 6-28-99; Ord. 1191-05, 6-27-05)  
TDC 9.040. - Area 10 Walgraeve Industrial Area. 
The Walgraeve area has excellent development potential. This is described in detail in the Technical Memorandum. It contains a very high percentage of large lots of over ten acres and is largely undeveloped. It contains approximately 380 acres with approximately 86 acres developed. Some of the largest industrial users within the community are in this area. The General Manufacturing (MG) Planning District is to be used in this area, as it reflects many of the existing land uses and gives maximum development flexibility. There are no residential areas adjacent to the Walgraeve area. 
(Ord. 592-83, §36, 6-13-83).  
TDC 9.041. - Area 11 Koch Industrial Area. 
The Koch Industrial Area has some of the most intense industrial development of the Industrial Planning Area, and at the same time, some of the most significant land in natural states. A detailed analysis of the area is given in the Technical Memorandum. The area is oriented on a north/south basis generally lying between the Burlington Northern Railroad on the east and the Metro UGB on the west. There are approximately 198 acres of which 54 are developed. The Tri-County Industrial Park, which straddles the rail line, makes up all of the developed property. There are two major sub-areas that are described below: 
(1)  The northern half of the property will probably continue to develop in a pattern similar to that found within the industrial park. With proper street and utility improvements, this will form a solid land use foundation for the total industrial planning area. On the western side of the railroad tracks, the existing development has taken place under the provisions of the more intensive County zoning designation. Since the vacant properties in this area are buffered from the residential area, the General Manufacturing (MG) Planning District is used. On the eastern side of the tracks, the Light Manufacturing (ML) Planning District is applied, reflecting the existing land uses and the immediate proximity to residential areas. 
(2)  In March 2011, the industrial land located south of SW Blake Street was removed from the Area 11 Koch Industrial Area and added to the Area 15 Southwest Manufacturing Business Park Area in accordance with the Southwest Tualatin Concept Plan accepted in October 2010. 
(Ord. 592-83, §37, 6-13-83; Ord. 1321-11 §8, 4-25-11)  
TDC 9.042. - Area 12 Roamer's Rest. 
This planning area has two distinct portions, the residential area to the west and the commercial area to the east. 
(1)  The residential area is identified as an ideal and critical location for higher density housing. The flat land, relationship to the river, proximity to major employment centers, and excellent transportation access all lend themselves to a higher density development pattern. As it is necessary for the City to create the opportunity to develop a city-wide average, on vacant, buildable land, of at least eight dwelling units per acre and with a 50:50 ratio of attached to detached units, these properties are critical in meeting this goal. Their higher density pattern offsets lower density patterns for vacant lands in other parts of the community. Table 9-1 shows how the three Residential Planning Areas from the 1983 plan amendment work with the existing density pattern of the City to reach the standards. A "density gradient" approach is used in the Roamer's Rest area, with RML used on the west adjacent to the agricultural lands, RMH in the center portion, and RH in the west adjacent to the commercial area. This pattern allows for a transition from light to intense land uses on the north side of the Highway. Mobile homes are allowed in this RML area. 
(2)  It has been documented elsewhere in this Plan that the commercial portion of the Roamer's Rest Planning Area is an important community resource. It is important to protect it and encourage its continued use as an area that provides commercial activities relating to the Tualatin River and the Highway. The Commercial Recreation (CR) Planning District is used in this area. 
(Ord. 592-83, §38, 6-13-83).  
TDC 9.043. - Area 13 Hazelbrook Planning Area. 
The Hazelbrook area has three main components: the higher density residential area, the single family area, and the commercial facilities. 
(1)  The higher density residential area is located along the north side of Tualatin Road extending from the commercial area at the highway intersection to approximately the east end of the manufacturing park area to the south. This area is designated for higher residential densities due to its proximity to the major employment center and its excellent transportation access. A density gradient approach is used with the RMH and RML Planning Districts in order to provide for a transition from the commercial uses to the single family areas. This area works well to help meet the City's overall housing objectives, as can be seen in (Table 9-1). 
(2)  North and east of the higher density development is a large area slated for the RL district. Much of the land north of Hazelbrook Road is in the 100-year floodplain. Development will be limited due to this physical limitation and the regulations of the City's Floodplain District. Along and south of the road, however, the lands will be available for low density residential development involving traditional single family subdivisions, and, through the conditional use process, clustered housing styles. 
(3)  A Neighborhood Commercial node is planned for the northeast corner of 115th Avenue and Tualatin Road. This two acre parcel is ideally suited for this type of convenience commercial use. It is on the intersection of an arterial and a collector. It has a relatively square shape and flat topography. Most importantly, it is located at the center of the proposed higher density area and immediately across from a major employment center. 
(Ord. 592-83, §39, 6-13-83)  
TDC 9.044. - Area 14 Graham's Ferry Planning Area. 
The Graham's Ferry area contains three basic components: the higher density area around the Norwood/Boones Ferry intersection, the higher density area on the east side of SW Grahams Ferry Road at SW Helenius Road, and the lower density residential balance of the area. 
(1)  An area with the RML Planning District is planned north of the Norwood Expressway in the vicinity of Boones Ferry Road and on the east side of SW Grahams Ferry Road at SW Helenius Road. This land lends itself to a slightly higher density than traditional single-family due to the excellent transportation access and the close relationship to the employment centers in Wilsonville. It is the determination of this Plan that it is appropriate to "spread" the higher density areas throughout the community, rather than concentrating them, such as in the Roamer's Rest and Hazelbrook Planning Areas. The use of the RML District in this area provides for the needed higher densities with a District that will allow development that is similar in character and density to the RL lands. 
(2)  The Tonquin Scablands area has three special provisions. First is the Wetland Protection District. It prohibits building in the defined wetland area and provides a setback from that area. Second is the Greenway and Riverbank Protection (GRP) District. It covers the steep cliff immediately east of the wetlands. The GRP District will allow residential density transfer to developable portions of an affected property. The third provision impacting the Scablands involves the various steep sided channels between 108th Avenue and Boones Ferry Road. It is the policy of this Plan to protect these areas on a case by case basis as development occurs by prohibiting building within the channels and allowing residential density transfer to other portions of the affected properties. 
(3)  The balance of the Graham's Ferry Planning Area is designated in the Residential Low Density (RL) Planning District. This land will develop either in the traditional single-family subdivision pattern, or, through the conditional use process, in mobile homes or clustered housing patterns. 
(Ord. 592-83, §40, 6-13-83; Ord. 1051-00 §2. 3-13-00)  
TDC 9.045. - Area 15 Southwest Manufacturing Business Park Planning Area. 
The Southwest Manufacturing Business Park Planning Area is 4431 acres of land for industrial development located in the Tonquin quarry areas west of the Portland & Western Railroad, south of SW Blake Street as far west as a future SW 124th Avenue extension and south to Tonquin Road and includes the land north of SW Blake Street and west of SW 120th Avenue to SW 124th Avenue, extending north to SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road (Shown on Map 9-2). The are was established and is consistent with the Southwest Tualatin Concept Plan (accepted by the City in October, 2010) and as a Metro-designated Regionally Significant Industrial Area (RSIA) consistent with Metro's Urban Growth Boundary expansion decisions of December 2002 and June 2004. 
The SWCP area will be designated as the Manufacturing Business Park (MBP) Planning District and will be a mix of light industrial and high-technology uses in a corporate campus setting, consistent with MBP Planning District development standards. There are three major sub-areas which are described below: 
(1)  The 302 acre RSIA-designated are (Shown on Map 9-5) requires development as Industrial consistent with Metro Urban Growth Management Functional Plan (MUGMFP) Title IV and must provide at least one 100-acre parcel and one 50-acre parcel for large industrial users within the RSIA. 
(2)  The properties in the SWCP are located north of SW Blake to SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road will include light industrial uses consistent with the MBP Planning District with some limited, local-serving commercial services in a specific area on both the east and west sides of SW 120th Avenue south of SW Itel Street. 
(3)  The 50 acre Tigard Sand & Gravel property located south of SW Blake Street already within the Tualatin's Planning Area. 
(Ord. 1321-11, §9, 4-25-11) 
Table 9-1 
Residential Densities in the Roamer's Rest, Hazelbrook, 
and Graham's Ferry Planning Areas 
Area and District 	Net Acres 	Dwelling Units Per Acre 	Dwelling Units 	Attached to
Detached Ratio 
Roamer's Rest 				
RML 	16.35 	10 	163 	100:0 
RMH 	8.87 	15 	133 	100:0 
RH 	13.74 	25 	340 	100:0 
Subtotal 	38.96 	16.32 	636 	100:0 
Hazelbrook 				
RL 	66.11 	5 	330 	0:100 
RML 	11.68 	10 	116 	100:0 
RMH 	19.54 	15 	293 	100:0 
Subtotal 	97.33 	7.59 	739 	55:45 
Graham's Ferry 				
RL 	201.69 	5 	1,008 	0:100 
RML 	42.24 	10 	421 	100:0 
Subtotal 	243.93 	5.88 	1,429 	29:71 
Total of Planning Area 	380.22 	7.37 	2,804 	52:48 
Total of Existing City 	283.80 	8.95 	2,539 	62:38 
Grand Total—Planning Area and City 	664.02 	8.05 	5,343 	57:43 
  
TDC 9.046. - Area 16 Basalt Creek Planning Area. 
The Basalt Creek Planning Area is generally located north of Basalt Creek Parkway, south of Helenius Road and Norwood Road, east of 124th Avenue, and west of I-5. The Basalt Creek Planning Area includes a mix of residential zones at various densities, a small neighborhood commercial node, an employment lands, as further described below. 
(1)  An area with the RL (Low Density Residential) Zone is planned west of Boones Ferry Road in the approximate area of the Basalt Creek Canyon. An area with the RL Zone is also planned north of Tonquin Loop, south of Helenius Road, west of Grahams Ferry Road and east of 124th Avenue. This land will develop either in the traditional single-family subdivision pattern, or, through the conditional use process in clustered housing patterns. 
(2)  An area with the RML (Medium Low Density Residential) Zone is planned south of Norwood Road, east of Boones Ferry Road, and west of I-5. An additional area of RML Zone is also planned east of Grahams Ferry Road between the two above described areas of RL Zone. These areas lends themselves to a slightly higher density than traditional single—family due to the excellent transportation access and the close relationship to the employment centers. The use of the RML Zone in this area provides for the needed higher densities with a Zone that will allow development that is similar in character and density to the RL lands. 
(3)  An area with the RH (High Density Residential) Zone is planned north of Greenhill Road and east of Boones Ferry Road. This land lends itself to a higher density due to the excellent transportation access and the close relationship to the employment centers. The use of the RH District in this area provides for the needed higher densities. 
(4)  A small area with the CN (Neighborhood Commercial) Zone is planned north of Greenhill Road and east of Boones Ferry Road. This CN Zone is intended to provide locations for commercial uses within close proximity to residential areas, to provide opportunities to serve the needs of residents for convenience shopping and services. This area lends itself to the CN Zone due to the excellent transportation access and the close proximity to abutting residential areas of medium to higher densities. 
(5)  The balance of the Basalt Creek Planning Area is designated in the MP (Manufacturing Park) Zone. The MP District is intended to be conducive to the development and protection of modern, large-scale specialized manufacturing and related uses and research facilities. This area is located north of Basalt Creek Parkway, south of Tonquin Loop, east of 124th Avenue, west of Basalt Creek Canyon and an area of RML Zone. 
(Ord. 1418-19, § 3, 4-22-19)  
CHAPTER 10 - COMMUNITY DESIGN 
 
TDC 10.010. - Background. 
In 1972 the City adopted an ordinance establishing an Architectural Review Board with powers to review the functional and esthetic aspects of each new City structure, excluding single family dwellings and minor remodeling. When adopting this ordinance, the City Council found that, "excessive uniformity, dissimilarity, inappropriateness or poor quality of design in the exterior appearance of structures and signs and, the lack of proper attention to site development and landscaping in the business, commercial industrial and certain residential areas of the City hinders the harmonious development of the City, impairs the desirability of residence, investment or occupation in the City, limits the opportunity to attain the optimum use and value of land and improvement, adversely affects the stability and value of property, produces degeneration of property in such areas with attendant deterioration of conditions affecting the peace, health and welfare of the City, and destroys a proper relationship between the taxable value of property and the cost of municipal services therefor."  
TDC 10.020. - Design Objectives. 
The City Council also adopted the following objectives as a part of the ordinance establishing the Architectural Review Board. 
(1)  Encourage originality, flexibility and innovation in site planning and development, including the architecture, landscaping and graphic design of said development. 
(2)  Discourage monotonous, drab, unsightly, dreary and inharmonious development. 
(3)  Promote the City's natural beauty and visual character and charm by insuring that structures and other improvements are properly related to their sites, and to surrounding sites and structures, with due regard to the esthetic qualities of the natural terrain and landscaping, and that proper attention is given to exterior appearances of structures and other improvements. 
(4)  Protect and enhance the City's appeal to tourists and visitors and thus support and stimulate business and industry and promote the desirability of investment and occupancy in business, commercial and industrial properties. 
(5)  Stabilize and improve property values and prevent blighted areas and thus increase tax revenues. 
(6)  Achieve the beneficial influence of pleasant environments for living and working on behavioral patterns and thus decrease the cost of governmental services. 
(7)  Foster civic pride and community spirit so as to improve the quality and quantity of citizen participation in local government and in community growth, change and improvement. 
(8)  Sustain the comfort, health, tranquility and contentment of residents and attract new residents by reason of the City's favorable environment; and thus promote and protect the peace, health and welfare of the City. 
(10.020(3) amended by Ord. 960-96, §1, 5-28-96)  
TDC 10.025. - Design Guidelines—Central Design District. 
The Design Guidelines in TDC 73.600 and 73.610 apply to properties in the Central Design District as shown on Figure 73-4. The Design Guidelines are to be considered when evaluating development in the Central Design District. 
(Ord. 1097-02, 02-11-02)  
TDC 10.030. - Design Improvements. 
While the City has been successful in improving the esthetic quality of the City, there remains considerable room for improvement. Weaknesses in the current design review program include the following: 
(1)  Lack of strong community support for design excellence. 
(2)  Lack of comprehensive and definitive architectural and landscape design standards for City development. 
(3)  Lack of qualified staff and sufficient staff time to work with developers to achieve well-designed projects and enforce construction conformance with plans approved through the Architectural Review process. 
(4)  Lack of underground electrical wiring program or other program to deal with overhead utility wiring. 
(5)  Small but ineffective street tree program. 
(Ord. 960-96, §2, 5-28-96)  
TDC 10.040. - Implementation. 
To improve the City's appearance, it will be necessary to implement steps that will increase the effectiveness of the design review process. To accomplish this, the following specific community design objectives are described. These objectives are in addition to those included in the enabling ordinance of the Architectural Review Board and are intended to aid implementation of those objectives. These additional objectives are to: 
(1)  Build strong community support for design excellence. 
(2)  Prepare and adopt specific and enforceable design standards for all private and public development. 
(3)  Retain additional qualified City staff to work with developers to achieve well-designed projects and enforce construction conformance with plans approved by the Architectural Review Board. 
(4)  Develop a long-term underground wiring program for all streets, or develop other means of screening overhead wires, in cooperation with private utilities. 
(5)  Develop a strong street tree program. 
(Ord. 960-96, §3, 5-28-96)  
TDC 10.050. - Tree Preservation and Street Tree Objectives. 
This section describes the purpose of tree preservation and street tree provisions in the Planning District Standards. 
(1)  Develop a program for tree conservation within the City, including control over tree removal, in order to protect and enhance the esthetic character of Tualatin, protect and improve air and water quality, provide and protect buffering and screening between land uses, and provide and protect habitat for wildlife, in order to create and preserve a desirable community in which to live, work, and invest. 
(a)  Tualatin's tree preservation goal is consistent with the general purpose of the Tualatin Community Plan, which is to guide the physical development of the City so as to preserve the natural beauty of the area while accommodating economic growth. 
(b)  Tualatin's tree preservation goal shall be implemented through adoption and administration of Planning District Standards consistent with this goal. 
(2)  Develop a program for street tree planting along public rights-of-way within the City. 
(Ord. 963-96, §1, 6-24-96; Ord. 1227-07 §1, 2-12-07)  
CHAPTER 11 - TRANSPORTATION 
 
TDC 11.600. - Background. 
(1)  The Tualatin Transportation System Plan (TSP) establishes a long-range vision for the combination of projects, programs, and policies that will achieve Tualatin's transportation goals. To do this, the TSP looks at the needs of its residents, businesses, employees, and visitors - now (Year 2012), and what is expected for the future (Year 2035). TSPs are required by the state of Oregon for all cities with populations greater than 2,500 people. The current TSP (December 2012) is a major update of the TSP that was adopted in 2001, with analysis completed in 2000. The TSP considers the diverse needs of all users of the City's transportation network, and sets out recommendations that will serve the needs of transit riders, bicyclists, pedestrians, freight traffic, and drivers. 
The TSP has been prepared in compliance with state, regional, and local plans and policies, including the Oregon Highway Plan (OHP), the state Transportation Planning Rule (TPR), Metro's Regional Transportation Plan (RTP), Metro's Regional Transportation Functional Plan (RTFP), Washington and Clackamas Counties Transportation System Plans, and Tualatin's Comprehensive Plan. The TSP presents a vision specific to the City's transportation future, while remaining consistent with these state, regional, and local plans. Plan elements will be implemented by the City, private developers, and regional, or state agencies. 
(2)  Regulatory Requirements. The TPR (OAR 660-012), developed by the state Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD) in accordance with state law, and Oregon Revised Statute (ORS) 197.712 guide preparation of the TSP and require that jurisdictions develop the following: 
(a)  A road plan for a network of arterial and collector roads; 
(b)  A public transit plan; 
(c)  A bicycle and pedestrian plan; 
(d)  An air, rail, water, and pipeline plan; 
(e)  A transportation financing plan; 
(f)  Policies and ordinances for implementing the TSP. 
The TPR requires that alternate travel modes including cycling, walking, and transit, be given equal consideration with automobile travel and states that reasonable effort must be applied in the development and enhancement of alternate modes in Tualatin's future transportation system. Local jurisdictions must also coordinate their plans with relevant state, regional, and county plans and amend their own ordinances to implement the TSP. 
Metro also requires that TSPs meet certain requirements that have been adopted in the RTP and RTFP. Local TSPs must: 
(a)  Establish an arterial street network, considering Metro's street design concepts and include a conceptual map of new streets; 
(b)  Implement access management standards; 
(c)  Include policies, standards, and projects that connect to transit stops; 
(d)  Develop a transit plan consistent with the regional transit functional plan; 
(e)  Develop pedestrian, bicycle, freight, parking, and transportation system management plans; 
(f)  Ensure that regional transportation needs are incorporated into the TSP; 
(g)  Include regional transportation goals for mode share and vehicles miles traveled. 
(3)  The TSP Technical Memorandum, December 2012, is adopted by reference as a supporting technical document to the Tualatin Development Code (TDC). The TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012) was prepared in compliance with the requirements of the TPR and includes the following chapters and appendices: 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
Chapter 2: Modal Plans 
Chapter 3: Implementation 
Policy and Code Language 
Appendix A: Plan and Policy Review 
Appendix B: Existing Conditions and Deficiencies 
Appendix C: Future Transportation Conditions 
Appendix D: Alternatives Analysis 
Appendix E: Transportation Funding and Improvement Costs 
Appendix F: Implementing Ordinances 
Appendix G: Public Involvement Process 
Appendix H: Bicycle and Pedestrian 
The Modal Plans element (Chapter 2) of the TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012) addresses those components necessary for development of the future transportation network. Chapter two of the TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012) was adopted as the transportation element of the Tualatin Community Plan in the Spring of 2013. This chapter is intended to provide policy guidance for transportation improvements, which are then implemented by the TDC. 
(4)  Plan Process. Tualatin began the process to update the TSP in 2011. Staff organized their work into four basic steps. 
Step 1. The team (of staff and consultants) identified existing and future needs, opportunities, project goals, and objectives. City staff and the consultant project team assembled existing and collected new data, analyzed the data to identify deficiencies and opportunities, and attended a number of community events to ask about issues with the transportation system to form an understanding of transportation problems to be addressed in the TSP. Additionally, the project website included an issues map where visitors to the website could identify transportation problems within the City. 
Step 2. Next the team created a long list of potential solutions and screened and evaluated potential solutions to see how ideas met project goals and objectives. An open house, several Transportation Task Force (TTF; refer to TDC 11.600) meetings, and Working Group meetings helped create and/or evaluate potential solutions. Throughout each of these steps, the project team engaged the community to ensure that each element was appropriate for Tualatin. 
Step 3. The team prepared the draft recommendations for projects to be included into the TSP, refining a number of recommendations for the more complex transportation needs, and prioritizing the project recommendations to help both the City and the community define which projects and programs should be implemented first. 
Step 4. Finally the team developed the draft and final TSPs for City adoption. This process focused on compiling all recommendations into the TSP document, and coordinating with relevant stakeholders in reviewing the TSP for completeness and consistency. These stakeholders included the community, City Council, Tualatin Planning Commission (TPC), Tualatin Parks Advisory Committee (TPARK), Washington County, Metro, Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT), Clackamas County, adjacent cities, and the state's DLCD. 
(5)  Study Area. In December 2002, Metro expanded the Portland Urban Growth Boundary (UGB). This expansion included lands bordering Tualatin's Planning Area boundary that are intended to develop in the future for industrial uses. Following studies of impacts of these expansions, the city's TSP (2001) was amended to incorporate these new lands. 
(a)  The City of Tualatin, in conjunction with ODOT, initiated a study of a 23 acre area south of Highway 99W and west of SW Cipole Road in 2004. The Northwest Tualatin Concept plan addressed the impacts of developing this area for industrial uses. A technical analysis was prepared for the Concept Plan, following requirements of the TPR, that specifically addressed the transportation needs associated with developing the concept plan area at urban densities. Development of the Concept Plan was guided by input from an 11-member Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) that met four times during the planning process. The TAC included representatives from the City of Tualatin, ODOT, Washington County, Bonneville Power Administration (BPA), Metro, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (representing the Tualatin River National Wildlife Refuge), Portland General Electric (PGE), Clean Water Services (CWS), and TriMet. Mailing to stakeholders and a public open house were used to obtain community feedback on the draft plan. The TSP (2001) amendments relating to the Northwest Tualatin Concept Plan area were accepted by the City Council on June 13, 2005. 
(b)  The City of Tualatin, in conjunction with ODOT, initiated a study of a 431-acre area south of SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road and west of the Portland & Western railroad tracks in 2004. In 2010, the City analyzed this area plus an additional 183-acres south of the Concept Plan area. The Southwest Tualatin Concept Plan addressed the impacts of developing this area for industrial uses, particularly the portion of the area designated as a "regionally significant industrial area." A technical analysis was prepared for the Concept Plan, following the requirements of the TPR that specifically addressed the transportation needs associated with developing the Concept Plan area at urban densities. Development of the Concept Plan was guided by input from a 31-member TAC that met 12 times during the planning process. The TAC included representatives from the Cities of Tualatin, Sherwood, and Wilsonville; Metro; ODOT; DLCD; Washington County; PGE; BPA; CWS; Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries; Coffee Creek Correctional Facility; Tualatin Valley Fire & Rescue (TVF&R); TriMet; Genessee and Wyoming Railroad; and property owners from the Tonquin Industrial Group, the Itel properties area and from Tigard Sand & Gravel. Mailings to stakeholders and four public open houses were used to obtain community feedback on the draft plan. The TSP (2001) amendments relating to the Southwest Tualatin Concept Plan area were accepted by the City Council on October 11, 2010. 
(c)  The study area for the current Tualatin TSP (2012) is comprised of the Tualatin Planning Area boundary, with one addition—the Basalt Creek planning area between Tualatin and Wilsonville. This area outside of the Planning Area Boundary, but within the study area, was included because of the transportation impact that it could have on the City's transportation network associated with the potential development of residential and employment areas. The study area is shown on several of the TSP's figures, including Figure 11-1 Functional Classification Plan. 
(6)  Public Involvement. The TSP planning process actively engaged the citizens of Tualatin in the production of its TSP. Residents, business owners, employees, and agency partners were encouraged to participate and were provided with multiple ways to share their thoughts—from initial goal development and issue identification to evaluation and screening. The public involvement plan outlined a thorough outreach process, making it easy and fun for the public to share ideas. The process provided meaningful ways to influence outcomes and took advantage of existing communication networks to reach more people. 
(a)  Transportation Task Force. The public involvement plan established a clear decision-making framework for the TSP. The Transportation Task Force (TTF), with input from Working Groups, advised the Tualatin Planning Commission (TPC). The TPC then made a recommendation to the City Council, which then adopted the final TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012) and any changes to the City's Code. In addition, the TPARK made recommendations on the bicycle and pedestrian elements to the City Council. Each of these organizations received regular project updates from City staff throughout the process and each had representative members on the TTF. These groups were given the opportunity to provide their recommendation before the TTF decisions were forwarded to TPC and the City Council. 
The TTF was formed in November 2011 for the purpose of advising the TPC and City Council about the needs and concerns of the community with regard to transportation. The City Council Citizen Involvement Committee selected TTF members carefully to be representative of neighborhoods, the business community, and the interests of Tualatin's advisory committees. Members and alternates were selected from a pool of applications. Neighboring communities, counties, TVF&R, ODOT, Metro, and TriMet also had representatives on the TTF. 
Additional information about the TTF, Working Groups, and other aspects of the public involvement process for the TSP are included in Appendix G of the TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012). 
(Ord. 1151-03, 11-10-03; Ord. 1103-02, 3-25-02; Ord. 1191-05, 6-27-05; Ord. 1321-11 §13, 4-25-11; Ord. 1354-13 §36, 02-25-13)  
TDC 11.610. - Transportation Goals and Objectives. 
(1)  Over a span of three meetings the TTF prepared a vision for the TSP, conveyed as a set of goals and objectives. In early 2012 they adopted seven principal goals organized into the following goal categories: 
Goal 1: Access and Mobility 
Goal 2: Safety 
Goal 3: Vibrant Community 
Goal 4: Equity 
Goal 5: Economy 
Goal 6: Health and the Environment 
Goal 7: Ability to be Implemented 
These goals and their associated objectives were also discussed by the community at the first open house in February 2012 and by TPC, TPARK, and City Council. The full description of goals and objectives served as the basis for the TSP's evaluation framework. This means that all TSP recommendations were tied back to the underlying vision as established by these groups. 
(2)  Goal 1: Access and Mobility. Maintain and enhance the transportation system to reduce travel times, provide travel-time reliability, provide a functional and smooth transportation system, and promote access for all users. 
Objectives: 
(a)  Improve travel time reliability/provide travel information for all modes including freight and transit. 
(b)  Provide efficient and quick travel between points A and B. 
(c)  Provide connectivity within the City between popular destinations and residential areas. 
(d)  Accommodate future traffic, bicycle, pedestrian, and transit demand. 
(e)  Reduce trip length and potential travel times for motor vehicles, freight, transit, bicycles, and pedestrians. 
(f)  Improve comfort and convenience of travel for all modes including bicycles, pedestrians, and transit users. 
(g)  Increase access to key destinations for all modes. 
(3)  Goal 2: Safety. Improve safety for all users, all modes, all ages, and all abilities within the City of Tualatin. 
Objectives: 
(a)  Address known safety locations, including high-crash locations for motor vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians. 
(b)  Address geometric deficiencies that could affect safety including intersection design, location and existence of facilities, and street design. 
(c)  Ensure that emergency vehicles are able to provide services throughout the City to support a safe community. 
(d)  Provide a secure transportation system for all modes. 
(4)  Goal 3: Vibrant Community. Allow for a variety of alternative transportation choices for citizens of and visitors to Tualatin to support a high quality of life and community livability. 
Objectives: 
(a)  Produce a plan that respects and preserves neighborhood values and identity. 
(b)  Create a variety of safe options for transportation needs including bicycles, pedestrians, transit, freight, and motor vehicles. 
(c)  Provide complete streets that include universal access through pedestrian facilities, bicycle facilities, and transit on some streets. 
(d)  Support a livable community with family-friendly neighborhoods. 
(e)  Maintain a small-town feel. 
(5)  Goal 4: Equity. Consider the distribution of benefits and impacts from potential transportation options, and work towards fair access to transportation facilities for all users, all ages, and all abilities. 
Objectives: 
(a)  Promote a fair distribution of benefits to and burdens on different populations within the City (that is, low-income, transit-dependent, minority, age groups) and different neighborhoods and employment areas within the City. 
(b)  Consider access to transit for all users. 
(6)  Goal 5: Economy. Support local employment, local businesses, and a prosperous community while recognizing Tualatin's role in the regional economy. 
Objectives: 
(a)  Support a vibrant city center and community, accessible to all modes of transportation. 
(b)  Support employment centers by providing transportation options to major employers. 
(c)  Increase access to employment and commercial centers on foot, bike, or transit. 
(d)  Consider positive and negative effects of alternatives on adjacent residential and business areas. 
(e)  Accommodate freight movement. 
(f)  Facilitate efficient access for goods, employees, and customers to and from commercial and industrial lands, including access to the regional transportation network. 
(7)  Goal 6: Health/Environment. Provide active transportation options to improve the health of citizens in Tualatin. Ensure that transportation does not adversely affect public health or the environment. 
Objectives: 
(a)  Provide active transportation options to area schools to reduce childhood obesity. 
(b)  Promote active transportation modes to support a healthy public and children of all ages. 
(c)  Provide interconnected networks for bicyclists and pedestrians throughout the City for all age groups. 
(d)  Consider air quality effects of potential transportation solutions. Protect park land and create an environmentally sustainable community. 
(e)  Consider positive and negative effects of potential solutions on the natural environment (including wetlands and habitat areas). 
(8)  Goal 7: Ability to Be Implemented. Promote potential options that are able to be implemented because they have community and political support and are likely to be funded. 
Objectives: 
(a)  Promote fiscal responsibility and ensure that potential transportation system options are able to be funded given existing and anticipated future funding sources. 
(b)  Evaluate potential options for consistency with existing community, regional, and state goals and policies. 
(c)  Strive for broad community and political support. 
(d)  Optimize benefits over the life cycle of the potential option. 
(e)  Consider transportation options that make the best use of the existing network. 
(f)  Conduct the planning process with adequate input and feedback from citizens in each affected neighborhood. 
(Ord. 1103-02, 3-25-02; Ord. 1224-06 §2, 11-13-06; Ord. 1354-13 §36, 02-25-13)  
TDC 11.620. - Functional Classification Plan. 
(1)  A city's functional classification plan defines the intended operations and character of roadways within the overall transportation system including standards for roadway and right-of-way width, access spacing, and pedestrian and bicycle facilities. The City of Tualatin's functional classification system applies to roadways owned by the City, the County, and the State, and includes principal arterials, major arterials, minor arterials, major collectors, minor collectors, connector, and local roads. Figure 11-1 presents the updated functional classification plan for the City of Tualatin. 
The arterial roadways carry a high number of vehicles including transit and freight vehicles, and provide mobility with few opportunities for local access. Collectors assemble traffic from a neighborhood or district and deliver it to the closest arterial street. Collectors serve shorter trip lengths than arterials and have more local access opportunities. Both arterials and collectors within Tualatin are owned by a variety of agencies including the City, ODOT, and Clackamas and Washington Counties. The roadway owners are responsible for maintenance and upkeep on the roadways and they make decisions on upgrades to their facilities. TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012) describes the functional classifications and the purpose they are intended to serve in more detail; Appendix A, Plan and Policy Review, of the TSP Technical Memorandum provides a detailed description of the various policies associated with roadway ownership. 
There are a number of existing freight and truck routes through the City designated by the City, the State, and the Federal government. These routes have specific design criteria and mobility standards to ensure that these roadways serve freight traffic. 
(2)  Functional Classification Policies. Functional classification policies support the City's transportation goals and objectives included in TDC 11.610. Policies help provide direction for roadways and roadway classifications. 
(a)  Functional Classification Policy 1: Major and minor arterials will comprise the main backbone of the freight system, ensuring that freight trucks are able to easily move within, in, and out of the City. 
(b)  Functional Classification Policy 2: Continue to construct existing and future roadways to standard when possible for the applicable functional classification to serve transportation needs within the City. 
(3)  Street Design Standards. Street design standards by functional classification are included in TDC Section 74.425. 
(4)  The RTP's Regional Street Design System describes typical features of its street design designations. For comparison purposes, Metro's Regional Street Design System map has been recreated in Figure 11-2. The Tualatin TSP's street design standards for roadways shown on the RTP Regional Street Design System map are generally in conformance with the RTP's concepts, particularly in the areas of pedestrian and bicycle lanes, landscape strips, and medians or center turn lanes. 
(Ord. 1151-03, 11-10-03; Ord. 1103-02, 3-25-02; Ord. 1191-05; 6-27-05; Ord. 1354-13 §36. 02-25-13)  
TDC 11.630. - Street System Modal Plan. 
(1)  The street system modal plan consists of several sections: a listing of street urban upgrades and new streets, other intersection-specific or non-capacity streets projects, access management policies, and traffic operation standards. This modal plan is included in its entirety in the TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012) and pertinent sections are included in this section of TDC Chapter 11. 
(2)  Summary of Limitations and Needs of Street System. Key needs identified for the street system include: 
(a)  Improved Roadway connectivity. New roadway connections should be explored to improve east-west connectivity south of SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road and north-south regional connectivity. Metro RTP policies related to a complete street system identify one-mile spacing between major arterial streets with collector streets or minor arterials spaced a half-mile apart. 
(b)  Improved travel time along congested corridors. Focus on reducing vehicle delay on key corridors. 
(c)  Intersection improvements. Address intersection delay and intersection issues in congested areas. 
(d)  Upgrading roadway geometries. City design standards for roadway width, sidewalks, and bicycle facilities should be followed where specific deficiencies have been identified. 
(e)  Additionally, safety is a concern for the community. Safety issues were identified at the following intersections: 
(i)  SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road and SW Boones Ferry Road 
(ii)  SW Nyberg Street and I-5 southbound off ramps. 
(3)  Roadway Policies. The following establish the City's policies on roadways. 
(a)  Roadway Policy 1: Implement design standards that provide clarity to developers while maintaining flexibility for environmental constraints. 
(b)  Roadway Policy 2: Ensure that street designs accommodate all anticipated users including transit, freight, bicyclists and pedestrians, and those with limited mobility. 
(c)  Roadway Policy 3: Work with Metro and adjacent jurisdictions when extending roads or multi-use paths from Tualatin to a neighboring City. 
(4)  Local Streets Plan. The RTP calls for cities to identify all contiguous areas of vacant and redevelopable parcels of five or more acres planned or zoned for residential or mixed-use development and to prepare a conceptual new streets plan map. Figure 11-3 presents the City of Tualatin's Local Streets Plan. The intent of this map is to identify the locations of future street connections and desired connections within future development that promote a connected street system. The endpoints of the connections should be considered fixed, unless the Community Development Director or their designee determines that an alternate connection point is preferable due to safety, operations, improved connectivity concerns, or environmental impacts. The routes connecting endpoints may vary, as long as a reasonably direct route between the two points is provided. 
(5)  Access Management. Access management is important to maintain traffic flow and ensure safety on the City's arterial street network, including SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road, Oregon Highway 99W (OR 99W), and other high-traffic routes. Limiting the number of points where traffic can enter and exit reduces potential conflict points, improves roadway performance, and reduces the need for capacity expansion. The City manages access through Chapter 75 of the TDC; that chapter details where access is permitted on arterial and collector roads within the City. Tualatin must coordinate with Washington and Clackamas Counties and ODOT to manage access on roads the City does not own, including SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road, SW Cipole Road, SW 65th Avenue, SW Borland Road, and sections of SW Boones Ferry Road. Chapter 75 of the TDC, most recently updated in 2012, has specific access standards for each arterial road within Tualatin. It provides recommendations for future changes on specific roads, as well as potential solutions for access issues. 
(a)  Access Management Policies. Access management policies are: 
(i)  Access Management Policy 1: No new driveways or streets on arterial roadways within the City, except where noted in the TDC, Chapter 75, usually when no alternative access is available. 
(ii)  Access Management Policy 2: Where a property abuts an arterial and another roadway, the access for the property shall be located on the other roadway, not the arterial. 
(iii)  Access Management Policy 3: Adhere to intersection spacing included in Chapter 75 of the TDC. 
(iv)  Access Management Policy 4: Limit driveways to right-in, right-out (where appropriate) through raised medians or other barriers to restrict left turns. 
(v)  Access Management Policy 5: Look for opportunities to create joint accesses for multiple properties, where possible, to reduce the number of driveways on arterials. 
(vi)  Access Management Policy 6: No new single-family home, duplex or triplex driveways on major collector roadways within the City, unless no alternative access is available. 
(vii)  Access Management Policy 7: On collector roadways, residential, commercial and industrial driveways where the frontage is greater or equal to 70 feet are permitted. Minimum spacing at 100 feet. Uses with less than 50 feet of frontage shall use a common (joint) access where available. 
(6)  Traffic Operations Standards. This section includes a discussion of standards included in the OHP, ODOT's Highway Design Manual (HDM), and the TPR and City documents for local roadways. Based on the preferred system for operational analysis, there are four intersections that do not meet jurisdictional standards after mitigation strategies are included. These intersections that experience operational constraints are in the SW Lower Boones Ferry Road/I-5 interchange area, and are due to the additional motor vehicle trips associated with the widening of SW Boones Ferry Road from SW Martinazzi Avenue to SW Lower Boones Ferry Road. 
The first mitigation strategies developed explored transportation system management techniques (maximizing operations at intersections through signal timing adjustments and/or phasing adjustments). If system management techniques did not achieve acceptable jurisdictional operations, localized capacity improvements were explored (for example, a new turn pocket). Generally these improvements allowed for adequate signal operations under a mitigated scenario. 
There were some intersections located in the downtown core area that were not able to meet jurisdictional standards without the implementation of significant capacity and/or roadway widening improvements. These types of major infrastructure improvements were deemed to be too impactful to the downtown core and were not included in the final preferred system improvements. The downtown Tualatin area is designated a Town Center by Metro, and using that designation, Town Centers are allowed to not meet jurisdictional standards. Alternate standards for Town Centers in the RTP are based on a two-hour peak hour. The standard volume to capacity ratio (v/c) for the first peak hour is 1.1, and for the second peak hour is 0.99. These intersections meet the RTP standards, and there is no need for additional alternate mobility standards. 
(Ord. 1103-02, 3-25-02; Ord. 1354-13 §36, 02-25-13)  
TDC 11.640. - Transit Modal Plan. 
(1)  Public transit in Tualatin is envisioned to be multi-faceted by including local and express bus service, commuter rail, potential high capacity transit, and local transit shuttle services. In addition, the community's vision for public transit includes improvements in the quality of transit service, as well as land uses that better complement and encourage use of transit in downtown Tualatin. Figure 11-5 presents the updated transit system for the City of Tualatin. 
(2)  Summary of Limitations and Needs for Transit. TriMet does not provide transit service within all areas of Tualatin or on all major corridors. No transit service is provided on SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road or SW Tualatin Road, and many residents in the western portion of the City live more than a mile from the nearest transit line. Many residents who do live near a bus line are not served by transit at regular intervals during the day. According to the Conceptual Linking Tualatin Plan (Draft 2012), over 11,000 workers and over 5,000 households (over half of the people living and working in the city) lack regular transit service within a quarter mile of where they live or work. Because of the limitations of service during off-peak hours, non-commuting trips may be more difficult to complete using transit in Tualatin. Community feedback indicated the following specific needs for transit: 
(a)  Service connecting the west side of Tualatin to the downtown core; 
(b)  Park-and-rides in the west and south areas of Tualatin; 
(c)  Extended service hours, including weekend service; 
(d)  More direct connections to places other than downtown Portland. 
Additional needs for transit stops include direct and safe access to transit stops and bicyclist and pedestrian amenities at stops, especially where transit riders are able to transfer lines or modes. 
(3)  Transit Policies. The City of Tualatin's policies on public transit are as follows: 
(a)  Transit Policy 1: Partner with TriMet to jointly develop and implement a strategy to improve existing transit service in Tualatin. 
(b)  Transit Policy 2: Partner with the Tualatin Chamber of Commerce to support grant requests that would expand the Tualatin Shuttle services. 
(c)  Transit Policy 3: Partner with TriMet, Metro, and neighboring communities to plan the development of high-capacity transit in the Southwest Corridor, as adopted in the Metro High Capacity Transit System Plan. 
(d)  Transit Policy 4: Partner with TriMet, Metro, and neighboring communities to plan development of high-capacity transit connecting Tualatin and Oregon City, as adopted in the Metro High Capacity Transit System Plan. 
(e)  Transit Policy 5: Coordinate with ODOT and neighboring communities on conversations related to Oregon Passenger Rail between Portland and Eugene. 
(f)  Transit Policy 6: Develop and improve pedestrian and bicycle connections and access to transit stops. 
(g)  Transit Policy 7: Encourage higher-density development near high-capacity transit service. 
(h)  Transit Policy 8: Metro in the RTP calls for increased WES service frequency. The City will coordinate with TriMet, Metro, and ODOT to explore service frequency improvements and the possible inclusion of a second WES station in south Tualatin. 
(i)  In addition to the transit policies included here, Bicycle and Pedestrian Policies 7 and 8, included in TDC 11.650, are applicable to transit. 
(Ord. 1103-02, 3-25-02; Ord. 1354-13 §36, 02-25-13)  
TDC 11.650. - Pedestrian, Bicycle, and Multi-Use Path Modal Plan. 
(1)  This modal plan describes pedestrian and bicycle improvements to comfortably and safely accommodate bicyclists and pedestrians within the City. These include multi-use paths, specific bicycle and pedestrian improvements, and street upgrades. Figure 11-4 presents the updated bicycle and pedestrian system for the City of Tualatin. 
(2)  Summary of Limitations and Needs for Bicycle and Pedestrian Facilities. This section summarizes limitations and needs for bicycle and pedestrian facilities, and multi-use paths. A full description of existing conditions and deficiencies for the bicycle, pedestrian, and pathway system can be found in Appendix B of the TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012). 
(a)  Bicycle Facility Needs. Existing bicycle facilities in Tualatin have a few gaps and challenging connections: 
(i)  Difficult left-turn maneuvers; 
(ii)  Difficult areas with low bike visibility; 
(iii)  Bike lanes outside of turn lanes; 
(iv)  Obstacles within the bike lanes; 
(v)  Gaps in the network; and 
(vi)  In addition to these needs, there are a number of high-crash locations. 
Most crashes result in an injury to the bicyclist, and most occur on a dry roadway surface in daylight conditions. High-crash locations include SW Boones Ferry Road and SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road; as well as, the SW Nyberg Road interchange ramps at I-5. 
(b)  Pedestrian Facility Needs. Pedestrian facility needs include: 
(i)  Fill sidewalk gaps on arterials and collector streets at: 
(a)  Sections of SW Herman Road; 
(b)  Sections of SW Grahams Ferry Road; 
(c)  Sections of SW Boones Ferry Road; 
(d)  SW Blake Street between SW 105th and SW 108th Avenues; 
(e)  SW Sagert Street overpass over I-5; and 
(f)  SW 105th Avenue between SW Paulina Drive and SW Blake Street. 
(ii)  Narrow or obstructed sidewalks. 
(iii)  Wide or angled crosswalks at intersections. 
(iv)  Difficult crossing on major roadways (SW Boones Ferry Road, SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road, and roadways in the downtown core). 
(v)  Most of the pedestrian crashes reported in the 5-year crash study timeframe occurred on SW Boones Ferry Road, generally when a vehicle failed to yield for pedestrians. Most crashes occurred when a vehicle was turning. 
(c)  Multi-Use Path Needs. Additional bicycle and pedestrian connections over the Tualatin River are needed to connect with existing regional paths; as well as, to provide alternate routes to the one existing Ki-a-Kuts bridge that is exclusively for bicycles and pedestrians (from Tualatin Community Park to Durham City Park in Durham). Additionally, many of the existing multi-use paths are fragmented and do not connect. Signs and other way-finding guides are needed to inform bicyclists or pedestrians how to move among the various pathways, and from the pathways to on-street facilities. The planned multi-use path network is only half constructed, once the system is complete, the multi-use path network will be more comprehensive. 
(3)  Bicycle and Pedestrian Policies. The City of Tualatin's policies on bicycle and pedestrian facilities are as follows: 
(a)  Bicycle and Pedestrian Policy 1: Support Safe Routes to Schools (SRTS) for all Tualatin schools. 
(b)  Bicycle and Pedestrian Policy 2: Work with partner agencies to support and build trails. 
(c)  Bicycle and Pedestrian Policy 3: Allow wider sidewalks downtown for strolling and outdoor cafes. 
(d)  Bicycle and Pedestrian Policy 4: Add benches along multi-use paths for pedestrians throughout the City (especially in the downtown core). 
(e)  Bicycle and Pedestrian Policy 5: Develop and implement a toolbox, consistent with Washington County, for mid-block pedestrian crossings. 
(f)  Bicycle and Pedestrian Policy 6: Implement bicycle and pedestrian projects to help the City achieve the regional non-single-occupancy vehicle modal targets in Table 11-1. 
(g)  Bicycle and Pedestrian Policy 7: Implement bicycle and pedestrian projects to provide pedestrian and bicycle access to transit and essential destinations for all mobility levels, including direct, comfortable, and safe pedestrian and bicycle routes. 
(h)  Bicycle and Pedestrian Policy 8: Ensure that there are bicycle and pedestrian facilities at transit stations. 
(i)  Bicycle and Pedestrian Policy 9: Create on- and off-street bicycle and pedestrian facilities connecting residential, commercial, industrial, and public facilities such as parks, the library, and schools. 
(j)  Bicycle and Pedestrian Policy 10: Create obvious and easy to use connections between on- and off-street bicycle and pedestrian facilities, and integrate off-street paths with on-street facilities. 
(4)  Bicycle Boulevards. Currently, there are no existing bicycle boulevards in Tualatin, though Washington County has bicycle boulevard policies and design standards. 
Bicycle boulevards are roadways that use a variety of design treatments to reduce vehicle speeds so that motorists and bicyclists generally travel at the same speed, to create a safer and more comfortable environment for all users. Bicycle boulevards may include a variety of applications ranging from minor street signing enhancements (such as shared lane markings) to larger scale projects (for example, bike-only access at intersections, traffic diverters). Boulevards also incorporate treatments to facilitate safe and convenient crossings where bicyclists must traverse major streets. Traffic controls along a boulevard may assign priority to through cyclists while encouraging through vehicle traffic to use alternate parallel routes. 
Bicycle boulevards work best in well-connected street grids, where riders can follow intuitive and reasonably direct routes. Boulevards also work best when higher-order parallel streets exist to serve through vehicle traffic. Bicycle boulevards are generally located on streets with lower traffic volumes and vehicle speeds, such as minor collectors or local streets passing through residential neighborhoods. Typically a bicycle boulevard would be located on a street where vehicles travel less than 30 miles per hour and average daily traffic volume is less than 3,000 vehicles (in both directions). 
Proposed bicycle boulevards in Tualatin are shown on Figure 11-4. These are all low volume, low speed streets that connect neighborhoods with roadways and trails where bicycle infrastructure investments have been made. As a short-term action, the City should consider signing these roadways as bicycle routes, and monitor usage on an annual basis. As bicycle usage increases, and bicyclists and drivers become more used to sharing travel lanes, further investments could be considered to enhance safety for bicyclists. 
(Ord. 1103-02, 3-25-2002; Ord. 1354-13 §36, 02-25-13; Ord. 1367-14 §1, 02-24-14)  
TDC 11.660. - Freight Plan. 
(1)  Efficient truck movement plays a critical role in the economic wellbeing and development of Tualatin. Trucks must be able to access commercial, industrial, manufacturing, distribution, and other employment areas both in Tualatin and connecting to the regional system. Future commercial/industrial uses are expected to be located consistent with the land uses identified in the Comprehensive Plan, which matches the current planning district designations, as codified in the TDC. 
(2)  The freight network illustrated in Figure 11-6 is largely consistent with the functional classification plan (Figure 11-1), which strives to connect industrial and manufacturing uses to the regional and state transportation network via a series of major and minor arterial roadways. The movement of raw materials and finished products via designated truck routes provides for efficient movement of goods while maintaining neighborhood livability, public safety, and minimizing maintenance costs of the roadway system. Federally and state designated truck routes, part of the National Highway System (NHS), have been identified on I-5 and OR 99W. Metro identifies "road connectors" in the RTP freight network on SW 124th Avenue, SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road, SW Lower Boones Ferry Road, and SW Boones Ferry Road. The City of Tualatin designates additional truck routes on roadway facilities that connect commercial/industrial districts within the City to major arterials and, ultimately, to OR 99W, I-5, and I-205. 
(3)  The needs of the freight system are consistent with those identified in the Street System Plan (TDC 11.630). Projects that address needs related to truck routes, either directly or by providing alternate routes that improve traffic operations along truck routes, serve the needs of the freight system. All new roadways should be built to current City design standards to meet the operational needs of trucks on designated truck routes. 
(Ord. 1103-02, 3-25-02; Ord. 1354-13 §36, 02-25-13)  
TDC 11.670. - Rail Plan. 
(1)  Portland and Western Railroad (PNWR) owns and operates two freight rail lines within the City. One track (running north-south) accommodates both freight and the WES commuter rail, and an east-west line runs along the south side of SW Herman Road. As of November 2012 the east-west line carries one train daily in each direction, and the north south has two freight trains daily in addition to the WES trains described in the Transit section. 
There are 13 gated public railroad crossings in Tualatin and a number of additional driveways or private roads that cross the railroad. The private crossings are stop controlled, but not signalized. Freight trains have the right-of-way at all intersections. The low number of trains does not present a large safety concern in the City, and recent Quiet Zone work done in conjunction with the north-south WES rail line opening added gates at all public crossings. 
(2)  PNWR has no current plans to increase freight service through Tualatin. Although the east-west track runs adjacent to manufacturing areas, no rail sidings or other access to businesses are planned. 
(3)  Freight Rail Policies. Following are policies for freight rail: 
(a)  Freight Rail Policy 1: Continue to coordinate with PNWR and TriMet to ensure that railroad crossings are safe and have few noise impacts on adjacent neighborhoods 
(b)  Freight Rail Policy 2: Look for opportunities to shift goods shipments to rail to help reduce the demand for freight on Tualatin's roads. 
(c)  Freight Rail Policy 3: Look for opportunities to create multi-modal hubs to take advantage of the freight rail lines. 
(4)  Passenger Rail Policies. The City of Tualatin's policies on public transit are described in TDC 11.640 as part of the Transit Modal Plan. Those policies that may relate to the existing heavy rail lines in Tualatin include Transit Policies 3, 4, 5, and 8. 
(Ord. 1103-02, 3-25-02; Ord. 1354-13 §36, 02-25-13)  
TDC 11.680. - Water, Pipeline, and Air Plan. 
This section includes the Water, Pipeline and Air Plans. 
(1)  Water Plan. The Tualatin River is the only large waterway within the City of Tualatin. The river is used primarily for recreation and is open for canoeing and kayaking. Therefore, the TSP does not include any specific policies, programs or projects for the Tualatin River as part of the transportation network. However, several projects are proposed in other sections of the TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012) to increase access to the river for recreation purposes. 
(2)  Pipeline Plan. A natural gas transmission pipeline and a gasoline pipeline cross through the City. There is no anticipated need to increase pipeline capacity or construct new pipelines through the City, and therefore no such improvements are proposed in the TSP. 
(3)  Air Plan. There are no airports within the City of Tualatin, although several airports are located within 30 miles of the City: the Aurora State Airport, Hillsboro Municipal Airport, and Portland International Airport. These airports meet the commercial, freight, and business aviation needs of Tualatin residents. No plans are proposed to construct airport facilities within the City of Tualatin; existing airports are anticipated to continue serving the citizens of Tualatin adequately. 
(Ord. 1103-02, 3-25-02; Ord. 1354-13 §36, 02-25-13)  
TDC 11.690. - Transportation Demand Management. 
(1)  The TPR requires all cities with populations greater than 25,000 people to develop a Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Plan. The RTP also requires that TDM strategies be used to encourage alternative transportation modes and achieve higher vehicle occupancy targets. TDM measures are designed to change travel behavior in order to reduce the need for more road capacity and improve performance of the road system. Typical TDM projects include encouraging use of travel modes other than the auto, ride sharing, and measures to reduce the need for travel—such as telecommuting policies. 
TDM policies and projects can be cost-effective ways to reduce congestion by encouraging the use of other modes, reducing the need for travel or reducing the number of vehicle miles driven. The City of Tualatin can implement a range of TDM measures to manage travel demand, in conjunction with partner organizations in many cases. Providing bicycle, pedestrian, and transit infrastructure can be effective means to encourage drivers to switch to other modes. Many of the pedestrian, bicycle, and transit improvements proposed in other sections of the TSP can be considered TDM measures as they encourage use of travel modes other than the auto. In addition to these infrastructure projects, a number of strategies are applicable to Tualatin, as discussed in detail in the TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012). 
(2)  Transportation Demand Management Policies. The following policies support other modal plans in the TSP and help Tualatin meet its mode-share targets, as required by the RTP and presented in Table 11-1: 
(a)  TDM Policy 1: Support demand reduction strategies, such as ride sharing, preferential parking, and flex-time programs. 
(b)  TDM Policy 2: Partner with the Tualatin Chamber of Commerce, the Westside Transportation Alliance, major employers, and business groups to implement TDM programs 
(c)  TDM Policy 3: Explore the use of new TDM strategies to realize more efficient use of the City's transportation system 
(d)  TDM Policy 4: Support Washington County's regional TDM programs and policies to reduce the number of single-occupancy vehicle (SOV) trips 
(e)  TDM Policy 5: Promote the use and expansion of the Tualatin Shuttle program. 
(3)  Metro Modal Targets. Metro in its 2035 RTP established modal targets for how residents in the region will make trips in 2040. These are separated out by regional designations. Tualatin has a number of designations within the City limits, as described in the following sections and shown in Figures 9-4 (Design Type Boundaries) and 11-2 (Metro Regional Street Design System). 
(a)  Town Center. This designation is consistent with the Town Center Plan study area, centered on the Lake of the Commons and includes land south of the Tualatin River and west of I-5, including the Tualatin Community Park. The western Boundary is SW 95th Avenue south to SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road, and then southern boundary is SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road to approximately SW Boones Ferry Road then continues east near SW Warm Springs Street. 
(b)  Corridors. There are a number of corridors in Tualatin: SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road is a regional street, along with 99W, SW 124th Avenue, and SW Tualatin Road. SW Boones Ferry Road is a community street, and SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road/SW Nyberg Street in downtown are community boulevards. Regional arterials include 99W, SW 124th Avenue, SW Boones Ferry Road, SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road, SW Herman Road, SW Nyberg Street, SW Sagert Street, SW Borland Road, and SW 65th Avenue. 
(c)  Employment Land. Most of western Tualatin is employment land south of SW Tualatin Road and west of the railroad tracks. 
(d)  Parks and Natural Areas. Hedges Creek is designated a park and natural area, along with many of the other greenway areas including Nyberg Creek Greenway, Saum Creek, and other City parks. 
(e)  Neighborhoods. Neighborhood areas include southern Tualatin near SW Boones Ferry Road, northern Tualatin north of SW Tualatin Road, and eastern Tualatin excluding the hospital area and the greenways and parks. 
(f)  These designations have modal targets associated with them, as seen in Table 11-1. The non-drive-alone modal target for Tualatin is 45—55 percent in the Town Center and Station Community, and 40—45 percent for the employment land, parks and natural areas, and neighborhoods. 
(Ord. 1103-02, 03-25-02; Ord. 1321-11 §15, 4-25-11; Ord. 1354-13 §36, 02-25-13)  
TDC 11.700. - Transportation System Management. 
(1)  Transportation System Management (TSM) measures are designed to increase the efficiency, safety, capacity, and level of service of the transportation system without physically increasing roadway capacity. Typical TSM projects include traffic light synchronization, traffic calming, travel information systems, access management, and parking management strategies. Many of the projects listed in the modal plans—including the Transit, Pedestrian and Bicycle, and Access Management plans—qualify as TSM measures. 
Many TSM tools can be implemented inexpensively to help make the existing system work more efficiently. A wide range of TSM strategies are applicable to Tualatin. These are discussed in detail in the TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012). 
(Ord. 1354-13 §36, 02-25-13)  
TDC 11.710. - Parking Plan. 
(1)  The City owns several public parking lots in downtown Tualatin to support denser development in the City's core area. A separate taxing district has been created to support ongoing maintenance and operations of these parking lots. The City completed a study in 2011 which identified that the existing parking supply is sufficient to meet the parking demand in downtown Tualatin. 
(2)  The RTFP requires parking policies and a parking plan in a TSP or other planning document. The current TDC includes parking minimums and is compliant with this requirement. 
(Ord. 1354-13 §36, 02-25-13)  
TDC 11.720. - Implementation. 
(1)  The project table for each modal plan in the Tualatin TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012) includes recommendations for applicable funding sources. Additionally, the relative importance of TSP projects are identified in the project tables, based on community goals, the magnitude of the deficiency or issue that the project addresses, and the ability to secure funding, conduct engineering, and build a project. Appendix E of the TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012) provides a detailed description of transportation funding and improvement costs for all of the TSP's recommendations. 
(2)  A variety of established federal, state, regional, and local funding sources are available to fund future transportation projects in the Tualatin TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012), depending on the eligibility requirements. Implementation of TSP projects will depend on funding and community priorities. 
(3)  Prioritization. Prioritization of projects within the TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012) is separated into three categories: short-term, medium-term, and long-term. Short term projects are expected to be built within zero—five years, while medium-term are five—ten years, and long-term projects are expected to be built in the 10—20 year time frame. Prioritization is determined based on a combination of the most important projects to implement first, the ease of implementation, and the potential cost—some projects will take a number of years to identify and secure funding. Some projects will also need regional coordination and support, which may take time to secure an agreement. Prioritization is an estimate: long-term projects may be implemented sooner than 10—20 years due to funding becoming available, a high degree of community support or other factors. The suggested priority for projects in the TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012) is a general guide and not a required timeframe. 
The City will need to periodically update the TSP, and will review the need and timing for longer-term improvements at those times. Prioritizing specific near-term projects will occur annually when the City updates its five-year financial plan and prepares its capital improvement plan (CIP) for the following year. Future road improvements or related transportation projects listed or not listed in the TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012) are not required to be reviewed and approved through a land use process. 
The construction of roads, storm drainage, water, sewer, and electrical facilities in conjunction with local development activity should be coordinated if the City of Tualatin is to continue to develop in an orderly and efficient way. Consequently, the plans proposed in the TSP Technical Memorandum (December 2012) should be considered in light of developing infrastructure sequencing plans, and may need to be modified accordingly. 
(Ord. 1103-02, 3-25-02; Ord. 1354-13 §36, 02-25-13) 
Table 11-1 
Metro Modal Targets 
2040 Regional
Designation 	Non-drive-alone Modal Target 	2040 Regional
Designation 	Non-drive-alone Modal Target 
Regional Centers 
Town Centers 
Main Streets 
Station Communities 
Corridors 
Passenger Intermodal Facilities 	45—55% 	Regional Centers 
Town Centers 
Main Streets 
Station Communities 
Corridors 
Passenger Intermodal Facilities 	45—55% 
Industrial Areas 
Freight Intermodal Facilities 
Employment Areas 
Inner Neighborhoods 
Outer Neighborhoods 	40—45% 	Industrial Areas 
Freight Intermodal Facilities 
Employment Areas 
Inner Neighborhoods 
Outer Neighborhoods 	40—45% 
 
Source: Metro's 2035 RTP  
CHAPTER 12 - WATER SERVICES 
 
TDC 12.010. - Introduction. 
(1)  In 1979, the City of Tualatin adopted the Tualatin Community Plan. R. A. Wright Engineering Company prepared the water service element. In 1982, the Tualatin Community Plan was reviewed due to the annexation of approximately 900 acres west of the city limits. City staff reviewed the water sewer service element. In 1983 the City Council amended the Plan, including the water service element. The Plan was changed from covering only the city limits to covering the city limits and the area out to the Urban Growth Boundary (UGB)(an "Active Plan"). 
(2)  In accordance with the Urban Planning Area Agreement between the City and Washington County and an Intergovernmental Agreement between the City and the City of Portland, the City of Tualatin is responsible for providing water service in the City of Tualatin. The City of Tualatin obtains its water from the City of Portland. 
(3)  In 1990 and 1999 minor amendments to TDC Chapter 12 were adopted. In 2000 and 2002 the City contracted with CH2M Hill to update the City's water master plan. The 2000 update reflected Tualatin's growth and refined the 1983 plan. 
(4)  The 2003 "Report, Tualatin Water Master Plan Update," (the "Master Plan") was the basis for amending the Tualatin Development Code (TDC), Chapter 12, in 2003. The purpose of the 2003 Master Plan was to provide the City with a comprehensive water master plan for future development of the water system. The 2003 Master Plan included a description of the existing water system, the planning criteria, a water system analysis and a capital improvement plan. 
The 2003 Master Plan study area was the same as the Tualatin Community Plan, plus it included the Southwest Manufacturing Business Park. 
(5)  The July 2013 Water Master Plan report was prepared as an update to the 2003 Master Plan. Its purpose is to be a comprehensive analysis of the City's water system, to identify system deficiencies, determine future water distribution system supply requirements and recommend water system facility improvements that correct system deficiencies and provide for future system expansion. 
(6)  The July 2013 Water Master Plan anticipates demand as residential growth from redevelopment and infill, within the Town Center area, and industrial and employment growth in the Southwest Concept Plan Area. 
(7)  The purpose of Chapter 12 is to provide for: 
(a)  Reinforcement of the existing water system to provide adequate peak and fire-flow capabilities; 
(b)  Expansion of the distribution system as areas inside the Urban Growth Boundary are annexed to the City and are developed; 
(c)  Expansion of supply and storage facilities for present and future needs; and 
(d)  Financing the construction of the foregoing facilities. 
(Ord. 592-83, §53, 6-13-83; Ord. 1152-03, 12-8-03; Ord. 1191-05, 6-27-05; Ord. 1321-11 §31 4-25-11; Ord. 1359-13 §1, 9-23-13).  
TDC 12.020. - Water Service Policies. 
City of Tualatin water service policies are to: 
(1)  Plan and construct a City water system that protects the public health, provides cost-effective water service, meets the demands of users, addresses regulatory requirements and supports the land uses designated in the Tualatin Community Plan. 
(2)  Require developers to aid in improving the water system by constructing facilities to serve new development and extend lines to adjacent properties. 
(3)  Water lines should be looped whenever possible to prevent dead-ends, to maintain high water quality and to increase reliability in the system. 
(4)  Improve the water system to provide adequate service during peak demand periods and to provide adequate fire flows during all demand periods. 
(5)  Review and update the water system capital improvement program and funding sources as needed or during periodic review. 
(6)  Prohibit the extension of City water services outside the City's municipal boundaries, unless the water service is provided to an area inside an adjacent city. 
(7)  The July 2013 Water Master Plan is accepted by reference as a supporting technical document to the Tualatin Community Plan. 
(Ord. 1152-03, 12-8-03; 03; Ord. 1191-05, 6-27-05; Ord. 1321-11 §32, 4-25-11; Ord. 1359-13 §2, 9-23-13).  
TDC 12.030. - Design Criteria. 
The proposed water supply and distribution system is designed to accommodate the maximum demand that the system is expected to experience. The maximum demand is composed of consumer flows and fire flows. 
(Ord. 1152-03, 12-8-03).  
TDC 12.040. - Population. 
The July 2013 Water Master Plan projected a "build out population" of 29,396 residents; including estimates of 2,288 for redevelopment and infill and 1,048 for Town Center residential growth. 
(Ord. 1152-03, 12-8-03; Ord. 1359-13 §3, 9-23-13).  
TDC 12.050. - Consumption. 
(1)  Population projections, commercial and industrial zoning acreage, and historical water use data formed the basis for the July 2013 Water Master Plan's future water demand projection. 
(a)  The future per capita residential average day demand was assumed to be 90 gallons per capita per day. 
(b)  The relationship between the average day demand and other flow rate demands in the system is called the peaking factor. A peaking factor of 2.2 was used in the July 2013 Water Master Plan's calculation of combined residential, commercial and industrial maximum day demand. 
(c)  Large volume users are typically large multi-family projects and specialized industrial uses. The 2003 Master Plan identified 16 large water uses and they represent about 30% of the total system demand. 
(d)  Unaccounted-for water is the difference between the total amount purchased wholesale from the Portland Water Bureau and the total amount billed to customers. It includes leakage losses, meter discrepancies, hydrant and main flushing, operation and maintenance uses, fire flow uses, unauthorized connections and unmetered miscellaneous uses. 
(2)  The July 2013 Master Plan's projected average day demand at buildout beyond 2031 for residential uses was 2.65 million gallons per day. The July 2013 Master Plan's projected average day demand at buildout beyond 2031 for commercial and industrial uses was 3.61 million gallons per day. The total system average day demand and maximum day demand were 6.47 and 14.24 million gallons per day, respectively. 
(Ord. 1152-03, 12-8-03; Ord. 1359-13 §4, 9-23-13).  
TDC 12.060. - Fire Flows. 
(1)  Fire flow is the amount of water required to fight a fire for a specified period. The Insurance Services Office (ISO) Commercial Risk Services, Inc., classifies a city for insurance rating purposes on the basis of a maximum fire flow requirement of 3,500 gallons per minute (gpm). Fire flow requirements greater than 3,500 gpm are evaluated individually and are not used by the ISO to determine the public protection classification of a municipality. For fire flow analysis the total fire flow requirement is a combination of building fire flow requirements plus system maximum day demand. 
(2)  Fire protection for the City's service area is provided by Tualatin Valley Fire & Rescue. The fire district has adopted fire flow requirements as defined in the 2010 State of Oregon Fire Code. A summary of fire flow recommendations based on the state fire code, fire flow criteria adopted by similar communities and fire flow guidelines as developed by the American Water Works Association is presented in Table 4-2 of the 2013 Master Plan. 
(3)  Fire protection is not dependent on the water distribution system alone. Fire flows greater than 3,500 gpm can be reduced with individual fire suppression systems such as sprinklers, chemical and alarm systems and fire-resistant construction, onsite supply and other methods. Developments with fire flows greater than 3,500 gpm will need to supplement public water system flows through private systems such as those noted in the prior sentence. The July 2013 Master Plan's recommended minimum criteria for fire suppression flows for single family residential is 1,000 gpm, for multi-family is 2,000 gpm and, commercial, industrial and institutional uses is 3,500 gpm for a 3-hour duration. 
(Ord. 1152-03, 12-8-03; Ord. 1359-13 §5, 9-23-13).  
TDC 12.070. - Method of Analysis. 
The July 2013 Water Master Plan analyzed the water system based on criteria for water supply, source, distribution system piping, service pressures, storage and pumping facilities in conjunction with the water demand forecasts for 2031 and beyond in Section 3 of the Master Plan. 
The analysis and recommendations in Section 4 of the Master Plan are based on performance guidelines developed in a review of State of Oregon requirements, American Water Works Association (AWWA) acceptable practice guidelines, Insurance Services Office, Inc. (ISO) guidelines and the operational practices of similar water providers. The distribution system analysis was performed using Innovyze's InfoWater hydraulic network analysis software and an updated system model that relied on geographical information system, updated reservoir and pump station data, and current control valve setting information. 
(Ord. 1152-03, 12-08-03; Ord. 1359-13 §5, 9-23-13).  
TDC 12.080. - Existing System. 
(1)  The City of Tualatin entered into an agreement with the City of Portland in the early 1980's to obtain water from the Bull Run watershed via the Washington County Water Supply Line. In emergencies the City can obtain small quantities through interties with the cities of Tigard, Lake Oswego, Sherwood and Wilsonville. Water from the Willamette River can be used for domestic purposes if Tualatin's voters approve of its use. Water quality from the Bull Run Reservoir, the Portland Water Bureau Columbia South Shore wellfield and the Tualatin distribution system meets or exceeds all U.S. Environmental Protection Agency water quality requirements. 
(2)  The City's water system is composed of three service levels (Levels A, B, and C) supplied by gravity and pumps and storage reservoirs. The system is primarily within public rights-of-way, is looped and is monitored and controlled by a central telemetry system. 
(3)  Service Level A is the lowest in elevation and is supplied directly from the Supply Line and by gravity from the 1971 2.2 million gallon enclosed steel tank Avery Reservoir. A new reservoir site was acquired in 2003 southwest of the SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road/SW Cipole Road inter-section. Service Level B is the second lowest in elevation and is supplied by gravity from the 1971 and 1989 2.2 and 2.8 million gallon enclosed steel tank reservoirs on SW Norwood Road. A new reservoir site was acquired in the 1990's southwest of the SW 108th Avenue/SW Cottonwood Street intersection Service Level C is the highest in elevation and is supplied by gravity from the 1981 0.8 million gallon enclosed steel tank reservoir southeast of the Norwood Road overpass over I-5. 
(4)  The City has three pump stations. Stations one and two pump a back-up supply from Level A to Level B. Station three pumps from Level B to the C reservoir. 
(5)  The July 2013 Water Master Plan identifies 13.0 million gallons of water storage capacity in five reservoirs. The 2013 Master Plan recommends increased storage capacity in Service Areas A and B in the future. 
(Ord. 592-83, §54, 6-13-83; Ord. 1152-03, 12-8-03; Ord. 1359-13 §7; 9-23-13).  
TDC 12.090. - Proposed Improvements. 
The water distribution and storage system with existing and proposed waterlines and reservoirs is illustrated in Map 12-1. The proposed short-term, medium-term and long-term capital improvements for the system recommended in the July 2013 Water Master Plan are in Master Plan Table 7-1 and shown mapped on Plate-1 in Appendix A of the Master Plan. 
(Ord. 592-83, §55, 6-13-83; Ord. 1023-99, §8, 6-28-99; Ord. 1152-03, 12-8-03; Ord. 1359-13 §8, 9-23-13).  
TDC 12.100. - Source of Supply. 
The City's sole water supply is purchased wholesale from the Portland Water Bureau (PWB) through a 10-year wholesale water supply contract signed in 2006. Under the terms of the agreement, the City is obligated to purchase a minimum annual volume of water equal to 4.4 million gallons per day (mgd). 
The City operates a single aquifer storage and recovery (ASR) facility. ASR operations allow the City to store surplus drinking water in a groundwater aquifer during low demand periods (fall through spring) and then recover the water from a groundwater well during high demand periods (summer). The aquifer has an effective recovery capacity of approximately 90 mg and is connected to Service Area B for both injection and recovery. 
As a member of the Willamette River Water Coalition (WRWC), the City has access to surface water supply capacity from the Willamette River under OWRD Permit S-49240. In May 2002, the City Charter was amended to require that before Willamette River water is used for drinking purposes, a vote must approve such use. 
(Ord. 592-83, §56, 6-13-83; Ord. 1152-03, 12-08-03; Ord. 1359-13 §9, 9-23-13).  
TDC 12.110. - Pressure Levels. 
(1)  The City of Tualatin has three service levels designated as A, B, and C on Map 12-1. The Bridgeport Service Area serves commercial customers in the Bridgeport Village shopping center. 
(2)  Service Level A includes approximately the northern 50% of the City extending east and west covering elevations from 110 feet to about 200 feet. Service Level B includes approximately the middle 40% of the City extending east and west covering elevations from about 180 feet to 280 feet. Its southern extent is Ibach Street and Ibach Street extended west to the railroad tracks and extended east to I-5. There are isolated areas above 280 feet, but these contain a very limited number of houses. The boundaries of Service Level C are Ibach Street on the north, I-5 on the east, the UGB on the south and the railroad tracks on the west. 
(3)  Substantial development has occurred over the years. Future development is expected to occur in Level A on the remaining vacant manufacturing lands, in the Town Center area (redevelopment), in the Durham Quarry area and east of I-5 (Redevelopment of the Trailer Park of Portland). Future development in Level B is expected in the area of Legacy Meridian Park Hospital and the SW Concept Plan Area. Future development in Level C is expected in the SW Grahams Ferry and SW 108th Avenue residential areas. 
(Ord. 1152-03, 12-8-03; Ord. 1359-13 §10, 9-23-13).  
TDC 12.111. - Service Level A. 
(1)  Service Level A has adequate existing storage capacity but will require additional storage in the future. Increased storage volume needs in Service Area A are associated with the Town Center redevelopment and other redevelopment and infill. 
(Ord. 592-83, §58, 6-13-83; Ord. 1152-03, 12-8-03; Ord. 1359-13 §11, 9-23-13).  
TDC 12.112. - Service Level B. 
(1)  Service Level B has adequate existing storage capacity but will require additional storage in the future. Increased storage volume needs in Service Area B are associated with expansion and development in the SW Concept Plan Area which is located largely in Service Area B. 
(Ord. 592-83, §59, 6-13-83; Ord. 1152-03, 12-8-03; Ord. 1359-13 §12, 9-23-13).  
TDC 12.113. - Service Level C. 
(1)  The 2013 Water Master Plan identifies the pending construction of the 1.0 mg C-2 Reservoir to serve Service Area C. 
(Ord. 592-83, §60, 6-13-83; Ord. 797-90, §2, 2-26-90; Ord. 1152-03, 12-8-03; Ord. 1359-13 §13, 9-23-13).  
TDC 12.120. - Storage. 
(1)  The City's Water System consists of five storage reservoirs with a combined storage capacity of 13.0 million gallons. The reservoirs are supplied both directly from the Portland Supply Main and from pump stations. 
(2)  Service Areas A and B have adequate existing storage capacity but will require additional storage in the future associated with expansions and development in the Southwest Concept Plan area. Service Area C will be served by a new C-2 Reservoir and with the uncertainty of actual future development characteristics in the Service Area, the 2013 Master Plan does not recommend construction of additional storage within the planning period. 
(Ord. 592-83, §61, 6-13-83; Ord. 1152-03, 12-8-03; Ord. 1359-13 §14, 9-23-13).  
TDC 12.130. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1359-13, § 15, adopted September 23, 2013, repealed § 12.130.  
TDC 12.140. - Method of Financing. 
(1)  The financial plan was based on assumptions related to system revenue and cost growth and the capital improvement plan in the Master Plan. The City should review the funding possibilities for the proposed water system improvements in Table 7-1 of the July 2013 Water Master Plan. 
(Ord. 1152-03, 12-8-03; Ord. 1359-13 §16, 9-23-13).  
CHAPTER 13 - SEWER SERVICE 
 
TDC 13.010. - Introduction. 
(1)  In 1979, the City of Tualatin adopted the Tualatin Community Plan. R. A. Wright Engineering Company prepared the sanitary sewer service element. In 1982, the Tualatin Community Plan was reviewed due to the annexation of approximately 900 acres west of the city limits. City staff reviewed the sanitary sewer service element. In 1983 the City Council amended the Plan, including the sewer service element. 
(2)  In accordance with the Urban Planning Area Agreement between the City and Washington County and an Intergovernmental Agreement between Clean Water Services (CWS) and the City, the City is responsible for collecting the sewage and CWS is responsible for the major conveyance lines and treatment. CWS's Durham Advanced Waste Water Treatment Plant treats most of the sewage generated in the City limits. Waste generated in the City limits north of the Tualatin River and east of I-5 is treated at the City of Portland's Tryon Creek Waste Water Treatment Plant. 
(3)  In 2002, the City contracted with CH2M Hill to update the City's sewer master plan ("Report, Tualatin Sewer Master Plan," December 2002). The update accurately reflected Tualatin's growth and refined CWS's recently completed county-wide master plan system evaluation ("2000 Sanitary Sewer System Master Plan Update"). The City's "Report, Tualatin Sewer Master Plan," December 2002 (the "Master Plan") was the basis for amending the Tualatin Development Code (TDC), Chapter 13 in 2003. The purposes of the City's "Master Plan" were to: 
(a)  Further develop the planning done by CWS for the Tualatin area as part of its county-wide planning effort in its 2000 update. Refine the evaluation, focus on Tualatin and address the City's specific planning projections. 
(b)  Evaluate and recommend current and future infrastructure needs to allow the sewer system to keep up with growth and provide planning level costs. 
(c)  Control and eliminate sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs), such as basement flooding, to the extent possible. 
(d)  Protect public health. 
(e)  Protect water quality of neighborhood creeks, ponds and the Tualatin River. 
(f)  Address regulatory requirements. 
(g)  Develop a plan that will result in cost-effective sewer service that meets the demands of residential, commercial and industrial customers. 
(4)  The 2002 "Master Plan" study area was the same as the Tualatin Community Plan, plus it included the Southwest Tualatin Concept Plan Area. 
(5)  Northwest Tualatin Concept Plan 2005 identifies sewer service needs for the study area. This information is new and updates the 2003 Master Plan. 
(6)  In 2019, the City approved an updated Sewer Master Plan. The City also adopted the Basalt Creek Concept Plan; the 2019 Sewer Master Plan includes the Basalt Creek Plan Area. 
(Ord. 592-83, §63, 6-13-83; Ord. 1150-03, 10-27-03; Ord. 1321-11 §34, 4-25-11; Ord. 1427-19 , § 1, 11-25-19)  
TDC 13.015. - Sanitary Sewer System Objectives. 
(1)  Plan and construct a City sewer system that protects the public health, protects the water quality of creeks, ponds, wetlands and the Tualatin River, provides cost-effective sewer service, meets the demands of users, addresses regulatory requirements and supports the land uses designated in the Tualatin Community Plan. 
(2)  Provide a City sanitary sewer system in cooperation with Clean Water Services (CWS). The City is responsible for the collection system's smaller lines and the 65th Avenue pump station and CWS is responsible for the larger lines, pump stations and treatment facilities. 
(3)  Work with CWS to ensure the provisions of the intergovernmental agreement between the City and CWS are implemented. 
(4)  Prohibit the extension of sewer service to areas outside the City limits, unless it is provided to an area inside the city limits of an adjacent city. 
(5)  Require developers to aid in improving the sewer system by constructing facilities to serve new development as well as adjacent properties. 
(6)  Improve the existing sewer system to provide adequate service during peak demand periods. 
(7)  Improve the existing sewer system to control and eliminate sanitary sewer overflows such as basement flooding to the extent possible. 
(8)  The "Tualatin Sewer Master Plan" is adopted by reference as a supporting technical document to the Tualatin Community Plan. 
(9)  Review and update the "Tualatin Sewer Master Plan" on a regular basis in coordination with CWS. 
(10)  Perform a cost of service rate study and study funding methods to ensure sufficient City funds exist to construct planned improvements. 
(11)  Work with CWS to update CWS's and the City's plans and regulations once new sanitary sewer overflow (SSO) and capacity, management, operation and maintenance (CMOM) regulations are published in the Federal Register. 
(Ord. 1150-03, 10-27-03; Ord. 1191-05, 6-27-05; Ord. 1321-11 §35, 4-25-11; Ord. 1427-19 , §§ 2, 50, 11-25-19)  
TDC 13.020. - Design Criteria. 
The design of the sewage collection system was established in 1979 and 1983 when the initial system was planned and updated. Since 1983 the planned system has, essentially, been constructed. The 2019 Sewer Master Plan updates the 2002 Sewer Master Plan for the City of Tualatin. This includes updating the 2012 hydraulic model prepared by CWS, reviewing and updating land use assumptions to match City planning projections, updating existing and future system hydraulic capacity deficiencies, developing a concept plan for service to two expansion areas, and reviewing initial project concepts with the updated hydraulic model to develop an improvement list for future land scenarios. Modeling was conducted for current conditions (2017) and planning years 2025, 2035, and buildout. 
(Ord. 1150-03, 10-27-03; Ord. 1427-19 , § 3, 11-25-19)  
TDC 13.030. - Domestic Flows. 
Using parcel (tax lot) based data for land use, residential flow volumes were calculated by totaling the flow volumes for all residential parcels and dividing that total volume by the most recent population estimates for the City. Diurnal flow and infiltration and inflow (I/I) data were also used. This resulted in an estimated residential water use of 91 gallons per capita per day (gpcd). This value was used for all planning years for parcels currently zoned residential and developed. New residential development flows were calculated for 100 gbcd, based on current City development code requirements. 
(Ord. 1150-03, 10-27-03; Ord. 1427-19 , § 4, 11-25-19)  
TDC 13.040. - Nondomestic Flows. 
The model addressed non-domestic flows similar to the domestic flows using parcel (tax lot) based data for land use, diurnal flow curves and infiltration and inflow data. Commercial flows were estimated in total gallons per day. The resulting daily flow rate for each parcel was input directly into the hydraulic model. 
Certain industrial sites currently produce, or were expected to produce, large quantities of wastewater flow. They may significantly affect the performance of the collection system as a whole, and often do not follow standard diurnal flow patterns. The largest flow producers were identified and their diurnal curve data and daily permitted volume, if available, were used in the modeling. 
(Ord. 1150-03, 10-27-03)  
TDC 13.050. - Infiltration/Inflow. 
The infiltration and inflow (I/I) data for the Sewer Master Plan was estimated based on the methodology used by Clean Water Services during the 2012 Durham model calibration task. A portion of the 5-year, 24-hour storm was routed through the service area and added to the average-day diurnal sanitary flows and base infiltration flows developed from monitoring data. 
(Ord. 1150-03, 10-27-03; Ord. 1427-19 , § 5, 11-25-19)  
TDC 13.055. - Sanitary Sewer Overflows. 
In accordance with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit for the Durham Waste Water Treatment Plant, Clean Water Services (CWS) must prohibit sanitary sewer overflows (SSO) for wet weather conditions up to and including the 5-year return interval, 24-hour duration winter storm event when the new SSO regulations become law in late 2003 or in 2004. The "Master Plan" addressed general capacity management issues, and uses the 5-year, 24-hour winter storm as the wastewater flow criteria. 
(Ord. 1150-03, 10-27-03; Ord. 1427-19 , § 6, 11-25-19)  
TDC 13.060. - Existing System. 
(1)  The City of Tualatin's sewage waste is treated at Clean Water Services' Durham Advanced Waste Water Treatment Plant. The waste is collected and piped to the plant via a network of collectors, trunks and interceptors. The main interceptor transporting waste from Tualatin is the Lower Tualatin Interceptor which is primarily fed by gravity sewers. Five areas are served by pressure mains and pump stations. A brief description of the existing system follows and it is shown on Map 13-1. 
(2)  Except for the five areas discussed below, the City is served by gravity lines. The main interceptors in this system are the Lower Tualatin Interceptor which conveys sewage from the City to the Durham Advanced Waste Water Treatment Plant, the Nyberg Trunk Line, which runs from the Lower Tualatin Interceptor east under I-5 serving the area east of I-5 and south of the river, the Bluff Cipole Trunk Line and Lateral which extends to the west from the Lower Tualatin Interceptor and the Tualatin-Sherwood Trunk which serves the area west of 99W and north of SW Tualatin Road. The Bluff Cipole Trunk Line is the main interceptor serving the western and southern portions of the Tualatin Planning Area. The five areas currently served by pump stations are as follows: 
(a)  The area east of I-5 and north of the Tualatin River is served by a pump station located at 65th and Childs Road. The pump station discharges into the City of Lake Oswego sanitary sewer system. This area is served by Lake Oswego through a contract agreement with the City of Tualatin. 
(b)  The area along Nyberg Street and Borland Road east of I-5 is served by five pump stations. The pump stations pump sewage to the Nyberg Interceptor and then into the Lower Tualatin Interceptor. 
(c)  The area east of I-5 and south of Sagert Street is served by a pump station at the intersection of 65th and I-205. This pump station discharges into the gravity line on SW 65th at the intersection of 65th and Borland. 
(d)  The south portion of the area west of SW Boones Ferry Road and east of SW Grahams Ferry Road is served by a pump station at the south end of Victoria Woods Subdivision which discharges into the Bluff Cipole Lateral. 
(e)  The area east of SW Cipole Road, north of SW Herman Road and south of 99W is served by a pump station at SW Cipole Road and Cummins Creek. 
(Ord. 592-83, §64, 6-13-83; Ord. 1150-03, 10-27-03; Ord. 1427-19 , § 7, 11-25-19)  
TDC 13.070. - Proposed System. 
(1)  The proposed sewage collection system is illustrated in Map 13-1. 
(2)  The majority of the trunk and interceptor lines were constructed, but some are not of sufficient capacity. The "Master Plan" reviewed the system and recommended improvements. The "Master Plan" focused on sewer system capacity deficiencies. Consistent with CWS's sewer design criteria, it compared peak hydraulic grade lines (HGL's) for each segment of the system with pipe slopes and ground surface elevations. City staff also identified locations requiring maintenance or replacement due to degradation and aging of the system. 
(3)  Because the system is essentially built and several trunk and interceptor lines are too small, the "Master Plan's" recommendations primarily were to increase trunk and interceptor line sizes. 
(4)  New collection system pipes and at least one pump station will be needed to serve the Southwest Tualatin Concept Plan Area. The actual configuration will depend on individual development plans, land use type and location, site grading and other factors not known in 2010. The Southwest Tualatin Concept Plan and the Basalt Creek Planning areas have conceptual sewer and pump station layouts that will be dependent on development. 
(Ord. 592-83, §65, 6-13-83; Ord. 635-84, §7, 6-11-84; Ord. 1150-03, 10-27-03; Ord. 1321-11 §36, 4-25-11; Ord. 1427-19 , § 8, 11-25-19)  
TDC 13.080. - Project List and Cost Estimates. 
Projects and cost estimates, including engineering and administration, for the major improvements in Tualatin's sewage collection system are contained in the Sewer Master Plan. No attempt has been made to adjust prices to a future date. The cost figures include only City costs, not Clean Water Services. 
(Ord. 592-83 §66, 6-13-83; Ord. 1150-03; Ord. 1191-05, 6-27-05; Ord. 1427-19 , § 9, 11-25-19)  
TDC 13.090. - Financing Methods. 
(1)  Financing the improvements proposed in the Sewer Master Plan will be provided primarily by local improvement districts, connection charges system development charges and revenue bonds, and private investors for residential, commercial and industrial developments. Construction of interceptors and trunks may involve a combination of costs to developers, contributions from Tualatin's sewer fund, and assessments against properties benefited. 
(2)  The City's sewer utility finances were reviewed in the Sewer Master Plan. It was estimated the capital expenditures for the recommended improvement projects will cause shortfalls. To meet the shortfalls the City can explore additional revenue sources such as revenue bonds. The specific requirements will be determined by a cost of service rate study. The City can also review sewer rates and system development charges with CWS to ensure revenues are sufficient to cover operating expenses, future capital projects and outstanding debt service. Ongoing rehabilitation and replacement projects to repair structural deficiencies as they develop should be considered for inclusion in capital budget planning. 
(Ord. 592-83, §67, 6-13-84; Ord. 1150-03, 10-27-03; Ord. 1427-19 , § 10, 11-25-19)  
CHAPTER 14 - DRAINAGE PLAN AND SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT 
 
TDC 14.010. - Background. 
There are ten principal drainage basins for storm water and surface water in the Tualatin Planning Area. Except for a small drainage located in the south part of the City's planning area, the drainages flow to the Tualatin River. Hedges Creek, Nyberg Creek and Saum Creek are tributaries of the Tualatin River and are the larger drainages located within Tualatin's Planning Area. 
Drainage, storm water and surface water runoff in the Tualatin Planning Area are addressed in the Tualatin Drainage Plan, the Surface Water Management Ordinance (SWM Ordinance) (Ord. 846-91), the Northwest Tualatin Concept Plan 2005, The Southwest Tualatin Concept Plan 2010 and TDC Chapter 74, Public Improvements. 
The 1975 Tualatin Drainage Plan defines and describes the existing and planned drainage in the Tualatin Planning Area. The Tualatin Drainage Plan is periodically updated as drainage studies are prepared by the City or for development projects. In September of 1995, the City adopted the Hedges Creek Subbasin Plan (HCS Plan) and incorporated the drainage improvements and drainage pattern modifications in the Hedges Creek Subbasin into the Tualatin Drainage Plan. The HCS Plan consists of the drainage and storm water management activities and programs recommended in Chapter I of the Hedges Creek Subbasin Strategies (HCSS) Report prepared by the City and Clean Water Services (CWS). 
CWS began subbasin planning work for the Hedges Creek Basin in 1990, based on two previous storm water and nonpoint source plans, the Tualatin Basinwide Report and Technical Guidelines and the CWS Surface Water Management Plan. The HCSS report incorporates the original Hedges Creek Subbasin Management Plan completed in October 1992 and the Hydraulic Study of the Hedges Creek Marsh report completed in October 1994. 
The surface water management policies and requirements in the SWM Ordinance were adopted by the City and other jurisdictions in the Tualatin River Basin to implement CWS requirements for control of sedimentation and water quality. 
The drainage and surface management development requirements of the Tualatin Drainage Plan and SWM Ordinance are implemented in TDC Chapter 74, Public Improvements. 
(Ord. 1191-05, 6-27-05; Ord. 1321-11 §38, 4-25-11)  
TDC 14.020. - Drainage Plan. 
(1)  The Tualatin Drainage Plan is the City's drainage plan. It was originally prepared by Robert A. Wright, Consulting Engineers in 1972 and adopted in 1975 (Ord. 280-75) and in 1979 as an element of the Tualatin Community Plan (Ord. 491-79). The Tualatin Drainage Plan is referenced in the Technical Memoranda TDC 3.080. With the supporting technical material, the Tualatin Drainage Plan provides an overall view of the drainage system, its major problems and their solutions, and is the City's storm water and surface water drainage policy. 
(2)  The Tualatin Drainage Plan was updated in the fall of 1995 by the Hedges Creek Subbasin Plan. The HCS Plan is outlined in Chapter 1 of the HCSS Report and implements the recommended drainage and storm water management activities and facilities. The HCS Plan relies on the technical data and analysis documented in the HCSS report. The HCSS Report and the HCS Plan identify the critical importance of the Hedges Creek Marsh to drainage, storm water management and water quality in the subbasin. The HCS Plan provides for drainage improvements, storm water detention requirements and a number of non-structural activities for better management of water quantity and water quality in the Hedges Creek Subbasin. 
(3)  Map 14-1 is from Figure I-1 of the HCS Plan. It shows the drainage pattern revisions and drainage system improvements for the Hedges Creek Subbasin. The drainage pattern revisions and drainage system improvements shown in Map 14-1 are incorporated into the Tualatin Drainage Plan. 
(4)  The HCSS Report is a comprehensive technical document that provides data and analysis of storm water drainage in the Hedges Creek Subbasin. From an analysis of several alternatives, the report recommended specific management activities and facilities to control water quantity and quality problems associated with urban storm water runoff in the Hedges Creek Subbasin. The HCS Plan incorporates the report's recommended activities and facilities. 
(5)  The Northwest Tualatin Concept Plan 2005 identifies storm water drainage options for the area west of Cipole Road and south of Pacific Highway 99W. 
(6)  The Southwest Tualatin Concept Plan 2010 identifies storm water drainage options for the area south of SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road and east of SW 124th Avenue. 
(Ord. 1191-05, 6-27-05; Ord. 1321-11 §39, 4-25-11)  
TDC 14.030. - Surface Water Management. 
(1)  The Surface Water Management Ordinance (SWM Ordinance) (Ord. 846-91) establishes regulations for soil erosion control, surface water management and water quality. The purpose of the SWM Ordinance is to implement Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) and Clean Water Services (CWS) requirements for surface water management and water quality in the Tualatin River basin by reducing sediment and other pollutants reaching the public storm and surface water system. The SWM Ordinance provides requirements for permits, onsite detention, water quality facilities, floodplain and floodway design standards, protection of sensitive areas and vegetated corridors, specifications for building and side sewers, maintenance and inspection of facilities, permit fees, enforcement of violations and other matters related to surface water management and maintaining water quality. 
(2)  HCS Plan requirements for onsite storm water detention for new development in the Hedges Creek Subbasin upstream from the Wetland Protected Area portion of the Hedges Creek marsh are adopted in the SWM Ordinance. 
(Ord. 979-97, §3, 7-14-97; Ord. 1321-11 §40, 4-25-11)  
TDC 14.040. - Objectives. 
The objectives of the Tualatin Drainage Plan and Surface Water Management regulations are: 
(1)  Provide a plan for routing surface drainage through the City, utilizing the natural drainages where possible. Update the plan as needed with drainage studies of problem areas and to respond to changes in the drainage pattern caused by urban development. 
(2)  Coordinate the City's Drainage Plan and Storm Water Management regulations with the City's Floodplain District, Wetland Protection District and Natural Resource Protection Overlay District regulations and with the plans of USA and other regional, state, and federal agencies to achieve consistency among the plans. 
(3)  Reduce sediment and other pollutants reaching the public storm and surface water system by implementing the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) and USA requirements for surface water management and water quality in the Tualatin River basin. Reduce soil erosion, manage surface water runoff and improve surface water quality. 
(4)  Identify and solve existing problems in the drainage system and plan for construction of drainage system improvements that support future development. 
(5)  Provide standards for surface water management and water quality by which development will be reviewed and approved. Review and update the standards as needed. 
(6)  Clearly indicate responsibilities for maintaining storm water management and water quality facilities. 
(7)  Enforce drainage and storm water management standards. 
(8)  Route storm water runoff from the upper Hedges Creek Subbasin through the Wetland Protected Area marsh which as a wetland provides important drainage, storm water management and water quality benefits. 
(9)  Protect the Wetland Protected Area marsh and its important drainage, storm water management and water quality functions in the Hedges Creek Subbasin. 
(10)  Require new development to provide onsite pollution reduction facilities when necessary to treat storm water runoff prior to entering Hedges Creek and protect the marsh from urban storm water pollutants. 
(11)  To reduce sedimentation and erosive storm water flow volumes, require onsite storm water detention facilities for new development in the Hedges Creek Subbasin upstream from the Wetland Protected Area marsh. 
(12)  Consider opportunities to construct regional pollution reduction facilities to treat storm water runoff prior to entering Hedges Creek and protect the marsh from urban storm water pollutants. 
(13)  Restrict beaver dam activity in the Wetland Protected Area marsh to retain the drainage flow through the marsh area and to reduce flooding between Teton Avenue and Tualatin Road. 
(14)  As outlined in the HCS Plan, the City will assist CWS with non-structural activities including public education programs and water quality and management activity monitoring. 
(15)  Comply with Metro's Urban Growth Management Functional Plan, Title 3. 
(Ord. 979-97, §4, 7-14-97; Ord. 1070-01, §1, 4-9-01; Ord. 1321-11 §41, 4-25-11)  
CHAPTER 15 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
 
TDC 15.010. - Background. 
(1)  Tualatin is fortunate to have significant natural features which provide the City with excellent opportunities for outdoor recreation in attractive settings. The Tualatin River and the area's many small creeks provide opportunities for water-oriented recreation and greenway loops connecting various parts of the City. Several forested and wetland areas remain undeveloped and available for the neighborhood park types of recreation as well as for natural areas. Because of Tualatin's rapid development, the City must aggressively promote the acquisition of park lands before they are developed for other uses. 
(2)  It is the basic premise of this Plan that Tualatin should develop the highest-quality park and recreation system to offset the effects of large amounts of industrial and commercial growth that are proposed for the central portions of the City. While the City's commercial and industrial development will be reviewed through the City's Architectural Review process, an atmosphere of intensive development will remain that can be partially offset by large amounts of open space land that are visible and accessible to the public. Additionally, the property values of this new commercial and industrial development should create a favorable financial environment, enabling the City to maintain a reasonable tax rate, while providing a high-quality recreation system. 
(3)  The Parks and Recreation Master Plan is adopted by reference as a supporting technical document to the Tualatin Community Plan. The Parks and Recreation Master Plan contains detailed analysis, discussions, and recommendations on community parks, neighborhood parks, greenways, bicycle and pedestrian routes, and recreation programs. The Tualatin Development Code references figures and maps within the Master Plan. 
(Ord. 608-83, §1, 9-26-83; Ord. 948-95, §1, 8-14-95; Ord. 1427-19 , §§ 11, 49, 11-25-19)  
TDC 15.020. - Objectives. 
The following are the objectives of the Park and Recreation Plan. These objectives are to: 
(1)  Coordinate this Park and Recreation Plan with the plans of regional, state and federal agencies to achieve consistency among the various plans. 
(2)  Provide a high-quality park and recreation system to offset the environmental impact of large areas of commercial and industrial development. 
(3)  Create a park and recreation system that provides diverse recreation opportunity. 
(4)  Develop an advance land acquisition program that will assure the future availability of land for park and recreation use at the most reasonable cost. 
(5)  Preserve the scenic value of the Tualatin River by creating a greenway along the entire bank of the River within the City. 
(6)  Preserve as greenways, specific City creeks and drainage swales to provide sufficient area for stormwater runoff, enhance water quality, preserve fish and wildlife habitat and provide, where appropriate, public pedestrian and bicycle access. 
(7)  Preserve greenways, as much as possible, in their natural state. 
(8)  Preserve designated historic resources through public purchase or encouragement of compatible private reuse. 
(9)  Link the park and recreation system with a system of greenways and bicycle/pedestrian facilities. 
(10)  Develop design standards for development adjacent to greenways and natural areas. 
(11)  Preserve and enhance native vegetation in riparian and other natural areas for the purpose of providing favorable habitat for fish and wildlife. Encourage developers to preserve areas of natural vegetation, wherever possible, to provide habitat for wildlife. 
(12)  Encourage developers to utilize residential density transfers, landscaping credits, system development charge credits, reduction of minimum setback requirements, and other incentives for greenway, bikeway and pedestrian path purposes. 
(13)  Preserve the Hedges Creek Wetlands as a natural area and develop a Wetlands Protection Plan for this area. 
(14)  Discourage filling of the Hedges Creek Wetlands located westerly of those wetlands that may be identified by the City's Wetlands Protection District Ordinance until a general plan has been prepared for the remaining wetland area or until a consensus has been achieved among industrial and environmental interest groups and state and federal agencies on any individual request for a wetland fill permit. 
(15)  Develop a system of neighborhood parks that are geographically well distributed to serve the City's population. 
(16)  Whenever possible, locate neighborhood parks adjacent to school sites. 
(17)  Develop joint use agreements with the Tigard School District for the joint use of school land for neighborhood park facilities. 
(18)  Develop comprehensive City recreation programs by activating parks and facilities through vibrant programs, events, and recreation opportunities for people of all ages, ability, cultures, and interests. 
(19)  Encourage private donations of land or money, consistent with the Park and Recreation Plan, to augment City park development funds. 
(20)  Discourage acquisition of small mini-parks because of relatively high maintenance expenses, except where a specific recreation need has been identified as a priority. 
(21)  Develop a Capital Improvements Program to define recreation improvement priorities, financial requirements, and financing methods. 
(Ord. 608-83, §2, 9-2-83; Ord. 894-93, §1, 5-24-93; Ord. 933-94, §8, 11-28-94; Ord. 1427-19 , § 12, 11-25-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 608-83, § 3, adopted September 26, 1983, repealed §§ 15-030—15.070.  
TDC 15.100. - Natural Resources: Wetlands and Natural Areas Plan. 
(1)  In October 1994, the City initiated preparation of the Wetland and Natural Areas Plan as Periodic Review Work Tasks 3 and 4 of the 1993 City of Tualatin Periodic Review as approved by the Oregon Land Conservation and Development Commission (LCDC). The purpose of the plan is to inventory natural resources in the Tualatin Planning Area, identify Significant Natural Resources and provide a plan that preserves, conserves or allows development of the resources. The natural resources include wetlands, stream and riparian areas, and open spaces which consist of upland forests and meadows, and unique geologic areas and features such as the Tonquin Scablands. The Plan recommends requirements for protecting Significant Natural Resources designated in the Natural Resource Protection Overlay District as Greenways and Natural Areas. 
(2)  The Wetlands and Natural Areas Plan consists of: 
(a)  An inventory of natural resources within Tualatin' s Planning Area, The City of Tualatin Natural Resource Inventory and Local Wetlands Inventory (December, 1995). 
(b)  Significant Natural Resource Criteria. (TDC 72.011) 
(c)  Significant Natural Resource List (TDC 72.013) and Map 72-3. 
(d)  Significant Natural Resource management programs such as the TDC Chapter 15.110 Objectives, the Natural Resource Protection Overlay District (NRPO), and shift of density provisions for residential Planning Districts. 
(e)  Wetlands and Natural Areas Plan Designations Map, (Natural Resource Protection Overlay District Map 72-1, TDC). 
(f)  Goal 5 Natural Resource Planning Analysis Conflicting Uses and Economic, Social, Environmental and Energy consequences of a decision to protect or not protect a significant resource. (Winterowd Planning Services Report, 1997). 
(Ord. 979-97, 7-14-97; Ord. 1427-19 , § 13, 11-25-19)  
TDC 15.110. - Wetlands and Natural Areas Plan Objectives 
The following are the objectives of the Wetlands and Natural Areas Plan. The objectives are to: 
(1)  Identify and protect significant natural resources that promote a healthy environment and natural landscape that improves livability. 
(2)  Protect significant natural resources that provide fish and wildlife habitat, scenic values, water quality improvements, storm-water management benefits, and flood control. 
(3)  Protect significant natural resources that provide recreational and educational opportunities. 
(4)  Balance natural resource protection and growth and development needs. 
(5)  Provide incentives and alternative development standards such as reduced minimum lot sizes and building setbacks for property owners to preserve the natural resource while accommodating growth and development. 
(6)  Allow public facilities such as sewer, stormwater, water and public streets and passive recreation facilities to be located in significant natural resource areas provided they are constructed to minimize impacts and with appropriate restoration and mitigation of the resource. 
(7)  Except in Wetland Natural Areas, allow public boating facilities, irrigation pumps, water-related and water-dependent uses including the removal of vegetation necessary for the development of water-related and water-dependent uses. 
(8)  Except in Wetland Natural Areas, allow the replacement of existing structures with structures in the same location that do not disturb additional riparian surface. 
(Ord. 9779-97, §7, 7-14-97; Ord. 1427-19 , § 14, 11-25-19)  
CHAPTER 16 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
 
TDC 16.010. - Background. 
Tualatin's history is directly tied to the agricultural based economy which historically supported the majority of its residents. The development patterns from this agricultural base left a scattering of residential dwellings and structures on the landscape with a small core area for retail activities. This pattern continued until the 1970's when rapid growth came to the area. From the 1970's to 1991 the City experienced rapid growth in residential, commercial and industrial activities. The once thriving agricultural economic base was transformed into a suburban extension of the Portland Metropolitan area. Along with this economic prosperity came the loss of many of the historic resources which once identified the community. 
The City of Tualatin Comprehensive Plan—Phase I—Technical Memoranda developed in 1979 identified seven structures in the central area of downtown. These structures were subsequently given historic status and regulations pertaining to modifications, demolitions and alterations for the designated resources were adopted and integrated into the Tualatin Development Code. The Technical Memoranda further indicated additional historic resources are located in Tualatin and that urban development would cause the loss of these resources. The report concluded that the City should investigate ways to preserve the history of the community. 
(Ord. No. 844-91, §1, 10-14-91)  
TDC 16.020. - Assumptions. 
The following are general assumptions used to formulate the Historic Preservation Plan: 
(1)  The demand for the City's residential, commercial and industrial land will continue and will create pressure to demolish and remove historic resources. 
(2)  Residential, commercial and industrial development has caused a number of the historic resources in the City to be demolished, relocated or altered. 
(3)  The City has historic resources which have not been identified or inventoried. 
(4)  Alterations have occurred to buildings, structures and sites which have diminished their value as historic resources. 
(5)  A mechanism needs to be established to provide an ongoing survey of the City's historic resources. 
(6)  Many of Tualatin's historic resources have been lost due to an inadequate comprehensive plan element concerning historic preservation. 
(Ord. No. 844-91, §2, 10-14-91)  
TDC 16.030. - Objectives. 
The objectives of the Historic Preservation Plan are to: 
(1)  Promote the historic, educational, architectural, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the public through the identification, preservation, restoration, rehabilitation, protection and use of those buildings, structures, sites and objects of historic interest within the City; 
(2)  Foster community and neighborhood pride and sense of identity based on recognition and use of historic resources; 
(3)  Strengthen the economy of the City by encouraging property owners to preserve historic resources for tourists, visitors and residents; 
(4)  Encourage public awareness, understanding and appreciation of the City's history and culture; 
(5)  Promote the enjoyment and use of historic resources appropriate for the education and recreation of the people of Tualatin; 
(6)  Identify and preserve diverse architectural styles reflecting periods of the City's historical and architectural development, encourage complementary design and construction for alterations affecting historic resources and encourage relocation of historic resources over demolition; 
(7)  Enhance property values and increase economic and financial benefits to the City and its inhabitants; 
(8)  Identify and resolve conflicts between the preservation of historic resources and alternative land uses; 
(9)  Integrate the management of historic resources into public and private land management and development processes; 
(10)  Carry out the provisions of Statewide Planning Goal 5; 
(11)  Prepare a report describing the comprehensive history of the City's past; and 
(12)  Identify and list additional properties to the current list of protected historic resources. 
(13)  Upon annexation, potential historic resources located outside of the City, but within the City's planning area shall proceed through the significance review, conflicting use and economic, social, environmental and energy analysis; 
(14)  Review the impacts on landmarks when public improvement projects are proposed; 
(15)  Retain landmarks in the Low Density Residential (RL) Planning District on parcels which cannot be partitioned or subdivided by preserving and not demolishing or relocating them; 
(16)  Retain landmarks located on parcels which can be partitioned or subdivided in the Low Density Residential (RL) Planning District by property owners and developers integrating the resource into proposed lot configurations and development proposals; 
(17)  Allow conflicting uses and/or adaptive reuse of the Sweek House and Smith/Boone House while maintaining the architectural integrity of the two structures and discourage relocation or demolition; 
(18)  Allow conflicting uses to develop on the undeveloped portion of the Winona Cemetery property while maintaining the existing cemetery; 
(19)  Allow adaptive reuse of the structure at 6825 SW Childs Road and discourage relocation and demolition; 
(20)  Encourage adaptive reuse of landmarks in commercial planning districts and discourage relocation and demolition; 
(21)  Encourage conflicting uses on the Isaac Ball site while maintaining the architectural integrity of the landmark; 
(22)  Allow conflicting uses on the Little White House site and encourage relocation over demolition; 
(23)  Allow conflicting uses on the Smith Row House site, and encourage relocation over demolition; 
(24)  Preserve the Cipole School while allowing conflicting uses to occur on undeveloped portions of the site; and 
(25)  Allow conflicting uses in manufacturing planning districts and encourage relocation over demolition. 
(Ord. No. 844-91, §3, 10-14-91. Ord. No. 894-93, §2, 5-24-93)  
CHAPTER 20 - SIGN DESIGN 
 
TDC 20.010. - Background. 
(1)  The City of Tualatin is a community of natural beauty, quality architecture and landscaping and planned urban design. Signs are one of the more visual and prominent components of urbanscapes. Signs have a strong visual impact on the character and quality of the community. Signs are of primary concern to business owners, customers and the public. Clear and effective signage is essential to the successful operation of businesses and public and semi-public uses and can, without distraction, facilitate vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian movement. Signage can also, however, be a significant contributor to visual clutter and blight. Large, garish and/or numerous signs designed as "attention getters" are neither necessary nor desirable in Tualatin's setting. With care, signs can serve to effectively identify uses and provide a positive contribution to the City's visual quality. 
(2)  The City of Tualatin competes with many other Oregon, national and international communities for economic opportunities. Since the City relies on its scenery and physical beauty to attract residents and commerce, esthetic considerations assume economic value. To ensure the City of Tualatin is a desirable community in which to live, vacation and conduct business and to protect the City's economic base, a visually pleasing, attractive environment is important and desired. 
(Ord. 960-96, §1, 5-28-96)  
TDC 20.020. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through a comprehensive system of effective sign Objectives. 
(Ord. 960-96, §2, 5-28-96)  
TDC 20.030. - Objectives. 
The following are the City's Sign Objectives. 
(1)  Preserve the right of free speech exercised through the use of signs. 
(2)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(3)  Protect persons and property in rights-of-way from unsafe and dangerous signs that distract, rather than inform, motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians. 
(4)  Protect persons and property from unsafe and dangerous signs due to natural forces, including but not limited to wind, earthquakes, precipitation and floodwaters. 
(5)  Protect persons and property from unsafe and dangerous signs due to improper construction, repair and maintenance. 
(6)  Protect and enhance the visual appearance of the City as a place to live, work, recreate, visit and drive through. 
(7)  Protect and enhance the quality streetscapes, architecture, landscaping and urban character in Tualatin. 
(8)  Protect and enhance property values. 
(9)  Protect and enhance the City's economy. 
(10)  Ensure the number, height and dimensions of signs allowed adequately identifies a business or use and does not result in sign clutter. 
(11)  Allow greater sign heights and dimensions for Major Commercial Centers. 
(12)  Allow only temporary signs on a property with no building. 
(13)  Allow no new permanent sign, or a change of face on an existing permanent sign, on a property with an unoccupied building. 
(14)  Allow permanent signs only on buildings, or parts of buildings, that are occupied. 
(15)  Regulate the number, height and dimensions of temporary signs. 
(16)  In the manufacturing and institutional planning districts allow permanent freestanding monument signs, but not permanent freestanding pole signs. 
(17)  In the residential planning districts sign numbers, heights and dimensions for dwelling units shall be restricted and for conditional uses shall be consistent with the use. 
(18)  Allow indirect and internal illumination in residential planning districts for conditional uses. 
(19)  Allow greater sign diversity in the Central Urban Renewal District's Central Design District for uses on properties abutting the City owned promenade around the Lake of the Commons. 
(20)  The wiring for electrically illuminated freestanding signs shall be underground and for wall signs shall be in the wall or a race. 
(21)  Adopt sign regulations for the Mixed Use Commercial Overlay District that are consistent with the type and high quality of developments desired in the District. New sign types to be allowed are wall-mounted plaques and inlaid floor signs. 
(22)  Adopt Sign Design standards and a Sign Design Review process for freestanding signs in commercial districts that encourage attractive and creative signage with varied design elements such as proportionally wider sign bases or pylons, a mix of exterior materials that have a relationship to building architecture, use of dimensional lettering and logos with halo or internal lighting and is consistent with the high quality of developments desired in commercial districts. 
(23)  In Central Commercial and General Commercial planning districts, allow permanent freestanding monument signs on Arterial Streets, and restrict permanent freestanding pole signs to Collector or Local Commercial Street frontages. 
(24)  Create an incentive for improvement of existing freestanding signs and adopt provisions allowing non-conforming freestanding signs in commercial districts to retain non-conforming sign status when structurally altered subject to improved compliance with Sign dimension and Sign Design standards. 
(Ord. 960-96, §4, 5-28-96; Ord. 1120-02, 11-15-02; Ord. 1176-04, 11-22-04; Ord. 1216-06, 7-24-06; Ord. 1261-08 §1, 6-9-08.; Ord. 1302-10 §1, 5-24-10)  
CHAPTER 30 - TUALATIN URBAN RENEWAL PLAN 
 
TDC 30.010. - Urban Renewal Plan. 
The Tualatin Urban Renewal Plan, 1975, as amended by the Tualatin Central Urban Renewal Plan, 1984, 1987, 1992, 2002, 2006, and 2009 and thereafter referred to as the "Tualatin Central Urban Renewal Plan," is hereby adopted as part of the Tualatin Community Plan and is incorporated by reference into the Tualatin Development Code. 
(Ord. 730-87, §3, 9-14-87; Ord. 881-92, §3, 11-9-92; Ord. 882-92, §3, 12-14-92; Ord. 1108-02, 4-22-02; Ord. 1213-06, 7-10-06; Ord. 1290-09 §1, 10-12-09)  
TDC 30.020. - Leveton Tax Increment Plan. 
The Leveton Tax Increment Plan, 1985, as amended on June 26, 1989, December 12, 1994, March 23, 1998, November 22, 1999, and April 8, 2002, is adopted as part of the Tualatin Community Plan and is incorporated by reference into the Tualatin Development Code. 
(Ord. 674-85 §3, 8-12-85; Ord. 778-89 §2, 7-10-89; Ord. 935-94 §1, 12-12-94; Ord. 1036-99 §1, 11-22-99; Ord. 1105-02, 4-8-02)  
CHAPTER 31 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
In General 
Compliance and Enforcement  
IN GENERAL 
 
TDC 31.010. - Title. 
The following sections are collectively known as "The Planning District Standards of the City of Tualatin Community Development Code." 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 1009-98 §34, 11-9-98; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 31.020. - Classification of Planning District (Zones). 
In order to carry out the objectives of the Tualatin Community Plan, land within the City is divided into planning districts or zones. The established planning districts are designated on the Plan Map. The planning district (zone) designations are as follows: 
Planning District/Zone 	Abbreviated Designation 
Low Density Residential 	RL 
Medium-Low Density Residential 	RML 
Medium-High Density Residential 	RMH 
High Density Residential 	RH 
High Density Residential—High Rise 	RH-HR 
Institutional 	IN 
Office Commercial 	CO 
Neighborhood Commercial 	CN 
Recreational Commercial 	CR 
Central Commercial 	CC 
General Commercial 	CG 
Mid-Rise/Office Commercial 
Medical Center 
Light Manufacturing 	CO/MR 
MC 
ML 
General Manufacturing 	MG 
Manufacturing Park 
Manufacturing Business Park 	MP 
MBP 
 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11.83; Ord. 592-83, 6-13-83; Ord. 1216-06, 7-24-06;Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018 )  
TDC 31.040. - Planning District (Zone) Map. 
Each planning district (zone) is designated on the Plan Map of the Tualatin Community Plan. To carry out the purposes of the planning district standards, the Plan Map of the Tualatin Community Plan is known as the "Planning District Map." The primary function of the Planning District Map is to describe the boundaries of the planning districts so that people using this Code may determine which planning district standards regulate the use and development of their land. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018 )  
TDC 31.050. - Planning District (Zone) Boundaries. 
Except as otherwise provided, the boundaries of each planning district designated on the Planning District Map are intended to follow, wherever possible, property lines, extensions of property lines, natural features such as creeks or riverbanks, and the centerlines of public highways. Where this is not possible, the boundaries between planning districts are drawn to scale. In the event that the exact location of any planning district boundary is ambiguous or uncertain for any reason, the Council, by resolution, may establish the exact location of any such boundary. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018 )  
TDC 31.060. - Definitions. 
As used in this Code, the masculine includes the feminine and the neuter, and the singular includes the plural. For the purposes of the TDC, the following words and phrases, unless the context otherwise requires, mean: 
Access Management. The process of providing and managing access to land while preserving the flow of traffic in terms of safety, capacity, and speed. 
Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU). See, Residential Structure Types. 
Accessory Structure or Use. A structure or use incidental and subordinate to the main use of the property and which is located on the same lot with the main use, which includes, but is not limited to, garage, carports, tool sheds, private greenhouses, utility buildings, and home occupations. 
Accessway. A non-vehicular, paved pathway designed for pedestrian and bicycle use and providing convenient linkages between a development and adjacent residential and commercial properties and areas intended for public use, which includes, but is not limited to, schools, parks, and adjacent collector and arterial streets where transit stops or bike lanes are provided or designated. An accessway is not a sidewalk. 
Adequate Public Facilities. Public improvements determined by the Council or City Manager to be of adequate size and capacity, and capable of supporting and servicing the physical area and designated intensity of the proposed development. 
Adjacent Property. A property or unit of land which is touching, or which is across from a public right-of-way, easement, small creek, or small stream, from the extension of the property lines of the subject property. 
Aisle. The corridor by which cars enter and depart parking spaces. 
Alley. A narrow street through a block, primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on another street. 
Animal, Small. A domestic animal, such as a dog, cat, rabbit, or guinea pig, accepted by the American Veterinary Medical Association as a household pet. 
Antenna. A device commonly in the form of a metal rod, wire panel or dish, for transmitting or receiving electromagnetic radiation. It is typically mounted on a supporting tower, pole, mast, or building. 
Applicant. The owner of land proposed to be developed, or a representative, who has express written authority to act on behalf of the owner. 
Arborist. A professional listed as a certified arborist or a registered consulting arborist. 
Arcades. A continuous passageway parallel to and open to a street, open space, or building, usually covered by a canopy or permanent roofing, and accessible and open to the public. 
Architectural Feature or Architectural Features. The portion of a structure or remodeling activity which is regulated or controlled by the objectives, criteria and standards for architectural, graphic and landscaping design, which are subject to Architectural Review, and includes all aspects of an Architectural Review Plan which are not Utility Facilities. 
Architectural Focal Element. A publicly-owned structure whose primary function is to attract attention and create a special sense of place. 
Assembly. As used in the Manufacturing Planning districts, assembly means the putting together of a final product using parts and components that have been fabricated elsewhere and shipped in. See also Manufacturing. 
Awning. A shelter supported entirely by the exterior wall of a building and composed of nonrigid materials except for a supporting framework. 
Barriers. Physical or topographic conditions that make a street or accessway connection impracticable. Such conditions include but are not limited to freeways; railroads; steep slopes; wetlands or other bodies of water where a connection could not reasonably be provided; where buildings or other existing development on adjacent lands physically preclude a connection now or in the future considering the potential for redevelopment; and where streets or accessways would violate provisions of leases, easements, covenants, restrictions or other agreements existing as of May 1, 1995 which preclude a required street or accessway connection, or the requirements of Titles 3 and 13 of the Metro Urban Growth Management Functional Plan (UGMFP). 
Bike (Bicycle) Facilities. On and off street improvements and facilities designed to accommodate bicycles. 
Bike (Bicycle) Lane. A portion of roadway which has been designated by striping, signing and pavement markings for the preferential or exclusive use of bicyclists. 
Bike (Bicycle) Parking, Long-term. Facilities for parking bicycles for stays of more than four hours. 
Bike (Bicycle) Parking, Short-term. Facilities for parking bicycles for stays of less than four hours. 
Bike (Bicycle) Path. A bikeway physically separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within the public street right-of-way or within an independent right-of-way or easement. 
Bikeway. Any street, road, path or way open to bicycle travel regardless of whether such facilities are designated for the preferential use of bicycles or are to be shared with other transportation modes. 
Buffer. A landscaped portion of land established to separate and protect incompatible land uses. 
Buildable Area. The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard and open space requirements of the zoning ordinance have been met. 
Building. A structure that has a roof and is enclosed on at least 50 percent of the area of its sides. 
Building Coverage. That portion or percentage of a lot utilized by a building or structure, excluding parking lots and driveways or sidewalks. 
Building Official. The person charged by a municipality with responsibility for administration and enforcement of the state building code in the municipality as defined by ORS 455.715. 
Business. All of the activities carried on by the same legal entity on the same premises, whether or not the enterprise operates for profit, and includes freemasonry, fraternal, religious, educational or social organizations. "Legal entity" includes, but is not limited to, individual proprietorships, partnerships, corporations, nonprofit corporations, associations, and joint stock companies. 
Business Occupant. A nonresidential use of real property by an owner or lessee. Each user is considered a separate business occupant if the user has an independent or distinct property right in the real property. 
Bus Stop. See Transit Stop. 
Caliper. The diameter of a tree trunk measured at a prescribed height. 
Canopy. A rigid non-movable roof-like structure supported only by columns or posts permanently affixed to the ground, or by a building at one or more points or extremities and by columns or posts in the ground at other points or extremities. 
Central Design District. The Central Design District as identified in Section F of the Central Urban Renewal Plan. 
Certificate of Appropriateness. A final written decision of approval, approval with conditions or denial from the City Manager or City Council for demolition, relocation, alteration, or new construction concerning a landmark. 
Child Care: 
Child Care Center. A child care facility that is certified to care for thirteen or more children, or a facility that is certified to care for twelve or fewer children and located in a building constructed as other than a single family dwelling. 
Child Care Facility. Any facility that provides child care to children, including a child care center, certified family child care home, and registered family child care home. It includes those known under a descriptive name, such as nursery school, preschool, kindergarten, child play school, before and after school care, or child development center, except those excluded under ORS 657A.250. This term applies to the total child care operation. It includes the physical setting, equipment, staff, provider, program, and care of children. 
Certified Child Care Provider. A person licensed by the State of Oregon to provide Child Care ORS329A.280. 
Family Child Care Home, Registered. The residence of the provider who has a current Family Child Care Registration at that address and who provides care in the family living quarters, as provided by ORS 329A.330. 
Family Child Care Provider, Registered. An individual who operates a family child care home that is registered under ORS 329A.330. 
Children's Play Area. An area designated for the recreation of children. Such areas may include sand boxes, bark chip areas, areas containing play structures, basketball courts, hard surface courts and wading pools. 
Citizen Involvement Organization. As provided in the Tualatin Municipal Code Chapter 11-9 Citizen Involvement Program. 
City. The City of Tualatin, Oregon, a municipal corporation. 
City Manager. The person appointed by the City Council as the City Manager, or the City Manager's designee. 
Civic Rooms. Outdoor areas that are open to the public where the space is defined by the locations of buildings, landscaping, or accessways. 
Clean Water Services (CWS). A special service district (formerly known as the Unified Sewerage Agency) that serves as a separately managed and financed public utility and provides stormwater and wastewater services in partnership with 12 member cities in Washington County, including Tualatin. CWS maintains and enhances the public drainage system to meet public needs and to comply with strict water quality regulations set for the Tualatin River drainage area by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ). 
Commercial Use. See Chapter 39 (Use Categories). 
Common Wall Dwellings. Dwelling units characterized by shared wall structures, including, but not limited to, duplexes, triplexes, rowhouses, townhouses, multi-family dwellings, and condominiums. 
Compliance Agreement. A contract entered into by the owner and the City Manager, on behalf of the City, by which the owner promises to complete the required public improvements relating to a subdivision or partition within a specified time period in exchange for the City granting final subdivision or partition plat approval prior to completion of required public improvements. 
Condominium. A property with a building or group of buildings, submitted to the provisions for condominiums in state statutes, in which units are owned individually, and common areas, structures, facilities, easements, rights and appurtenances belonging to the property are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. 
Congregate Care Facility. See Residential Structure Types. 
Core Area Parking District. The Core Area Parking District as identified in Section D of the Central Urban Renewal Plan. 
Core Area Parking District (CAPD) Parking Standards. Off-street motor vehicle parking requirements for development within the CAPD. 
Craft of Building. Using skill and expertise in the design and quality of the construction of the building, especially in the building's architectural details. 
Cross Access. A service drive providing vehicular access between two or more contiguous sites so the driver need not enter the public street system. 
Cul-de-sac. A dead end street terminating in a turnaround. 
Customer Entry Area. For the Mixed Use Commercial Overlay District only, a customer entry area is defined as the area up to five feet on each side of the customer entry doors and extending perpendicular no further than ten feet from the doors. 
Decibel. 
• Decibel (dB) means to a unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure. The reference pressure is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter). 
• "dBA" refers to the standard "A" weighting network as specified in the American National Standard Specification for Sound Level Meters (ANSI §1.4—1971). 
Demolition. Raze, destroy, dismantle, or in any other manner cause significant partial or total destruction of a building, structure, or landmark. 
Density Transfer Project. A residential development in a Medium Low Density Residential (RML) Planning District consisting of an area of single family development wherein the single family development consists of detached and attached (zero lot line) single family dwellings each on a separate lot approved through a Subdivision or Partition application, or consisting of both an area of single family development and an area of multi-family development in an identified project area wherein (1) the single family development consists of detached and attached (zero lot line) single family dwellings each on a separate lot approved through a Subdivision or Partition application, (2) the multi-family development consists of multi-family dwellings on a lot or lots approved through a Subdivision or Partition application and (3) an amount of unused density from the area of single family dwellings may be transferred to and used in the area of multi-family dwellings. 
Developable Area. The privately owned land area upon which site improvements are to be placed, including but not limited to buildings, landscaping, parking, loading, vehicular circulation areas, outdoor storage, and water quality facilities. Developable areas do not include public rights-of-way and wetlands. 
Development or Redevelopment. A planning or construction project involving property improvement, or a change of land-use character within the site; the act of using land for building or extractive purposes. 
Development Application. The application form and checklist which sets forth all submittal requirements for approval of development proposals, including but not limited to architectural review, subdivision, partition and property line adjustment. 
Development Project. A defined and planned undertaking for the physical development or redevelopment of real property, and subject to a submitted or approved development application. 
Drip Line. The outside boundary of the branches of a tree, projected downward to the ground. For the purposes of this Development Code, a drip line will be assumed to be circular rather than irregular, elliptical or whatever its actual shape might be. While the drip line need not be centered on the tree trunk, in the instance of an irregularly shaped tree, the minimum distance radius from the trunk of the tree shall be measured so that the drip line area is most advantageous to the tree's health. 
Drive-Through Facility. A facility or structure that is designed and intended to allow drivers to remain in their vehicles before and during participation in an activity on the site. 
Driveway. A private way providing ingress and egress from private property to a public or private street. 
Duplex. See Residential Structure Types. 
Dwelling Unit. See Residential Structure Types. 
Easement. A nonpossessory interest in the land of another which entitles the owner of the interest to a limited use or enjoyment of the other's land and to protection from interference with this use. 
Election. The time designated by law for voters to cast ballots for candidates and measures. 
ESEE Analysis. A type of analysis which is used to help determine if a particular resource should be protected in accordance with Statewide Planning Goal 5. The analysis examines competing values to determine what the controlling value should be for the individual resources being examined. The analysis considers economic, social, energy and environmental values. 
Evergreen. Having foliage that remains green until the formation of new foliage. 
Exterior Major Remodeling. Modifications to the exterior of a building or placement of new mechanical equipment which are visible from a public right-of-way such as installation of new exterior material, addition of canopy or installation of dust collectors or storage tanks. 
Family. A person living alone or two or more related or unrelated persons living together in a single dwelling unit. 
Final Approval. The official action taken on a preliminarily approved subdivision, partition or property line adjustment, after all conditions, engineering plans, and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the required public improvements have been installed, or where satisfactory security to assure completion of such improvements has been properly posted. 
Fish and Wildlife Habitat Area. An area in the Natural Resource Protection Overlay District or in a Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor. 
Floor Area. The total floor area of a building, both above and below ground with a clear ceiling height of at least seven feet. Floor area is measured from the interior walls of a building or structure and does not include the following: 
(1)  Roof area; 
(2)  Rooftop mechanical equipment; 
(3)  Roofed porches, exterior balconies, or other similar areas, unless they are enclosed by walls that are more than 42 inches in height, for 50 percent or more of their perimeter; and 
(4)  Vents, shafts, courtyards, stairwells, elevator shafts, rooms designed and used for the purpose of storage and operations of maintenance equipment and enclosed or covered parking areas. 
Floor Area Ratio. The ratio of the total amount of enclosed gross floor area within a structure to the amount of buildable acreage. For purposes of calculation, both floor area and net site area shall be converted to square feet. Total gross floor area is measured from the exterior faces of a building or structure, and does not include basement or semi-subterranean areas used for storage or parking. 
Frontage. See Lot Line, Front. 
Functional Classification. A system used to group public roadways into classes according to their purpose in moving vehicles and providing access. 
Garage. A building or portion thereof designed for the storage of a motor vehicle licensed to operate on public highways. 
Gateway Tower Element. A tall structure, rectilinear or round in plain view, that rises to a greater height than the surrounding buildings and which is located in a 3.0 acre or larger commercial center development that is in the General Commercial (CG) Planning District and within a 1,000 foot radius of either (1) the intersection of the centerline of SW Nyberg Street with the centerline of Interstate 5, or (2) the intersection of the centerline of SW Lower Boones Ferry Road with the centerline of Interstate 5. 
Governmental Structure. A structure to be used by a federal, state or local government or municipality, special district, or agency of any such government, excepting public transportation shelter structure. 
Green Building. The use of natural vegetation, alternative building products using natural or recycled materials, or energy efficient design in the construction of buildings, structures, or sites. 
Green Design. The use of natural vegetation, alternative building products using natural or recycled materials, or energy efficient design in the design of buildings or structures. 
Green Streets. The use of natural vegetation, alternative building products using natural or recycled materials or energy efficient design in the construction of streets, sidewalks, or parking areas. 
Gross Floor Area. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building or structure measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings. 
Gross Leasable Area. The total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, expressed in square feet and measured from the center-line of joining partitions and from outside wall faces. 
Group Living: 
Congregate Care Facility. Retirement housing with common dining facilities and housekeeping services. 
Group Living Unit. In assisted living facilities, residential facilities and congregate care facilities, a room, apartment, cottage or other area set aside for the use of a resident individual or couple. 
Nursing Facility. A State of Oregon Licensed Intermediate or Long-term care facility including facilities identified as a nursing home, skilled nursing facility, or convalescent care as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS) Chapter 678 and Chapter 442. 
Residential Facility. A residential facility providing residential care, training or treatment for six or more individuals exclusive of staff, as defined in ORS 443.400. 
Height, Structure. Height of a structure is the vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum must be elected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of building: (1) the elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five-foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than ten feet above lowest grade; (2) An elevation ten feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in Item (1) above is more than ten feet above lowest grade. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. 
Highway. When used in reference to railroad-highway grade crossing, "highway" includes all roads, streets, alleys, avenues, boulevards, parkways and other places in this state actually open and in use, or to be opened and used for travel by the public. 
Home Occupation. A home occupation is a lawful business, occupation or activity undertaken for financial gain that: (1) is conducted in a residential planning district in or on the premises of a dwelling unit that serves as its principal place of business; (2) by a resident of the dwelling unit; (3) who is the sole proprietor, owner, partner, franchise owner or holder of the business, occupation or activity; and (4) is secondary and incidental to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes. 
Household. One or more persons related by blood, marriage, domestic partnership, legal adoption or guardianship, plus not more than five additional persons, who live together in one dwelling unit; or one or more handicapped persons as defined in the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, plus not more than five additional persons, who live together in one dwelling unit. 
Housing Density. The number of dwelling units per acre of land, rounded to the nearest whole number. (For example, 12.5 is rounded to 13 and 12.49 is rounded to 12.) 
Improvement Types: 
Landscape Improvements (excluding greenways, parks and other Parks and Recreation Department roadside improvements). Addition or modification of landscape materials to a site which has not obtained prior Architectural Review approval or installation of landscape material which is substantially different than approved through a prior Architectural Review. 
Private Improvements. Includes any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, bikeway, walkway, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, water utility, sanitary sewer utility, storm drainage utility, street or other facility which the property owner, and not a governmental authority, is responsible for maintaining and operating. 
Public Improvements. Includes any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, bikeway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, water utility, sanitary sewer utility, storm drainage utility, street or other facility constructed in compliance with the Public Works Construction Code for which the City or other governmental authority will ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation. 
Industrial Master Plan. A plan, approved by the Tualatin City Council, that guides development within the boundaries of an Industrial Master Plan Area defined by that plan and located within a Manufacturing Park Planning District. 
Industrial Master Plan Area. The area within the boundaries of an Industrial Master Plan. 
Industrial Use. See Chapter 39 (Use Categories). 
Joint Access (or Shared Access). A driveway connecting two or more contiguous sites to the public street system. 
Joint Use Parking. Vehicle parking where two or more separate developments are able to jointly use some or all of the same required parking spaces because their parking demands occur at different times. 
Landmark or Landmark Related. See TDC Chapter 68 (Historic Preservation). 
Landscape Improvement See Improvement Types. 
Landscaped Plaza. An open space which may consist of trees, plants and lawn combined with decorative features such as fountains, paving bricks, benches or other site furniture. 
Landscaping. The improvement of land by such means as contouring, planting of lawn, groundcover plants, shrubs or trees, and by the location of outdoor structures, courtyards, planters, raised beds, walkways and other similar features. 
Limited Land Use Decision. Defined in ORS 197.015 and outlined in ORS 197.195 means a final decision or determination made by a local government pertaining to a site within an urban growth boundary that concerns: (1) the approval or denial of a tentative subdivision or partition, as described in ORS Chapter 92.040 (Application for approval of subdivision or partition); (2) the approval or denial of an application based on discretionary standards designed to regulate the physical characteristics of a use permitted outright, including but not limited to site review and design review. 
Limited Land Use Decision does not mean a final decision made by a local government pertaining to a site within an urban growth boundary that concerns approval or denial of a final subdivision or partition plat or that determines whether a final subdivision or partition plat substantially conforms to the tentative subdivision or partition plan. 
L-max. A maximum noise level, measured in dBA and occurring over any duration or amount of time. 
Local Government Unit. Any unit of local government, including a city, county, incorporated town or village, school district, any other special district, or any other municipal or quasi-municipal corporation, intergovernmental authority created pursuant to ORS 190.010, a district as defined in ORS 198.010, 198.180, and 198.210 or an urban renewal agency established under ORS 457.035. 
Lot Area. The total horizontal area, calculated in square feet, within the property lines of the lot. 
Lot Coverage. The proportional amount of land on a lot covered by buildings. 
Lot Line. The property line bounding a lot. (Also known as a property line). 
Front Lot Line. The lot line separating the lot from the street other than an alley. 
Rear Lot Line. A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular, triangular, or other-shaped lot, a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. On a corner lot, the shortest lot line abutting adjacent property that is not a street is considered a rear lot line. 
Side Lot Line. Any lot line not a front or rear lot line. 
Lot Line Adjustment. The relocation of a common property line between two abutting properties. (Also known as Property Line Adjustment.) 
Lot of Record. A lot of record is a plot of land: (1) which was not created through an approved subdivision or partition; (2) which was created and recorded before July 26, 1979; and (3) for which the deed, or other instrument dividing the land, is recorded with the appropriate county recorder. 
Lot Types: 
Corner Lot. A lot abutting two intersecting streets other than an alley. 
Double Frontage Lot. A lot having public right-of-way frontage on two sides, but is not a corner lot; or a lot having frontage on three sides. 
Flag Lot. A lot the major portion of which has access to a public street by means of a narrow strip of the lot. 
Lot. A unit of land that is created by a subdivision of land as set forth in ORS 92.010—92.190. 
Primary Condominium Lot. A large lot, usually held in common ownership by condominium owners, and containing secondary condominium lots. 
Reserve Frontage Lot. A lot which is required by the City to take access across a specified lot line to separate residential development from railroad tracks or crossings, arterial or collector streets, adjacent non-residential uses, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
Secondary Condominium Lot. A small, individually owned lot, usually encompassing the perimeter of a dwelling unit and located inside the primary condominium lot. 
Through Lot. A lot that fronts upon two parallel streets or that fronts upon two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lots. 
Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, ordinarily measured parallel to the front lot line, at the center of the lot, or, in the case of a corner lot, the horizontal distance between the front lot line and a side lot line. 
Average Lot Width. The sum of the length of the front lot line and the rear lot line divided by 2. 
Major Driveway. Access is considered a major driveway when controlled by a traffic signal. 
Major Remodeling. Any man-made exterior modifications to improved or unimproved real property, including but not limited to the construction, installation, or alteration of a building or other structure; any remodeling that substantially changes the exterior appearance of the building (including painting); any site alteration which substantially alters the topography or appearance of the site; and any change in occupancy from single family use to commercial or industrial use. 
Major Transit Stop. See Transit Stop, Major. 
Manufactured Dwelling Types. 
Manufactured Dwelling, as defined in state law ORS 446.003. A residential trailer, mobile home or manufactured home, but not including any building or structure subject to the State of Oregon Structural Specialty Code adopted pursuant to ORS 55.100 to 455.450 and 455.610 to 455.630 or any unit identified as a recreational vehicle by the manufacturer. 
Manufactured Home. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes, and that was constructed after June 15, 1976 and in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards and regulations in effect at the time of construction. 
Mobile Home. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was constructed between January 1, 1962, and June 15, 1976, and met the construction requirements of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction. 
Residential Trailer. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was constructed before January 1, 1962. 
Manufactured Dwelling Park (includes Mobile Home Park). Any place where four or more manufactured dwellings are located within 500 feet of one another on a lot, tract or parcel of land under the same ownership, the primary purpose of which is to rent or lease space or keep space for rent or lease to any person for a charge or fee paid or to be paid for the rental or lease or use of facilities or to offer space free in connection with securing the trade or patronage of such person consistent with state law ORS 446.003. 
Marijuana. All parts of the plant of the Cannabis family Cannabaceae, whether growing or not; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its resin, and includes both medical and recreational marijuana as defined by Oregon law. 
Edible Marijuana. Edible product that contains marijuana. 
Homegrown Marijuana. Marijuana grown or made by a person 21 years of age or older for noncommercial purposes. 
Marijuana Extract. A product obtained by separating resins from the marijuana plant by solvent extraction. 
Marijuana Facility. A commercial or public use or structure where marijuana is produced, processed, wholesaled, retailed, distributed, transferred, sold or consumed and registered with the Oregon Health Authority (OHA) or the Oregon Liquor Control Commission (OLCC). 
Marquee. A projecting, permanent, roofed structure attached to and supported only by a building. 
Mixed Solid Waste. Solid waste that contains recoverable or recyclable materials, and materials that are not capable of being recycled or recovered for further use. 
Mixed Use Development. A tract of land or building or structure with two or more different uses such as, but not limited to, residential, office, retail, manufacturing, public, or entertainment, in a compact urban form. 
Mixed Use Residential Development. A mixed use development containing one or more residences. 
Mobile Home. See Manufactured Dwelling Types. 
Mobile Home Park. See Manufactured Dwelling Park. 
Modular Home. See Residential Structure Types. 
Multi-Family Dwelling. See Residential Structure Types. 
Multi-Use Path (Trail). A path (trail) accommodating multi-modal active transportation. They serve as routes for recreational, commuter and destination-oriented trips. 
Mural. A pictorial or graphic decoration, illustration, visual representation or art work which is applied directly to a wall and does not contain letters, numbers, logos, brand names or trademarks. Murals are Architectural Features which are reviewed through the Architectural Review process. 
Net Acres. The area proposed for development measured to the property lines of the parcel(s) or development site boundary or lot after all deductions are made. Deductions include: 
(1)  The following sensitive land areas: 
(a)  Land within the 100-year floodplain that is preserved in a tract; 
(b)  Land exceeding 25 percent slope; 
(c)  Drainage ways; and 
(d)  Wetlands and associated buffers. 
(2)  Land dedicated to the public for park purposes; and 
(3)  Land dedicated to the public for rights-of-way and stormwater facilities. When actual information is not available, the following formulas may be used: 
(a)  Single-family development: allocate 20 percent of gross acres; 
(b)  Multi-family development including, but not limited to, apartments, condominiums and townhouses: allocate 15 percent of gross acres. 
Noise Sensitive Property. Any residence, apartment, condominium, multi-family dwelling or any school, church, nursing home, retirement home, group care home or day care center located in a residential planning district. 
Nonconforming Situations, Development, or Lots. See TDC Chapter 35 (Nonconforming Situations). 
Off-Site. Any area not located within the property to be developed, whether or not in the common ownership of the applicant for development approval. 
Off-Street Parking. Parking spaces provided for motor vehicles on individual lots and not located on public street right-of-way. Off-street parking includes surface lots, parking structures, and underground parking. 
Outdoor Dining Facility. An establishment that serves food and beverages in an outdoor setting as part of a restaurant. 
Outdoor Recreational Access Route. A pedestrian path that provides access to a recreation trail. These trails are on City-owned property, exclusive rights-of-way or easements, but are not necessarily located in a designated greenway. They are typically ¼ mile or less in length. 
Outdoor Shared Areas. Common areas in multi-family developments used by residents for outdoor activities. Outdoor shared areas can include, but are not limited to open lawn areas, gazebos, covered spaces, swimming pool areas, walking trails or sport recreation fields. 
Overhead Door. An opening in a wall that is at least eight feet wide and eight feet in height and that is used as an access to a loading dock, loading bay, vehicle service bay, or other similar work area. The opening is covered by a door that opens overhead. 
Owner. Any person, firm, corporation or combination, or any other legal entity having legal title to land sought to be the subject of any application or decision of this Development Code. 
Painted Highlights. Painted areas on a wall which highlight a building's architecture or structure and do not contain letters, numbers, logos, brand names or trademarks. Painted highlights are architectural features which are reviewed through the Architectural Review process. 
Parcel. A unit of land that is created by a partitioning of land, as set forth in ORS 92.010. 
Parking Lot Improvement or Expansion. The alteration of land or expansion of existing off-street parking, including grading, paving or installation of landscaping, on land intended to be regularly used for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. Parking lot improvement does not include resurfacing existing asphalt parking or re-striping of parking lots. 
Partition. An act of partitioning land, or an area or tract of land partitioned, as set forth in ORS 92.010. 
Partition Land. To divide land into two or three parcels of land within a calendar year, as set forth in ORS 92.010. 
Pedestrian. A person afoot or using any of the following: A means of conveyance propelled by human power other than a bicycle; or an electric personal assistive mobility device. Pedestrian includes a person who is operating a self-propelled wheelchair, motorized tricycle, or motorized quadricycle and, by reason of physical disability, is otherwise unable to move about as a pedestrian. 
Pedestrian Facilities. On and off-street improvements and facilities such as sidewalks, walkways, pedestrian paths, trails, outdoor recreation access routes, accessways, and other amenities designed to accommodate pedestrians. 
Pedestrian Path (Trail). Pedestrian paths (trails) are generally located within the City's designated greenways, but may be located elsewhere to provide access between residential, commercial, public, and semi-public uses. They serve as routes for recreational, commuter and destination-oriented trips. 
Person. A natural person, his or her heir, executor, administrator, assign or successor in interest; a firm, partnership, corporation, association or legal entity, it's or their successors or assigns; and any agent, employee or representative of any of the above-mentioned. 
Phase. A distinct stage of development having adequate public facilities. 
Planning District. Land use regulatory designation under the Tualatin Development Code. The term "Zone" has the same meaning as "Planning District." 
Plat. A final subdivision plat, replat or partition plat, as set forth in ORS 92.010. 
Partition Plat. A final map and other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, specifications, provisions and information concerning a partition, as set forth in ORS 92.010. 
Subdivision Plat. A final map and other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, provisions and information concerning a subdivision, as set forth in ORS 92.010. 
Porch. A covered entrance to a building. 
Portable Collection Facility. A trailer, dropbox or similar portable or semi-portable container or enclosure for the collection and storage of repairable or reusable household goods or materials for the purpose of transfer of said goods and materials elsewhere for further processing. In this context, "materials" is specifically intended to include newspaper, magazines and other printed matter. 
Preliminary Approval. After specific elements of a development plan have been submitted to and agreed upon by the City and prior to final approval, the conditional approval and qualified acceptance which is given by the City. 
Preliminary Plat. The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in these regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision or partition. 
Primary Public Customer Doorway. One or more principal entryways to a business provided for customer access on a day-to-day basis. 
Private Areas. Outdoor areas which are an extension of private interior spaces. Private areas include main entrances to dwelling units and patio areas. 
Private Grounds. Includes all real property not contained within public right-of-way. 
Private Improvements. See Improvement Types. 
Property Line. An imaginary line defining the boundary limits of a tract of land or lot. (Also known as a lot line). 
Property Line Adjustment. The relocation of a common property line between two abutting properties, as set forth in ORS 92.010. (Also known as Lot Line Adjustment.) 
Public Hearing. An adjudicatory proceeding held by the City Council proceeded by specified public notice at which interested persons, including the applicant, may call witnesses and introduce evidence for the purpose of demonstrating an application complies with applicable development regulations and where the City Council determines whether and under what conditions the application complies or development may occur. 
Public Improvement. See Improvement Types. 
Public Road. A road under the jurisdiction of a public body. 
Public Utility Facility. All on-site and off-site improvements and related accessories to be accepted for ownership, maintenance and operation by a public agency, including but not limited to, sanitary sewers and pump stations, water lines including related reservoirs, pump stations, pressure reading stations and hydrants, storm drain systems, greenways, bike paths, and streets including, alleys, street lights, street name signs, traffic control systems and devices. 
Public Works Construction Code or Public Works Code. The document entitled "Public Works Construction Code" adopted by the Council to provide design, materials and workmanship specifications for public improvements constructed by developers. 
Quasi-Judicial. The application of general standards and criteria to a specific set of facts in order to determine the conformance of the facts to the applicable criteria and resulting in a determination that will definitely affect only a small number of identifiable people. 
Recreational Vehicle. See Vehicle Types. 
Relocation. Relocating a landmark from its existing parcel to another parcel or repositioning a landmark on an existing parcel. 
Replat. The act of platting the lots, parcels and easements in a previously recorded subdivision or partition plat to achieve a reconfiguration of the existing subdivision or partition plat or to increase or decrease the number of lots in the subdivision, as set forth in ORS 92.010. 
Reserve Strip. A narrow strip of land located between a subdivision or partition and other property at the ends of, or parallel to streets which has not been dedicated to public use, but rather conveyed to the City for purposes of enhancing City control over development of the adjacent property. 
Residential Care. Services such as supervision; protection; assistance while bathing, dressing, grooming or eating; management of money; transportation; recreation; and the providing of room and board, as defined in ORS 443.400(4). 
Residential Facility. See Group Living Types. 
Residential Structure Types and Related (includes but is not limited to definitions for Housing Types in Section 39.200 and Group Living in Section 39.210) 
Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU). An interior attached or detached residential structure that is accessory to a single family dwelling. An Accessory Dwelling Unit is not a separate dwelling unit for density purposes. 
Certified or registered family child care home. (see ORS 329A.440). See, Child Care. 
Duplex. A type of dwelling that contains two primary dwelling units on one lot. The units must share a common wall or common floor/ceiling. 
Dwelling Unit. A habitable structure designed for occupancy and only having one cooking facility. 
Modular Home. A residential structure consisting of prefabricated components manufactured at a remote location and assembled on-site. 
Multi-Family Dwelling. A dwelling unit within a multi-family structure. 
Multi-Family Structure. A structure containing three or more dwelling units on one lot. The land underneath the structure is not divided into separate lots. Multi-Family Structure includes, but is not limited to structures commonly called apartments, condominiums, garden apartments, and triplex. 
Garden Apartments. A multi-family housing structure characterized by the emphasis of open landscaped areas. 
Triplex. A multi-family structure containing three primary dwelling units. Each unit must share a common wall or common floor/ceiling with at least one other unit. 
Residential Home. A residential training home or residential treatment home for five or fewer individuals exclusive of staff, as defined in ORS 443.400. 
Retirement Housing Facility. Retirement housing consisting of dwelling units in a multi-family structure or complex. 
Retirement Housing. Housing occupied by persons who are 55 years of age and older, including couples with one person 55 years of age or older, where a more supportive living environment than typically afforded to residents in conventional apartments or single-family residential housing is provided. Retirement housing includes "congregate care facility" and "retirement housing facility," or combinations thereof as defined by this Code. Retirement housing does not include "nursing facility" as defined below by this code. 
Single-Family Dwelling (detached). A single dwelling unit detached or separate from other dwelling units. A dwelling unit not having common walls with another dwelling unit. 
Townhouse (or Rowhouse). A type of dwelling unit, located on its own lot, and which shares one or more common or abutting walls with one or more other dwelling units. 
Residential Trailer. See Residential Structure Types/Manufactured Dwelling. 
Restrictive Covenant. A legally binding limitation on the manner in which a tract of land or lot can be used, usually a condition placed on the deed. 
Retail Commercial Use. See Chapter 39 (Use Categories). 
Retirement Housing. See Residential Structure Types. 
Retirement Housing Facility. See Residential Structure Types. 
Riparian area. The area adjacent to a river, lake, stream, consisting of the area of transition from an aquatic ecosystem to a terrestrial system. 
Riparian Corridor. Riparian corridor includes the water areas, fish habitat, adjacent riparian areas, and wetlands within the riparian area boundary. 
Roadway. The portion of street right-of-way developed for vehicular traffic. 
Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between the public street right-of-way or side and rear property lines to the front, side and rear lines of a building or structure located on a lot. 
Shared Roadway. A type of bikeway where bicyclists and motor vehicles share the same roadway. 
Sidewalk. A pedestrian walkway with permanent surfacing located in a street right-of-way, generally constructed as part of a street improvement and parallel to the street improvement. A sidewalk is not an accessway. 
Sight Distance. The distance along which a person can see approaching objects, such as automobiles or pedestrians at a street intersection or from a driveway along a street. 
Single-Family Dwelling. See Residential Structure Types. 
Site. For purposes of a decision following the limited land use process, a site refers to the property upon which a development is proposed. 
Sketch Map. A plan map provided to the City Manager as part of a development application for purposes of property line adjustment. 
Skirting. A covering that totally obscures the undercarriage of a manufactured dwelling, extending from the top of the undercarriage to the ground. 
Small Lot Subdivision. A subdivision containing lots smaller than 6,500 square feet and that has been granted conditional use approval. 
Stand-Alone Structure. A single purpose building that does not have a mixture of uses within it and therefore has an architectural design appropriate to the use. 
Storage Area. The space necessary to store mixed solid waste and source separated recyclables that accumulate between collection days. 
Store. The space within a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any finished floor and the surface of the ceiling immediately above said floor. 
Stream. A stream is a channel such as a river or creek that carries flowing surface water, including perennial streams and intermittent streams with defined channels, and excluding manmade irrigation and drainage channels. 
Street. A structure within the boundary lines of a public right-of-way which provides for public use of a public roadway for the purpose of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the placement of utilities, and including the terms "road," "highway," "lane," "place," "avenue," "court," "circle," "alley," or other similar designation. 
Street Right-of-Way. Publicly owned land devoted to the primary purpose of street and utility construction. 
Street Tree. A tree in a public place, street, special easement, or right-of-way adjoining a street as provided in these regulations. 
Stub-out (Stub-street). A portion of a street or cross access drive used as an extension to an abutting property that may be developed in the future resulting in the extension of the stubbed street. 
Structural Alteration. Any change to the supporting members of a building or structure, including foundations, bearing walls, partitions, columns, beams, girders, or roof or other supports. 
Structure. That which is built or constructed. An edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some manner and which requires a location on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on the ground. 
Structure Bulk. The mass or size of a structure. 
Subdivision. The splitting of a single tract of land into four or more parcels. 
Subdivision Improvements. Construction of facilities such as streets, water, sewer, gas and telephone lines and other construction related to drainage, landscaping and beautification. 
Subdivision Sign. See Chapter 38 (Signs). 
Substantially Complete. A subdivision or partition will be considered substantially complete when, in the opinion of the City Manager, the City will not be adversely impacted by issuance of building permits prior to acceptance of the public improvements by resolution of the Council. Substantially complete includes, but is not limited to a determination that water and sewer lines have been tested and ready to begin service, that as-built drawings of public facilities have been submitted, that the roadway surfaces and drainage facilities will provide year-round access to each lot and that street lights are installed and authorized to be energized. 
Tenant. A separate business or business occupant whether as owner, purchaser or lessee. See Business and Business Occupant. 
Townhouse. See Residential Structure Types. 
Tract. A non-buildable unit of land created in the partitioning or subdivision process. 
Traffic Control Device. Any sign, signal or other device constructed by a road authority, as defined by State law, for the purpose of vehicular or pedestrian traffic control. 
Trail. The term "Trail" has the same meaning as "Path." See Multi-Use Path and Pedestrian Path. 
Transit Stop. A location where regularly scheduled transit service stops (includes but is not limited to bus stop) to load and unload passengers. For purpose of measuring, the transit stop is the location of a sign denoting the transit stop. See also Transit Stop, Major. 
Major Transit Stop. Existing and planned light rail stations, commuter rail stations and transit transfer stations, except for temporary facilities; other planned stops designated as major transit stops in TDC Chapter 11 (Figure 11-5); and existing stops which have or are planned for frequently scheduled fixed-route service. 
Transit System. The property, equipment and improvements of whatever nature owned, used, constructed, maintained, controlled or operated to provide mass transportation for passengers, or to provide for the movement of people, including park-and-ride stations, transfer stations, parking lots, malls and skyways, as set forth in ORS 267. 
Transportation Facility or Improvement. Any physical facility constructed for the movement of people or goods, excluding electricity, sewage and water systems; the operation, maintenance, repair and preservation activities of existing facilities including but not limited to road, bicycle, pedestrian and rail facilities; the installation of improvements including but not limited to culverts, fencing, guardrails, landscaping, lighting, medians and pathways within the existing right-of-way; emergency measures necessary for the safety and protection of people and property; acquisition of right-of-way for public roads, highways and other transportation improvements designated in the Transportation System Plan TDC Chapter 11; and construction of a street or road as part of an approved subdivision, land partition, architectural review or other land use decision consistent with the TDC. 
Tree. A living, standing, woody plant having a trunk eight inches or more in diameter, widest cross section, at a point four feet above mean ground level. 
Tree Removal. To remove or cut down a tree, or to damage a tree so as to cause the tree to die. Damage which constitutes removal includes, but is not limited to, topping or removing a significant portion of the tree crown; application or injection of a substance toxic to the tree; damage inflicted upon the root system by root cutting, grading, paving, or storing materials or equipment in the tree's root zone; disrupting bark functions by stripping bark or girdling tree trunks or limbs with rope or wire. 
Triplex. See Residential Structure Types; Multi-Family Structure. 
Tualatin Development Code (TDC). The TDC, as amended, as of the date of submittal of a development application. 
Urban Renewal Area. A portion of the central area of the City legally designated by the City Council as appropriate for urban renewal. 
Use. The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. 
Utility Facility or Utility Facilities. The portion of a new structure or major remodeling activity which is regulated or controlled by applicable portions of the City's Structural Specialty and Fire and Life Safety Code, the City's Public Works Construction Code, the City's Plumbing Code, the City's Mechanical Code, and those portions of the Tualatin Development Code which regulate site access, street, sanitary and storm sewer and water improvements, onsite vehicle circulation, and the location of power, gas, telephone, cable television, and other similar activities. "Facilities" includes Public Utility Facilities, but does not include architectural features. 
Vegetated Corridor. A corridor adjacent to a water quality Sensitive Area that is preserved and maintained to protect the water quality functions of the water quality sensitive area. 
Vehicle Types. 
Light Truck. Two axle motor vehicles including trucks, cargo vans, school buses and motor homes with a Gross Vehicle Weight (GVW) of 28,000 lbs. or less. 
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle with or without motive power, which is designed for human occupancy and to be used temporarily for recreational, seasonal or emergency purposes, and has a gross floor area not exceeding 400 square feet in the set-up mode and as further defined, by rule, by the Oregon Department of Consumer and Business Services Director [ORS 446.003(12)). 
Recreational Water, Snow and Land Vehicles. Motorized vehicles for recreational purposes that do not meet the Oregon Motor Vehicle Code requirements for legal operation on public streets and roads, including but not limited to personal watercraft, snowmobiles go-carts and swamp or dune buggies. 
Vision Clearance Area. A triangular shaped area established at the intersection of any combination of rights-of-way, private roads, alleys and driveways. The sides of the triangle shall extend an equal and specified distance from the intersection of the property lines, or from the property lines extended along the right-of-way away from the intersection. 
Walkway. A pedestrian facility which provides a paved surface for pedestrian circulation within a development. A walkway may be shared with bicycles and may cross vehicle areas. 
Wetlands. Land areas determined by the Oregon Division of State Lands to be wetlands. 
Wetlands Conservation Lot. A parcel consisting principally of wetlands and therefore unsuitable for development, created to preserve and protect wetlands. 
Wireless Communication, Co-Location. The placement of two or more antenna systems or platforms by separate FCC license holders on a structure, such as a support structure, building, water tank, or utility pole. 
Wireless Communication Facility. An unstaffed facility for the transmission or reception of radio frequency (RF) signals, usually consisting of an equipment shelter, cabinet or other enclosed structure containing electronic equipment, a support structure, antennas or other transmission and reception devices. 
Wireless Communication Facility Attached. A wireless communication facility that is affixed to an existing structure, e.g., an existing building wall or roof, mechanical equipment, tower or pole, water tank, utility pole, or light pole, that does not include an additional wireless communication support structure. 
Wireless Communication Support Structure. A new structure, tower, pole or mast erected to support wireless communication antennas and connecting appurtenances. Support structure types include, but are not limited to, monopoles, lattice towers, wood poles and guyed towers. 
Yard. An open space on a lot which is unobstructed by buildings or structures from the ground upward. 
Yard Setback. An open space on a lot which is unobstructed by buildings or structures from the ground upward and is the minimum horizontal distance between the public street right-of-way or side and rear property lines to the front, side and rear lines of a building or structure located on a lot. 
Front Yard Setback. An open space between side lot lines, and measured horizontally from the front lot line at right angles to the front lot line to the nearest point of the building. 
Rear Yard Setback. An open space extending between side lot lines, and measured horizontally at right angles from the rear lot line of the nearest point of a building. 
Side Yard Setback. A yard between a building and the side lot line, measured horizontally at right angles to the side lot line from the side lot line to the nearest point of the building. 
Zone. Land use regulatory designation under the Tualatin Development Code. The term "Planning District" has the same meaning as "Zone." 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 04-11-83; Ord. 585-82, 12-13-82; Ord. 635-84 §8, 06-11-84; Ord. 647-85 §1, 02-11-85; Ord. 661-85 §1, 06-10-85; Ord. 705-86 §§1 and 2, 09-8-86; Ord. 725-87 §1, 06-22-87; Ord. 743-88 §§1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, 03-28-88; Ord. 769-89 §2, 02-27-89; Ord. 812-90 §1, 09-24-90; Ord. 818-91 §8, 9 and 10, 01-14-91; Ord. 822-92 §4, 12-14-92; Ord. 827-91 §5, 03-25-91; Ord. 828-91 §2, 03-25-91; Ord. 844-91 §4, 10-14-91; Ord. 849-91 §§2, 8 and 9, 11-25-91; Ord. 862-92 §1, 03-23-92; Ord. 868-92 §3, 05-11-92; Ord. 882-92 §4, 12-14-92; Ord. 884-93 §1, 02-8-93; Ord. 890-93 §2, 04-12-93, Ord. 894-93 §§3 and 4, 05-24-93; Ord. 895-93 §2, 05-24-93; Ord. 898-93 §1, 06-14-93; Ord. 902-93 §2, 06-28-93; Ord. 904-93 §1, 09-13-93; Ord. 911-94 §4, 02-14-94; Ord. 920-94 §1, 04-11-94; Ord. 921-94 §2, 04-25-94; Ord. 930-94 §1, 08-8-94; Ord. 937-95 §3, 01-9-95; Ord. 942-95 §2, 03-27-95; Ord. 947-95 §§3 and 4, 07-24-95; Ord. 956-96 §§4, 5 and 6, 01-8-96; Ord. 963-96 §§2 and 8, 06-24-96; Ord. 960-96 §6, 05-28-96; Ord. 965-96 §4, 12-9-96; Ord. 979-97 §8, 07-14-97; Ord. 1007-98 §1, 07-13-98; Ord. 1013-99 §5, 01-11-99; Ord. 1025-99 §1, 07-26-99; Ord. 1026-99 §14, 08-9-99; Ord. 1046-00 §2, 02-14-00; Ord. 1063-01 §1, 02-12-01; Ord. 1088-01 §1, 08-27-01; Ord. 1096-02, 01-28-02; Ord. 1097-02, 02-11-02; Ord. 1103-02, 03-25-02; Ord. 1120-02, 11-15-02; Ord. 1129-03, 02-24-03; Ord. 1133-03, 03-24-03; Ord. 1136-03, 04-28-03; Ord. 1145-03, 07-28-03; Ord. 1157-04, 03-8-04; Ord. 1160-04, 05-24-04; Ord. 1164-04, 06-28-04; Ord. 1212-06, 06-26-06; Ord. 1214-06, 07-10-06; Ord. 1216-06, 07-24-06; Ord. 1224-06§3, 11-13-06; Ord. 1227-07 §3, 02-12-07; Ord. 1261-08 §2, 06-9-08, Ord. 1277-09, 3-9-09; Ord. 1305-10 §1, 05-14-10; Ord. 1317-10 §1, 12-13-10; Ord. 1322-11 §1, 05-9-11; Ord. 1335-11 §1, 11-14-11; Ord. 1338-12 §3, 01-23-12; Ord. 1351-12 §2, 1; 0-22-12; Ord. 1354-13 §4, 02-25-13; Ord. 1379-15 § 1, 03-23-2015; Ord. 1411-18, 7-23-18; Ord 1414-18, 12-10-2018; Ord. 1427-19 , § 15, 11-25-19; Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 5, 6-22-20)  
TDC 31.070. - Interpretation of Code Provisions. 
(1)  The City Manager has the initial authority and responsibility to interpret all terms, provisions and requirements of the Tualatin Development Code. 
(2)  Unless accompanied by an application, submitted under some other Development Code or Ordinance provision, a party wishing an interpretation must submit a written application to the City Manager. The application must be accompanied by a detailed description of factors related to the issue for interpretation, including, but not limited to: 
(a)  The amount and type of traffic generated; 
(b)  The type of manufacturing or commercial process; 
(c)  The nature of any machinery used; 
(d)  Noise and odor characteristics, associated with the use or activity; 
(e)  Outside storage of materials or products; 
(f)  Type of structures required; 
(g)  Character of activity to be conducted on the site; 
(h)  Amount of parking required; 
(i)  Number of persons who would occupy the premises at any one time; and 
(j)  Any other information which the City Manager or designee determines to be relevant to a determination of the issue. 
(3)  Within 30 days of the submission of all required information, the City Manager must cause a final decision to be made on the issue. The decision must include findings of fact and conclusions for the particular aspects of the decision, based upon applicable criteria. Notice of the decision must be provided to the City Council. The City Manager must maintain a collection of such decisions. 
(4)  The final decision on a Code interpretation under this section may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to the provisions of TDC 31.076 and 31.077. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 04-11-83; Ord. 743-88 §8, 03-28-88; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 31.100. - Application Fee Required. 
All applications for a land use action must be accompanied by the appropriate fee, as set by resolution of the City Council. The City will not process any land use action until the appropriate fee is paid. Land use actions initiated by the City do not require a fee. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 31.102. - Waiver or Reduction of Fees. 
The City Council may reduce or waive fees upon showing of just cause to do so by the applicant. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
TDC 31.105. - Interpretation, Conflict and Rules of Construction. 
(1)  The provisions of this Chapter are minimum requirements. 
(2)  Unless a particular provision of the Tualatin Development Code provides otherwise, where two or more provisions of the Tualatin Development Code conflict, the provisions must be read in conjunction to give both meaning, unless only one can be given meaning in which case the provision imposing the more restrictive or higher standard applies. 
(3)  Unless a particular provision of the Tualatin Development Code provides otherwise, the rules of statutory construction under ORS Chapter 174, as interpreted by Oregon courts, apply to the Tualatin Development Code. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 31.110. - Conformance Required; Revocation. 
(1)  No building, structure, or land will hereafter be used, possessed or occupied, and no building, structure, or any part thereof will hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered contrary to the provisions of Chapters 31—80 of the City of Tualatin Development Code. 
(2)  Real property may be occupied or developed and a structure may be occupied or developed only as this Code and applicable City regulations permit. The requirements of this Code and applicable City regulations apply to the person undertaking the development or the user of a development and to any successor in interest. 
(3)  Any use of land or existing structures which is not in conformity with the provisions of the applicable standards at the time of the adoption of the City of Tualatin Community Development Code is nonconforming and subject to the provisions herein described by TDC Chapter 35. 
(4)  A building permit must not be issued by the Building Official for the City of Tualatin for the erection, construction, conversion or alteration of any building or structure or use of land unless the City Manager has first determined that such land use, building or structure, as proposed, would comply with the Tualatin Community Plan and Development Code. 
(a)  All applications for building permits must be accompanied by plans and specifications, drawn to scale, showing the exact sizes and locations on the lot of the building and other structures existing and proposed; the existing and intended use of each building, structure, structures, or part thereof; and such other information as is needed to determine conformance with the Tualatin Community Plan and Development Code. 
(b)  If, during the course of constructing any building or structure, the City Manager or Building Official determines that such construction activity is in violation of any provision of the Tualatin Community Plan or Development Code, the City Manager or Building Official is hereby authorized to issue a stop-work order. This remedy is in addition to and not in lieu of any other right or remedy available to the City to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
(5)  The City Council may, after conducting a hearing pursuant to TDC 32.140 (Type IV-A), revoke any permit approval previously given and may revoke any Certificate of Occupancy for any of the following reasons: 
(a)  Material misrepresentation or omission of fact in the application or in testimony or evidence submitted; whether such misrepresentation be intentional or unintentional; or 
(b)  Failure to complete the work within the time and in the manner approved without obtaining an extension of time or modification of plans from the granting authority; or 
(c)  Failure to maintain and use the property in accordance with the approved plans and conditions. 
(d)  A representation, misrepresentation or omission is material if it bears directly upon some relevant standard, if it could affect the outcome of the hearing, or if it could affect a condition on which approval is given. 
(6)  The rights and remedies provided by this section are in addition to right, remedy, or penalty available to the City under any other provision of law. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 31.111. - Civil Violation. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of the Tualatin Development Code commits a civil infraction and is subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00 for each violation. Each violation, and each day that a violation continues, is a separate civil infraction. 
(2)  Where a specific violation of the Tualatin Development Code specifies a different fine, the fine specific to that violation controls. 
(3)  The civil infraction procedures in Tualatin Municipal Code Chapter 7-01 apply to the prosecution of any violation of the Tualatin Development Code. 
(4)  The remedies for civil infraction are not exclusive and are in addition to any other remedies provided by law or in equity. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 31.112. - Concurrent Jurisdiction. 
The City of Tualatin Municipal Court and Circuit Courts of the State of Oregon for Washington County and Clackamas County have concurrent jurisdiction over prosecutions of violations of the Tualatin Development Code. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 31.113. - Injunction. 
In the event of a violation of this Code, City, or any person, firm or corporation whose interest in real property in the City is or may be affected by the violation may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate proceeding to prevent, temporarily or permanently enjoin, abate, or remove the violation. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
CHAPTER 32 - PROCEDURES 
 
TDC 32.010. - Purpose and Applicability. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish standard procedures for the review and processing of land use applications and legislative land use proposals, as well as ministerial actions. This Chapter is intended to enable the City, the applicant, and the public, where applicable, to reasonably review applications and participate in the local decision-making process in a timely and effective way. Table 32-1 provides a key for determining the review procedure and the decision-making body for particular applications. 
(2)  Applicability of Review Procedures. All land use and development permit applications and decisions, will be made by using the procedures contained in this Chapter. The procedure "type" assigned to each application governs the decision-making process for that permit or application. There are five types of permit/application procedures as described in subsections (a) through (e) below. Table 32-1 lists the City's land use and development applications and corresponding review procedure(s). 
(a)  Type I Procedure (Ministerial Staff Review). A Type I procedure is used in applying City standards and criteria that do not require the use of discretion, interpretation, or the exercise of policy or legal judgment (i.e., clear and objective standards). Type I decisions are made by the City Manager without public notice and without a public hearing. Appeals of Type I decisions are to Circuit Court under writ of review. 
(b)  Type II Procedure (Administrative/Staff Review with Notice). A Type II procedure is used when the standards and criteria require limited discretion, interpretation, or policy or legal judgment. Type II decisions are made by the City Manager and require public notice and an opportunity for appeal to the Planning Commission, Architectural Review Board, or City Council as shown in Table 32-1. Those Type II decisions which are "limited land use decisions" as defined in ORS 197.015 are so noted in Table 32-1. 
(c)  Type III Procedure (Quasi-Judicial Review—Public Hearing). Type III procedure is used when the standards and criteria require discretion, interpretation, or policy or legal judgment. Quasi-Judicial decisions involve discretion but implement established policy. Type III decisions are made by the Planning Commission or Architectural Review Board and require public notice and a public hearing, with an opportunity for appeal to the City Council. 
(d)  Type IV-A Procedure (Quasi-Judicial Review—City Council Public Hearing). Type IV-A procedure is used when the standards and criteria require discretion, interpretation, or policy or legal judgment and is the procedure used for site-specific land use actions initiated by an applicant. Type IV-A decisions are made by the City Council and require public notice and a public hearing. Appeals of Type IV-A decisions are heard by the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA). 
(e)  Type IV-B Procedure (Legislative Review). The Type IV-B procedure is used to review proposals to amend the Tualatin Comprehensive Plan, the City's land use regulations, and large-scale changes to the Comprehensive Plan or Plan Maps, and involve the creation, revision, or implementation of broad public policy. Type IV-B reviews are first considered by the Planning Commission, which makes a recommendation to City Council. City Council makes the final decision on a legislative proposal through the enactment of an ordinance. Appeals of Type IV-B decisions are heard by the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA). 
(3)  Determination of Review Type. Unless specified in Table 32-1, the City Manager will determine whether a permit or application is processed as Type I, II, III, IV-A or IV-B based on the descriptions above. Questions regarding the appropriate procedure will be resolved in favor of the review type providing the widest notice and opportunity to participate. An applicant may choose to elevate a Type I or II application to a higher numbered review type, provided the applicant pays the appropriate fee for the selected review type. 
(Ord. 1414-18;12-10-18) 
Table 32-1—Applications Types and Review Procedures 
Application/Action 	Procedure Type 	Decision Body* 	Appeal Body* 	Pre-Application
Conference
Required 	Neighborhood/
Developer Mtg
Required 	Applicable Code
Chapter 
Annexations 
• Quasi-judicial 	TDC 
32.260 	CC 	LUBA 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC 33.010 
• Legislative 		CC 	LUBA 	No 	No 	TDC 33.010 
Architectural Review 
 • Architectural Review (except as specified below) (limited land use) 	II 	CM 	ARB/CC 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC 33.020 
 • Single Family Dwelling following Clear and Objective Standards 
  
Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs) following Clear and Objective Standards 
  
 • Minor AR including façade and landscape modifications 	I 	CM 	Circuit Court 	No 	No 	TDC 33.020 
 • Commercial Buildings 50,000 square feet and larger 
 • Industrial Buildings 150,000 square feet and larger 
 • Multifamily Housing Projects 100 units and above (or any number of units abutting a single family district) 
 •as requested by the CM 	III 	ARB 	CC 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC 33.020 
Public Facilities Decision in conjunction with Architectural Review (limited land use) 	II 	CM 	CC 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC 33.020 
Driveway Approach and Closure Permits (limited land use) 	II 	CM 	CC 	No 	No 	TDC 33.030 
Conditional Use Permit 	III 	PC 	CC 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC 33.040 
Floodplain Development 	I 	CM 	Circuit 
Court 	No 	No 	TDC Ch 70 
Floodplain Variance 	IV-A 	CC 	LUBA 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC Ch 70 
Historic Landmark Actions 
 • Applying or removing designation—Quasi-judicial 	IV-A 	CC 	LUBA 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC Ch 68 
 • Applying or removing designation—Legislative 	IV-B 	CC 	LUBA 	No 	No 	TDC Ch 68 
 • Demolition, relocation, alteration, new construction (limited land use) of a Landmark 	II 	CM 	CC 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC Ch 68 
National Register Resources actions: demolition or relocation 	IV-A 	CC 	LUBA 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC Ch 68 
Industrial Master Plans 	III 	PC 	CC 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC 33.050 
Land Divisions 
 • Property line adjustment (PLA) 	I 	CM 	Circuit 
Court 	No 	No 	TDC Ch 36 
 • Subdivisions (limited land use) 	II 	CM 	CC 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC Ch 36 
 • Partitions (limited land use) 	II 	CM 	CC 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC Ch 36 
 • Minor (immaterial) modifications to approved plan (prior to plat approval) 	I 	CM 	Circuit Court 	No 	No 	TDC Ch 36 
 • Expedited Land Divisions 	Subject to procedures in ORS 197.365 	TDC Ch 36 
Nonconforming use—Reinstatement of a nonconforming use 	III 	PC 	CC 	No 	No 	TDC 33.060 
Plan Amendments 
 • Map or Text Amendments for a specific property 	IV-A 	CC 	LUBA 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC 33.070 
 • Legislative Map or Text Amendments 	IV-B 	CC 	LUBA 	No 	No 	TDC 33.070 
Signs 						
 • Sign Permit, New or Alteration, including Sign Design Review 	I 	CM 	Circuit Court 	No 	No 	TDC 33.080 
 • Sign Variance 	III 	PC 	CC 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC 33.080 
Temporary Outdoor Sales Permit 	I 	CM 	Circuit
Court	No 	No 	TDC 33.090 
Temporary Sales Office 	I 	CM 	Circuit 
Court 	No 	No 	TDC 33.100 
Tree Removal Permit 	II 	CM 	CC 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC 33.110 
Variance 
 • Variance (including Sign Variance) except as specified below 	III 	PC 	CC 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC 33.120 
 • Variance for existing single family residence 	III 	PC 	CC 	Yes 	No 	TDC 33.120 
 • Variance in conjunction with a subdivision or partition (except minor variances) 	IV-A 	CC 	LUBA 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC Ch 36 
 • Minor variance except as specified below 	II 	CM 	CC 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC 33.120 
 • Minor variance in conjunction with a property line adjustment, subdivision or partition 	II 	CM 	CC 	Yes 	Yes 	TDC Ch 36 
 • Minor variance for existing single family residence 	II 	CM 	CC 	Yes 	No 	TDC 33.120 
Wetlands Protection District 	I 	CM 	Circuit 
Court 	No 	No 	TDC Ch 71 
 
* City Council (CC); Planning Commission (PC); Architectural Review Board (ARB); City Manager or designee (CM); Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA). 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18)  
TDC 32.020. - Procedures for Review of Multiple Applications. 
Multiple applications processed individually require the filing of separate applications for each land use action. Each application will be separately reviewed according to the applicable procedure type and processed sequentially as follows: 
(1)  Applications with the highest numbered procedure type must be processed first; 
(2)  Applications specifically referenced elsewhere in the TDC as to the particular order must be processed in that order; and 
(3)  Where one land use application is dependent on the approval of another land use application, the land use application upon which the other is dependent must be processed first (e.g., a conditional use permit is subject to prior approval before architectural review). 
(Ord. 1414-18;12-10-18)  
TDC 32.030. - Time to Process Applications. 
(1)  Time Limit—120-day Rule. The City must take final action on all Type II, Type III, and Type IV-A land use applications, as provided by ORS 227.178, including resolution of all local appeals, within 120 days after the application has been deemed complete under TDC 32.160, unless the applicant provides written request or consent to an extension in compliance with ORS 227.178. (Note: The 120-day rule does not apply to Type IV-B (Legislative Land Use) decisions.) 
(2)  Time Limit—100-day Rule. The City must take final action including resolution of all local appeals on qualifying applications under ORS 227.180 within 100 days after the application is deemed complete. An application qualifies if it is submitted under ORS 227.175 and meets the following criteria: 
(a)  The application is for development of a multifamily residential building containing five or more residential units within the urban growth boundary; 
(b)  At least 50 percent of the residential units included in the development will be sold or rented as affordable housing. For the purposes of this section, "affordable housing" means housing that is affordable to households with incomes equal to or less than 60 percent of the median family income for the county in which the development is built or for the state, whichever is greater; and 
(c)  The development is subject to a covenant appurtenant that restricts the owner and each successive owner of the development or a residential unit within the development from selling or renting any residential unit described in paragraph (b) of this subsection as housing that is not affordable housing for a period of 60 years from the date of the certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Time Periods. "Days" means calendar days unless otherwise specified. In computing time periods prescribed or allowed by this Chapter, the day of the act or event from which the designated period of time begins is not included. The last day of the period is included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, in which case the period runs until the end of the next day that is not on a weekend or City recognized legal holiday. 
(Ord. 1414-18;12-10-18)  
TDC 32.110. - Pre-Application Conference. 
(1)  Purpose of Pre-Application Conferences. Pre-application conferences are intended to familiarize applicants with the requirements of the TDC; to provide applicants with an opportunity discuss proposed projects in detail with City staff; and to identify approval criteria, standards, and procedures prior to filing a land use application. The pre-application conference is intended to be a tool to assist applicants in navigating the land use process, but is not intended to be an exhaustive review that identifies or resolves all potential issues, and does not bind or preclude the City from enforcing any applicable regulations or from applying regulations in a manner differently than may have been indicated at the time of the pre-application conference. 
(2)  When Mandatory. Pre-application conferences are mandatory for all land use actions identified as requiring a pre-application conference in Table 32-1. An applicant may voluntarily request a pre-application conference for any land use action even if it is not required. 
(3)  Timing of Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference must be held with City staff before an applicant submits an application and before an applicant conducts a Neighborhood/Developer meeting. 
(4)  Application Requirements for Pre-Application Conference. 
(a)  Application Form. Pre-application conference requests must be made on forms provided by the City Manager. 
(b)  Submittal Requirements. Pre-application conference requests must include: 
(i)  A completed application form; 
(ii)  Payment of the application fee; 
(iii)  The information required, if any, for the specific pre-application conference sought; and 
(iv)  Any additional information the applicant deems necessary to demonstrate the nature and scope of the proposal in sufficient detail to allow City staff to review and comment. 
(5)  Scheduling of Pre-Application Conference. Upon receipt of a complete application, the City Manager will schedule the pre-application conference. The City Manager will coordinate the involvement of city departments, as appropriate, in the pre-application conference. Pre-application conferences are not open to the general public. 
(6)  Validity Period for Mandatory Pre-Application Conferences; Follow-Up Conferences. A follow-up conference is required for those mandatory pre-application conferences that have previously been held when: 
(a)  An application relating to the proposed development that was the subject of the pre-application conference has not been submitted within six months of the pre-application conference; 
(b)  The proposed use, layout, and/or design of the proposal have significantly changed; or 
(c)  The owner and/or developer of a project changes after the pre-application conference and prior to application submittal. 
(Ord. 1414-18;12-10-18)  
TDC 32.120. - Neighborhood/Developer Meetings. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this meeting is to provide a means for the applicant and surrounding property owners to meet to review a development proposal and identify issues regarding the proposal so they can be considered prior to the application submittal. The meeting is intended to allow the developer and neighbors to share information and concerns regarding the project. The applicant may consider whether to incorporate solutions to these issues prior to application submittal. 
(2)  When Mandatory. Neighborhood/developer meetings are mandatory for all land use actions identified in Table 32-1 as requiring a neighborhood/developer meeting. An applicant may voluntarily conduct a neighborhood/developer meeting even if it is not required and may conduct more than one neighborhood/developer meeting at their election. 
(3)  Timing. A neighborhood/developer meeting must be held after a pre-application meeting with City staff, but before submittal of an application. 
(4)  Time and Location. Required neighborhood/developer meetings must be held within the city limits of the City of Tualatin at the following times: 
(a)  If scheduled on a weekday, the meeting must begin no earlier than 6:00 p.m. 
(b)  If scheduled on a weekend, the meeting must begin between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(5)  Notice Requirements. 
(a)  The applicant must provide notice of the meeting at least 14 calendar days and no more than 28 calendar days before the meeting. The notice must be by first class mail providing the date, time, and location of the meeting, as well as a brief description of the proposal and its location. The applicant must keep a copy of the notice to be submitted with their land use application. 
(b)  The applicant must mail notice of a neighborhood/developer meeting to the following persons: 
(i)  All property owners within 1,000 feet measured from the boundaries of the subject property; 
(ii)  All property owners within a platted residential subdivision that is located within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of the subject property. The notice area includes the entire subdivision and not just those lots within 1,000 feet. If the residential subdivision is one of two or more individually platted phases sharing a single subdivision name, the notice area need not include the additional phases; and 
(iii)  All designated representatives of recognized Citizen Involvement Organizations as established in TMC Chapter 11-9. 
(c)  The City will provide the applicant with labels for mailing for a fee. 
(d)  Failure of a property owner to receive notice does not invalidate the neighborhood/developer meeting proceedings. 
(6)  Neighborhood/Developer Sign Posting Requirements. The applicant must provide and post on the subject property, at least 14 calendar days before the meeting. The sign must conform to the design and placement standards established by the City for signs notifying the public of land use actions in TDC 32.150. 
(7)  Neighborhood/Developer Meeting Requirements. The applicant must have a sign-in sheet for all attendees to provide their name, address, telephone number, and email address and keep a copy of the sign-in sheet to provide with their land use application. The applicant must prepare meeting notes identifying the persons attending, those commenting and the substance of the comments expressed, and the major points that were discussed. The applicant must keep a copy of the meeting notes for submittal with their land use application. 
(Ord. 1414-18;12-10-18)  
TDC 32.130. - Initiation of Applications. 
(1)  Type I, Type II, Type III, and Type IV-A Applications. Type I, Type II, Type III, and Type IV-A applications may be submitted by one or more of the following persons: 
(a)  The owner of the subject property; 
(b)  The contract purchaser of the subject property, when the application is accompanied by proof of the purchaser's status as such and by the seller's written consent; 
(c)  A lessee in possession of the property, when the application is accompanied by the owners' written consent; or 
(d)  The agent of any of the foregoing, when the application is duly authorized in writing by a person authorized to submit an application by paragraphs (a), (b) or (c) of this subsection, and accompanied by proof of the agent's authority. 
(2)  Type IV-A or B Applications. Type IV-A or B applications may be initiated by the City. 
(Ord. 1414-18;12-10-18)  
TDC 32.140. - Application Submittal. 
(1)  Submittal Requirements. Land use applications must be submitted on forms provided by the City. A land use application may not be accepted in partial submittals. All information supplied on the application form and accompanying the application must be complete and correct as to the applicable facts. Unless otherwise specified, all of the following must be submitted to initiate completeness review under TDC 32.160: 
(a)  A completed application form. The application form must contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
(i)  The names and addresses of the applicant(s), the owner(s) of the subject property, and any authorized representative(s) thereof; 
(ii)  The address or location of the subject property and its assessor's map and tax lot number; 
(iii)  The size of the subject property; 
(iv)  The comprehensive plan designation and zoning of the subject property; 
(v)  The type of application(s); 
(vi)  A brief description of the proposal; and 
(vii)  Signatures of the applicant(s), owner(s) of the subject property, and/or the duly authorized representative(s) thereof authorizing the filing of the application(s). 
(b)  A written statement addressing each applicable approval criterion and standard; 
(c)  Any additional information required under the TDC for the specific land use action sought; 
(d)  Payment of the applicable application fee(s) pursuant to the most recently adopted fee schedule; 
(e)  Recorded deed/land sales contract with legal description. 
(f)  A preliminary title report or other proof of ownership. 
(g)  For those applications requiring a neighborhood/developer meeting: 
(i)  The mailing list for the notice; 
(ii)  A copy of the notice; 
(iii)  An affidavit of the mailing and posting; 
(iv)  The original sign-in sheet of participants; and 
(v)  The meeting notes described in TDC 32.120(7). 
(h)  A statement as to whether any City-recognized Citizen Involvement Organizations (CIOs) whose boundaries include, or are adjacent to, the subject property were contacted in advance of filing the application and, if so, a summary of the contact. The summary must include the date when contact was made, the form of the contact and who it was with (e.g. phone conversation with neighborhood association chairperson, meeting with land use committee, presentation at neighborhood association meeting), and the result; 
(i)  Any additional information, as determined by the City Manager, that may be required by another provision, or for any other permit elsewhere, in the TDC, and any other information that may be required to adequately review and analyze the proposed development plan as to its conformance to the applicable criteria; 
(2)  Application Intake. Each application, when received, must be date-stamped with the date the application was received by the City, and designated with a receipt number and a notation of the staff person who received the application. 
(3)  Administrative Standards for Applications. The City Manager is authorized to establish administrative standards for application forms and submittals, including but not limited to plan details, information detail and specificity, number of copies, scale, and the form of submittal. 
(Ord. 1414-18;12-10-18)  
TDC 32.150. - Sign Posting. 
(1)  When Signs Posted. Signs in conformance with these standards must be posted as follows: 
(a)  Signs providing notice of an upcoming neighborhood/developer meeting must be posted prior to a required neighborhood/developer meeting in accordance with Section 32.120(6); and 
(b)  Signs providing notice of a pending land use application must be posted after land use application has been submitted for Type II, III and IV-A applications. 
(2)  Sign Design Requirements. The applicant must provide and post a sign(s) that conforms to the following standards: 
(a)  Waterproof sign materials; 
(b)  Sign face must be no less than 18 inches by 24 inches (18" x 24"); and 
(c)  Sign text must be at least two inch font. 
(3)  On-site Placement. The applicant must place one sign on their property along each public street frontage of the subject property. (Example: If a property adjoins four public streets, the applicant must place a sign at each of those public street frontages for a total of four signs.) The applicant cannot place the sign within public right-of-way. 
(4)  Removal. If a sign providing notice of a pending land use application disappears prior to the final decision date of the subject land use application, the applicant must replace the sign within 40-eight (48) hours of discovery of the disappearance or of receipt of notice from the City of its disappearance, whichever occurs first. The applicant must remove the sign no later than 14 days after: 
(a)  The meeting date, in the case of signs providing notice of an upcoming neighborhood/developer meeting; or 
(b)  The City makes a final decision on the subject land use application, in the case of signs providing notice of a pending land use application. 
(Ord. 1414-18;12-10-18)  
TDC 32.160. - Completeness Review. 
(1)  Duration. Except as otherwise provided under ORS 227.178, the City Manager must review an application for completeness within 30 days of its receipt. 
(2)  Considerations. Determination of completeness will be based upon receipt of the information required under TDC 32.140 and will not be based on opinions as to quality or accuracy. Applications that do not respond to relevant code requirements or standards can be deemed incomplete. A determination that an application is complete indicates only that the application is ready for review on its merits, not that the City will make a favorable decision on the application. 
(3)  Complete Applications. If an application is determined to be complete, review of the application will commence. 
(4)  Incomplete Applications. If an application is determined to be incomplete, the City Manager must provide written notice to the applicant identifying the specific information that is missing and allowing the applicant the opportunity to submit the missing information. An application which has been determined to be incomplete must be deemed complete for purposes of this section upon receipt of: 
(a)  All of the missing information; 
(b)  Some of the missing information and written notice from the applicant that no other information will be provided; or 
(c)  Written notice from the applicant that none of the missing information will be provided. 
(5)  Vesting. If an application was complete at the time it was first submitted, or if the applicant submits additional required information within 180 days of the date the application was first submitted, approval or denial of the application must be based upon the standards and criteria that were in effect at the time the application was first submitted. 
(6)  Void Applications. An application is void if the application has been on file with the City for more than 180 days and the applicant has not provided the missing information or otherwise responded, as provided in subsection (4) of this section. 
(Ord. 1414-18;12-10-18)  
TDC 32.170. - Revised Applications. 
Revisions or alterations of an application may be made following the determination that an application is complete, provided such revisions or alterations do not render the application incomplete and do address applicable requirements. When revisions or alterations are desired by the applicant or required by the City, the applicant must provide fully revised application materials and clearly identifying those application materials which are revised. 
(Ord. 1414-18;12-10-18)  
TDC 32.180. - Withdrawal of Application. 
(1)  Withdrawn by Applicant. An application may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time prior to the issuance of the decision if the owner or contract purchaser consents in writing to withdraw the application. 
(2)  Notice. If an application is withdrawn after the mailing of public notice, the City Manager must send written notice stating the application has been withdrawn to all persons who were provided mailed notice of the application or public hearing. 
(Ord. 1414-18;12-10-18)  
TDC 32.210. - Type I Procedure (Ministerial). 
The City Manager makes ministerial decisions through the Type I procedure without public notice and without a public hearing. Ministerial decisions are those where City standards and criteria do not require the exercise of discretion, interpretation, or policy or legal judgment (i.e., clear and objective standards). 
(1)  Submittal Requirements. Complete Type I applications must include the submittal information required by TDC 32.140(1)(a) through (d). 
(2)  Notice of Application Submittal. No public notice of review is required. 
(3)  Notice of Decision. Written notice of the decision must be provided to the applicant and property owner of record. 
(4)  Effective Date. A Type I decision is final on the date it is signed by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 1414-18;12-10-18)  
TDC 32.220. - Type II Procedure (Administrative Review with Notice). 
Type II decisions are made by the City Manager with public notice and an opportunity for review and comment. The local appeal body for each application type is specified in Table 32-1. Type II decisions include limited land use decisions under ORS 197.195. 
(1)  Submittal Requirements. Type II applications must include the submittal information required by TDC 32.140(1). 
(2)  Determination of Completeness. After receiving an application for filing, the City Manager will review the application for completeness in accordance with TDC 32.160. 
(3)  Written Notice of Application and Opportunity to Comment. Once the application has been deemed complete, the City must mail notice of a pending Type II decision to the following individuals and agencies no fewer than 14 days before making the Type II decision to allow interested people and agencies the opportunity to submit written comments on the application before the City issues the decision. 
(a)  Recipients: 
(i)  The applicant and the owners of the subject property; 
(ii)  All property owners within 1,000 feet measured from the boundaries of the subject property; 
(iii)  All property owners within a platted residential subdivision that is located within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of the subject property. The notice area includes the entire subdivision and not just those lots within 1,000 feet. If the residential subdivision is one of two or more individually platted phases sharing a single subdivision name, the notice area need not include the additional phases; 
(iv)  All designated representatives of recognized Citizen Involvement Organizations as established in TMC Chapter 11-9; 
(v)  Any person who submits a written request to receive a notice; 
(vi)  Any governmental agency that is entitled to notice under an intergovernmental agreement entered into with the City and any other affected agencies, including but not limited to: school districts; fire district; where the project either adjoins or directly affects a state highway, the Oregon Department of Transportation; where the project site would access a County road or otherwise be subject to review by the County, then the County; Clean Water Services; Tri Met; and, ODOT Rail Division and the railroad company if a railroad-highway grade crossing provides or will provide the only access to the subject property. The failure of another agency to respond with written comments on a pending application does not invalidate an action or permit approval made by the City under this Code; and 
(vii)  Utility companies (as applicable). 
(b)  The mailed notice of pending Type II Decision, at a minimum, must contain all of the following information: 
(i)  The names of the applicant(s), any representative(s) thereof, and the owner(s) of the subject property; 
(ii)  The street address if assigned, if no street address has been assigned then Township, Range, Section, Tax Lot or Tax Lot ID; 
(iii)  The proposed site plan; 
(iv)  Statement noting if a railroad-highway grade crossing provides or will provide the only access to the subject property; 
(v)  The type of application and a concise description of the nature of the land use action; 
(vi)  A list of the approval criteria by TDC section for the decision and other ordinances or regulations that apply to the application at issue; 
(vii)  Brief summary of the local decision making process for the land use decision being made; 
(viii)  The date, place and time where comments are due and that comments are due no later than 5:00 p.m. on the 14th calendar day after the notice was mailed; 
(ix)  A statement indicating that issues which may provide the basis for an appeal to the Oregon Land Use Board of Appeals must be raised in writing prior to the expiration of the comment period and with sufficient specificity to enable the applicant and local appeal body to respond to the issue; 
(x)  Statement that after the comment period closes, the City will issue its decision and the decision will be mailed to the applicant, property owner, anyone who submitted written comments on the application, and to anyone else is otherwise legally entitled to notice; 
(xi)  A statement that comments received after the close of the public comment period will not be considered; 
(xii)  The name of a City representative to contact and the telephone number where additional information may be obtained; and 
(xiii)  Statement that the application and all documents and evidence submitted by the applicant are available for review and that copies can be obtained at a reasonable cost from the City. 
(c)  Failure of a person or agency identified in TDC 32.220(3)(a) to receive the notice required in TDC 32.220(3)(b) does not invalidate any proceeding in connection with the application provided the City can demonstrate by affidavit that notice was given in accordance with this section. 
(d)  Written comments must be received by the City no later than 5:00 p.m. on the 14th calendar day after the notice was mailed in order for comments to be considered. 
(4)  Decision. At the conclusion of the comment period, the City Manager must review the comments received and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The decision must be in writing and include a statement that: 
(a)  Explains the criteria and standards considered relevant to the decision; 
(b)  States the facts relied upon in issuing the decision; and 
(c)  Explains the justification for the decision based on the criteria, standards and facts set forth. 
(5)  Notice of Type II Decision. Notice of the decision must be provided to the property owner, applicant, and any person who submitted written comments in accordance with TDC 32.220(3)(d). If approval is granted to remove a Heritage Tree, a copy of the decision must be sent to the chairman of the Tualatin Park Advisory Committee. The Type II Notice of Decision must contain all of the following information: 
(a)  A description of the applicant's proposal and the City's decision on the proposal, which may be a summary, provided it references the specifics of the proposal and conditions of approval in the public record; 
(b)  The address or other geographic description of the property proposed for development, including a map of the property in relation to the surrounding area; 
(c)  A statement a statement that the complete case file, including findings, conclusions, and conditions of approval, if any, is available for review and how copies can be obtained; 
(d)  The date the decision becomes final, unless an appeal is submitted; and 
(e)  A statement that all person entitled to notice of the decision may appeal the decision in accordance with TDC 32.310. 
(6)  Appeal of a Type II Decision. Appeals may be made in accordance with TDC 32.310. 
(7)  Effective Date of Type II Decision. A Type II Decision becomes effective 14 days after the City mails the Notice of Decision, unless an Appeal is submitted pursuant to TDC 32.310 or unless the conditions of approval specify otherwise. 
(Ord. 1414-18;12-10-18)  
TDC 32.230. - Type III Procedure (Quasi-Judicial Review—Public Hearing). 
Type III decisions involve the use of discretion and judgment and are made by the Planning Commission or Architectural Review Board after a public hearing with an opportunity for appeal to the City Council. The decision body for each application type is specified in Table 32-1. A hearing under these procedures provides a forum to apply standards to a specific set of facts to determine whether the facts conform to the applicable criteria and the resulting determination will directly affect only a small number of identifiable persons. 
(1)  Submittal Requirements. Type III applications must include the submittal information required by TDC 32.140(1). 
(2)  Determination of Completeness. After receiving an application for filing, the City Manager will review the application will for completeness in accordance with TDC 32.160. 
(3)  Written Notice of Public Hearing—Type III. Once the application has been deemed complete, the City must mail by regular first class mail Notice of a Public Hearing to the following individuals and agencies no fewer than 20 days before the hearing. 
(a)  Recipients: 
(i)  The applicant and, the owners of the subject property; 
(ii)  All property owners within 1,000 feet measured from the boundaries of the subject property; 
(iii)  All property owners within a platted residential subdivision that is located within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of the subject property. The notice area includes the entire subdivision and not just those lots within 1,000 feet. If the residential subdivision is one of two or more individually platted phases sharing a single subdivision name, the notice area need not include the additional phases; 
(iv)  All recognized neighborhood associations within 1,000 feet from the boundaries of the subject property; 
(v)  All designated representatives of recognized Citizen Involvement Organizations as established in TMC Chapter 11-9; 
(vi)  Any person who submits a written request to receive a notice; 
(vii)  Any governmental agency that is entitled to notice under an intergovernmental agreement entered into with the City and any other affected agencies, including but not limited to: school districts; fire district; where the project either adjoins or directly affects a state highway, the Oregon Department of Transportation; and where the project site would access a County road or otherwise be subject to review by the County, then the County; and Clean Water Services; Tri Met; and, ODOT Rail Division and the railroad company if a railroad-highway grade crossing provides or will provide the only access to the subject property. The failure of another agency to respond with written comments on a pending application does not invalidate an action or permit approval made by the City under this Code; 
(viii)  Utility companies (as applicable); and, 
(ix)  Members of the decision body identified in Table 32-1. 
(b)  The Notice of a Public Hearing, at a minimum, must contain all of the following information: 
(i)  The names of the applicant(s), any representative(s) thereof, and the owner(s) of the subject property; 
(ii)  The street address if assigned, if no street address has been assigned then Township, Range, Section, Tax Lot or Tax Lot ID; 
(iii)  The type of application and a concise description of the nature of the land use action; 
(iv)  A list of the approval criteria by TDC section for the decision and other ordinances or regulations that apply to the application at issue; 
(v)  Brief summary of the local decision making process for the land use decision being made and a general explanation of the requirements for submission of testimony and the procedure for conduct of hearings; 
(vi)  The date, time and location of the hearing; 
(vii)  Disclosure statement indicating that if any person fails to address the relevant approval criteria with enough detail, he or she may not be able to appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals on that issue, and that only comments on the relevant approval criteria are considered relevant evidence; 
(viii)  The name of a City representative to contact and the telephone number where additional information may be obtained; and 
(ix)  Statement that the application and all documents and evidence submitted to the City are in the public record and available for review, and that copies can be obtained at a reasonable cost from the City; and 
(x)  Statement that a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection at no cost at least seven days prior to the hearing and will be provided at reasonable cost. 
(c)  Failure of a person or agency to receive a notice, does not invalidate any proceeding in connection with the application, provided the City can demonstrate by affidavit that required notice was given. 
(4)  Conduct of the Hearing—Type III. The person chairing the hearing must follow the order of proceedings set forth below. These procedures are intended to provide all interested persons a reasonable opportunity to participate in the hearing process and to provide for a full and impartial hearing on the application before the body. Questions concerning the propriety or the conduct of a hearing will be addressed to the chair with a request for a ruling. Rulings from the chair must, to the extent possible, carry out the stated intention of these procedures. A ruling given by the chair on such question may be modified or reversed by a majority of those members of the decision body present and eligible to vote on the application before the body. The procedures to be followed by the chair in the conduct of the hearing are as follows: 
(a)  At the commencement of the hearing, the person chairing the hearing must state to those in attendance all of the following information and instructions: 
(i)  The applicable substantive criteria; 
(ii)  That testimony, arguments and evidence must be directed toward the criteria described in paragraph (i) of this subsection or other criteria in the plan or land use regulation which the person believes to apply to the decision; 
(iii)  That failure to raise an issue accompanied by statements or evidence sufficient to afford the decision maker and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to the State Land Use Board of Appeals based on that issue; 
(iv)  At the conclusion of the initial evidentiary hearing, the decision body must deliberate and make a decision based on the facts and arguments in the public record; and 
(v)  Any participant may ask the decision body for an opportunity to present additional relevant evidence or testimony that is within the scope of the hearing; if the decision body grants the request, it will schedule a date to continue the hearing as provided in TDC 32.230(4)(e), or leave the record open for additional written evidence or testimony as provided TDC 32.230(4)(f). 
(b)  The public is entitled to an impartial decision body as free from potential conflicts of interest and pre-hearing ex parte (outside the hearing) contacts as reasonably possible. Where questions related to ex parte contact are concerned, members of the decision body must follow the guidance for disclosure of ex parte contacts contained in ORS 227.180. Where a real conflict of interest arises, that member or members of the decision body must not participate in the hearing, except where state law provides otherwise. Where the appearance of a conflict of interest is likely, that member or members of the decision body must individually disclose their relationship to the applicant in the public hearing and state whether they are capable of rendering a fair and impartial decision. If they are unable to render a fair and impartial decision, they must be excused from the proceedings. 
(c)  Presenting and receiving evidence. 
(i)  The decision body may set reasonable time limits for oral presentations and may limit or exclude cumulative, repetitious, irrelevant, or personally derogatory testimony or evidence; 
(ii)  No oral testimony will be accepted after the close of the public hearing. Written testimony may be received after the close of the public hearing only as provided by this section; and 
(iii)  Members of the decision body may visit the property and the surrounding area, and may use information obtained during the site visit to support their decision, if the information relied upon is disclosed at the beginning of the hearing and an opportunity is provided to dispute the evidence. 
(d)  The decision body, in making its decision, must consider only facts and arguments in the public hearing record; except that it may take notice of facts not in the hearing record (e.g., local, state, or federal regulations; previous City decisions; case law; staff reports). Upon announcing its intention to take notice of such facts in its deliberations, it must allow persons who previously participated in the hearing to request the hearing record be reopened, as necessary, to present evidence concerning the newly presented facts. 
(e)  If the decision body decides to continue the hearing, the hearing must be continued to a date that is at least seven days after the date of the first evidentiary hearing (e.g., next regularly scheduled meeting). An opportunity must be provided at the continued hearing for persons to present and respond to new written evidence and oral testimony. If new written evidence is submitted at the continued hearing, any person may request, before the conclusion of the hearing, that the record be left open for at least seven days, so that he or she can submit additional written evidence or arguments in response to the new written evidence. In the interest of time, after the close of the hearing, the decision body may limit additional testimony to arguments and not accept additional evidence. 
(f)  If the decision body leaves the record open for additional written testimony, the record must be left open for at least seven days after the hearing. Any participant may ask the decision body in writing for an opportunity to respond to new evidence (i.e., information not disclosed during the public hearing) submitted when the record was left open. If such a request is filed, the decision body must reopen the record, as follows: 
(i)  When the record is reopened to admit new evidence or arguments (testimony), any person may raise new issues that relate to that new evidence or testimony; 
(ii)  An extension of the hearing or record granted pursuant to this section is subject to the limitations of TDC 32.030, unless the applicant waives his or her right to a final decision being made within the required timeframe; and 
(iii)  If requested by the applicant, the decision body must grant the applicant at least seven days after the record is closed to all other persons to submit final written arguments, but not evidence, provided the applicant may expressly waive this right. 
(5)  Notice of Adoption of a Type III Decision. Notice of Adoption must be provided to the property owner, applicant, and any person who provided testimony at the hearing or in writing. The Type III Notice of Adoption must contain all of the following information: 
(a)  A description of the applicant's proposal and the City's decision on the proposal, which may be a summary, provided it references the specifics of the proposal and conditions of approval in the public record; 
(b)  The address or other geographic description of the property proposed for development, including a map of the property in relation to the surrounding area; 
(c)  A statement that a copy of the decision and complete case file, including findings, conclusions, and conditions of approval, if any, is available for review and how copies can be obtained; 
(d)  The date the decision becomes final, unless a request for appeal is submitted; and 
(e)  The notice must include an explanation of rights to appeal the decision to the City Council in accordance with TDC 32.310. 
(6)  Appeal of a Type III Decision. Appeal of an Architectural Review Board or Planning Commission Type III Decision to the City Council may be made in accordance with TDC 32.310. 
(7)  Effective Date of a Type III Decision. 
(a)  The written order is the final decision on the application. 
(b)  The mailing date is the date of the order certifying its approval by the decision body. 
(c)  A decision of the Architectural Review Board or Planning Commission is final unless: 
(i)  a written appeal is received at the City offices within 14 calendar days of the date notice of the final decision is mailed; or 
(ii)  The City Manager or a member of the City Council requests a review of the decision within 14 calendar days of the date notice of the final decision is mailed. 
(Ord. 1414-18;12-10-18)  
TDC 32.240. - Type IV-A Procedure (Quasi-Judicial Review—City Council Public Hearing). 
Type IV-A decisions are quasi-judicial decisions made by the City Council after a public hearing. A hearing under these procedures provides a forum to apply standards to a specific set of facts to determine whether the facts conform to the applicable criteria and the resulting determination will directly affect only a small number of identifiable persons. Except as otherwise provided, the procedures set out in this section must be followed when the subject matter of the evidentiary hearing would result in a quasi-judicial decision. City Council decisions may be appealed to the state Land Use Board of Appeals pursuant to ORS 197.805—197.860. 
(1)  Submittal Requirements. Type IV-A applications must include the submittal information required by TDC 32.140(1). 
(2)  Determination of Completeness. After receiving an application for filing, the City Manager will review the application will for completeness in accordance with TDC 32.160. 
(3)  Written Notice of Public Hearing—Type IV-A. Once the application has been deemed complete, the City must mail by regular first class mail Notice of a Public Hearing to the following individuals and agencies no fewer than 20 days before the hearing. 
(a)  Recipients: 
(i)  The applicant and, the owners of the subject property; 
(ii)  All property owners within 1,000 feet measured from the boundaries of the subject property; 
(iii)  All property owners within a platted residential subdivision that is located within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of the subject property. The notice area includes the entire subdivision and not just those lots within 1,000 feet. If the residential subdivision is one of two or more individually platted phases sharing a single subdivision name, the notice area need not include the additional phases; 
(iv)  All recognized neighborhood associations within 1,000 feet from the boundaries of the subject property; 
(v)  All designated representatives of recognized Citizen Involvement Organizations as established in TMC Chapter 11-9; 
(vi)  Any person who submits a written request to receive a notice; 
(vii)  Any governmental agency that is entitled to notice under an intergovernmental agreement entered into with the City and any other affected agencies, including but not limited to: school districts; fire district; where the project either adjoins or directly affects a state highway, the Oregon Department of Transportation; and where the project site would access a County road or otherwise be subject to review by the County, then the County; and Clean Water Services; Tri Met; and, ODOT Rail Division and the railroad company if a railroad-highway grade crossing provides or will provide the only access to the subject property. The failure of another agency to respond with written comments on a pending application does not invalidate an action or permit approval made by the City under this Code; 
(viii)  Utility companies (as applicable); and, 
(ix)  Members of the City Council. 
(b)  The Notice of a Public Hearing, at a minimum, must contain all of the following information: 
(i)  The names of the applicant(s), any representative(s) thereof, and the owner(s) of the subject property; 
(ii)  The street address if assigned, if no street address has been assigned then Township, Range, Section, Tax Lot or Tax Lot ID; 
(iii)  The type of application and a concise description of the nature of the land use action; 
(iv)  A list of the approval criteria by TDC section for the decision and other ordinances or regulations that apply to the application at issue; 
(v)  Brief summary of the local decision making process for the land use decision being made and a general explanation of the requirements for submission of testimony and the procedure for conduct of hearings; 
(vi)  The date, time and location of the hearing; 
(vii)  Disclosure statement indicating that if any person fails to address the relevant approval criteria with enough detail, he or she may not be able to appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals on that issue, and that only comments on the relevant approval criteria are considered relevant evidence; 
(viii)  The name of a City representative to contact and the telephone number where additional information may be obtained; 
(ix)  Statement that the application and all documents and evidence submitted to the City are in the public record and available for review, and that copies can be obtained at a reasonable cost from the City; and 
(x)  Statement that a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection at no cost at least seven days prior to the hearing and will be provided at reasonable cost. 
(c)  Failure of a person or agency to receive a notice, does not invalidate any proceeding in connection with the application, provided the City can demonstrate by affidavit that required notice was given. 
(4)  Additional Notice Requirements for Certain Type IV-A Application Types. The following additional notice requirements apply to Type IV-A Hearings where the City Council will be considering the application or removal of a Historic Landmark Designation or a Plan Text or Map Amendment for a particular property or discrete set of properties. 
(a)  The City Manager will notify in writing the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD) in accordance with the minimum number of days required by ORS Chapter 197. 
(b)  At least 14 calendar days before the scheduled City Council public hearing date, public notice must be provided by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. 
(c)  At least 14 calendar days before the scheduled City Council public hearing date, public notice must be posted in two public and conspicuous places within the City. 
(5)  Conduct of the Hearing—Type IV-A. The Mayor (or Mayor Pro Tem) must follow the order of proceedings set forth below. These procedures are intended to provide all interested persons a reasonable opportunity to participate in the hearing process and to provide for a full and impartial hearing on the application before the body. Questions concerning the propriety or the conduct of a hearing will be addressed to the chair with a request for a ruling. Rulings from the Mayor must, to the extent possible, carry out the stated intention of these procedures. A ruling given by the Mayor on such question may be modified or reversed by a majority of those members of the decision body present and eligible to vote on the application before the body. The procedures to be followed by the Mayor in the conduct of the hearing are as follows: 
(a)  At the commencement of the hearing, the Mayor (or designee) must state to those in attendance all of the following information and instructions: 
(i)  The applicable approval criteria by Code Chapter that apply to the application; 
(ii)  Testimony and evidence must concern the approval criteria described in the staff report, or other criteria in the comprehensive plan or land use regulations that the person testifying believes to apply to the decision; 
(iii)  Failure to raise an issue with sufficient detail to give the City Council and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue, may preclude appeal to the state Land Use Board of Appeals on that issue; 
(iv)  At the conclusion of the initial evidentiary hearing, the City Council must deliberate and make a decision based on the facts and arguments in the public record; and 
(v)  Any participant may ask the City Council for an opportunity to present additional relevant evidence or testimony that is within the scope of the hearing; if the City Council grants the request, it will schedule a date to continue the hearing as provided in TDC 32.240(5)(e), or leave the record open for additional written evidence or testimony as provided TDC 32.240(5)(f). 
(b)  The public is entitled to an impartial decision body as free from potential conflicts of interest and pre-hearing ex parte (outside the hearing) contacts as reasonably possible. Where questions related to ex parte contact are concerned, members of the City Council must follow the guidance for disclosure of ex parte contacts contained in ORS 227.180. Where a real conflict of interest arises, that member or members of the City Council must not participate in the hearing, except where state law provides otherwise. Where the appearance of a conflict of interest is likely, that member or members of the City Council must individually disclose their relationship to the applicant in the public hearing and state whether they are capable of rendering a fair and impartial decision. If they are unable to render a fair and impartial decision, they must be excused from the proceedings. 
(c)  Presenting and receiving evidence. 
(i)  The City Council may set reasonable time limits for oral presentations and may limit or exclude cumulative, repetitious, irrelevant, or personally derogatory testimony or evidence; 
(ii)  No oral testimony will be accepted after the close of the public hearing. Written testimony may be received after the close of the public hearing only as provided by this section; and 
(iii)  Members of the City Council may visit the property and the surrounding area, and may use information obtained during the site visit to support their decision, if the information relied upon is disclosed at the beginning of the hearing and an opportunity is provided to dispute the evidence. 
(d)  The City Council, in making its decision, must consider only facts and arguments in the public hearing record; except that it may take notice of facts not in the hearing record (e.g., local, state, or federal regulations; previous City decisions; case law; staff reports). Upon announcing its intention to take notice of such facts in its deliberations, it must allow persons who previously participated in the hearing to request the hearing record be reopened, as necessary, to present evidence concerning the newly presented facts. 
(e)  If the City Council decides to continue the hearing, the hearing must be continued to a date that is at least seven days after the date of the first evidentiary hearing (e.g., next regularly scheduled meeting). An opportunity must be provided at the continued hearing for persons to present and respond to new written evidence and oral testimony. If new written evidence is submitted at the continued hearing, any person may request, before the conclusion of the hearing, that the record be left open for at least seven days, so that he or she can submit additional written evidence or arguments in response to the new written evidence. In the interest of time, after the close of the hearing, the decision body may limit additional testimony to arguments and not accept additional evidence. 
(f)  If the City Council leaves the record open for additional written testimony, the record must be left open for at least seven days after the hearing. Any participant may ask the decision body in writing for an opportunity to respond to new evidence (i.e., information not disclosed during the public hearing) submitted when the record was left open. If such a request is filed, the decision body must reopen the record, as follows: 
(i)  When the record is reopened to admit new evidence or arguments (testimony), any person may raise new issues that relate to that new evidence or testimony; 
(ii)  An extension of the hearing or record granted pursuant to this section is subject to the limitations of TDC 32.030(1) (ORS 227.178—120-day rule), unless the applicant waives his or her right to a final decision being made within 120 days of filing a complete application; and 
(iii)  If requested by the applicant, the City Council must grant the applicant at least seven days after the record is closed to all other persons to submit final written arguments, but not evidence, provided the applicant may expressly waive this right. 
(6)  Notice of Adoption of a Type IV-A Decision. Notice of Adoption must be provided to the property owner, applicant, and any person who provided testimony at the hearing or in writing. The Type IV-A Notice of Adoption must contain all of the following information: 
(a)  A description of the applicant's proposal and the City's decision on the proposal, which may be a summary, provided it references the specifics of the proposal and conditions of approval in the public record; 
(b)  The address or other geographic description of the property proposed for development, including a map of the property in relation to the surrounding area; 
(c)  A statement a statement that a copy of the decision and complete case file, including findings, conclusions, and conditions of approval, if any, is available for review and how copies can be obtained; 
(d)  The date the decision becomes final; and 
(e)  The notice must include an explanation of rights to appeal a City Council decisions to the state Land Use Board of Appeals pursuant to ORS 197.805—197.860. 
(7)  Effective Date of a Type IV-A Decision. 
(a)  The written order is the final decision on the application. 
(b)  The date of the order is the date it is mailed by the Mayor (or designee) certifying its approval by the decision body. 
(c)  Appeal of a IV-A City Council decision is to the State Land Use Board of Appeals pursuant to ORS 197.805—197.860. 
(Ord. 1414-18;12-10-18)  
TDC 32.250. - Type IV-B (Legislative Decisions). 
Type IV-B decisions are legislative land use decisions made by the City Council. Legislative land use proceedings include proposals to amend the Tualatin Comprehensive Plan and zoning maps, and involve the creation, revision, or implementation of broad public policy generally impacting more than one property owner or a large number of individual properties. The City Council may initiate its own legislative proposals at any time. Legislative requests are not subject to the 120-day review period under ORS 227.178. In most cases a public hearing is required. However, no public hearing is required in a legislative land use proceeding if the purpose of the amendment is to conform to new requirements in state land use statutes, Statewide Land Use Planning Goals, or administrative rules of the Oregon Land Conservation and Development Commission implementing state land use statutes or Statewide Land Use Planning Goals, if the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development confirms in writing that the only effect of the proposed change is to conform the City's Comprehensive Plan or land use regulations to the new state requirements. The Council may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing although one is not required. 
(1)  Submittal Requirements—Type IV-B. Legislative land use proceedings may be initiated by the City Council or City staff. 
(2)  Notice of Public Hearing—Type IV-B. Hearings on Legislative Land Use requests must conform to state land use laws (ORS 227.175), as follows: 
(a)  DLCD Pre-Adoption Notice. The City Manager will notify in writing the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD) of legislative amendments (zone change, rezoning with annexation, or comprehensive plan amendment) in accordance with the minimum number of days required by ORS Chapter 197. 
(b)  Notice of Rezone and Limitations of Land Use (Measure 56 Notice). When the proposed legislative decision affects the base zoning classification of a property or limits or prohibits a land use previously allowed, the City must provide notice to the owners of such property at least 20 days, but not more than 40 days, before the date of the first hearing on an ordinance. The notice must comply with ORS 227.175. 
(c)  Other Public Notice. In addition to any other notice required, at least 14 calendar days before the scheduled City Council public hearing date, the City must mail by regular first class mail Notice of a Public Hearing to the following individuals and agencies. 
(i)  Any affected governmental agency; 
(ii)  Any person who requests notice in writing; 
(iii)  For a zone change affecting a manufactured home or mobile home park, all mailing addresses within the park, in accordance with ORS 227.175; 
(iv)  Designated representatives of recognized Citizen Involvement Organizations; 
(v)  For an amendment which affects the transportation system, ODOT and Metro; and 
(vi)  For a plan amendment or land use regulation amendment that significantly impacts school capacity, the Tigard-Tualatin School District. 
(d)  At least 14 calendar days before the scheduled City Council public hearing date, public notice must be provided by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(e)  At least 14 calendar days before the scheduled City Council public hearing date, public notice must be posted in two public and conspicuous places within the City. 
(3)  Mailed Notice. The mailed Notice of a Public Hearing, at a minimum, must contain all of the following information: 
(a)  A concise description of the proposal; 
(b)  A map identifying the properties affected by the proposal, if applicable, in relation to major streets or other landmarks; 
(c)  A list of the applicable standards or criteria; 
(d)  The date, time, and location of the public hearing; 
(e)  Brief summary of the local decision making process for the land use decision being made and a general explanation of the requirements for submission of testimony and the procedure for conduct of hearings; 
(f)  A statement that all interested persons may appear either in person or with representation by an attorney and provide testimony and that only those participating at the hearing, in person or by submission of written testimony, have the right to appeal the decision to the Land Use Board of Appeals; 
(g)  The information required under ORS 227.186 (Measure 56 Notice), if the hearing changes the base zoning classification of a property or limits or prohibits a land use previously allowed; 
(h)  a statement that subsequent to the close of the hearing notice of a decision adopting a new land use regulation will be mailed to all neighborhood associations, anyone who participated in the hearing, either in person or in writing, and anyone who requested to receive notice; 
(i)  The name and contact information for the City representative responsible for collecting comments or responding to questions; and 
(j)  Statement that all documents are available for review and that copies can be obtained at a reasonable cost from the City. 
(4)  Conduct of the Hearing—Type IV-B. A Type IV-B land use hearing will follow the City's legislative hearing procedures. There can be pre-hearing contact between citizens and the decision makers on legislative matters. "Ex parte contact" is not a concern. 
(5)  Notice of Adoption and Effective Date of a Type IV-B Decision. 
(a)  Notice of Adoption must be mailed to the applicant, all participants of record, and the Department of Land Conservation and Development within 20 business days after the City Council decision is filed with the City Manager. The City must also provide notice to all persons as required by other applicable laws. 
(b)  A Legislative Land Use decision, if approved, takes effect and becomes final as specified in the enacting ordinance or, if not approved, upon mailing of the Notice of Adoption to the applicant. 
(Ord. 1414-18;12-10-18)  
TDC 32.260. - Annexation Procedures. 
An Annexation brings property from outside the City Limits into the City Limits. At the same time, the City also removes the property from any county special districts that are no longer needed. For example, property in Washington County is withdrawn from the Washington County Enhanced Sheriff's Patrol District because police services will be provided by the Tualatin Police Department. 
(1)  Procedure Type—Annexations. 
(a)  Quasi-Judicial Annexations will be conducted by City Council under the Type IV-A process in TDC 32.240, as modified by this Section. The 120-day rule does not apply to annexations. 
(b)  Legislative Annexations will be conducted by City Council under the Type IV-B process in TDC 32.250 as modified by this Section. 
(2)  Submittal Information and Completeness. 
(a)  Quasi-Judicial Annexation. For quasi-judicial annexation applications, submittal requirements must be in accordance with TDC 32.240(1) and will be reviewed for completeness in accordance with TDC 32.240(2). 
(b)  Legislative Annexation. Only the City Council may initiate legislative annexations. 
(3)  Timing of the Hearing. Within 45-days of determining an annexation application is complete, the City Manager will set the date for public hearing before the City Council. 
(4)  Notice of Public Hearing—Annexation. The City must give notice of its proposed deliberations by at least 20 days prior to the date of deliberations. Notice must be published as required by state law. 
(a)  For quasi-judicial annexations the City must comply with the same written notice provisions as for Type IV-A. For legislative annexations, the City must comply with the same written notice provisions as for Type IV-B proceedings. In addition, notice of public hearing must also be sent to all "Necessary Parties," as defined by Metro Code 3.09; 
(b)  The City must post the written notice of public hearing in four public places; 
(c)  The City must provide weatherproof posting of the notice in the general vicinity of the affected territory; and 
(d)  The City must post a notice of public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the City once each week for two successive weeks before the hearing. 
(5)  Final Decision. Final decisions on quasi-judicial and legislative annexations will be made by ordinance. 
(a)  The City Council may adjourn or continue its final deliberations on a proposed boundary change to another time. For a continuance later than 28 days after the time stated in the original notice, notice must be reissued in the form required by TDC 32.260(4) of this section at least five days prior to the continued date of decision. 
(b)  For quasi-judicial annexation proceedings, the City must send notice of final decision as provided in 32.240(6) (Notice of Adoption—Type IV-A). Notice of adoption is not required for legislative annexation proceedings. 
(c)  Following a final decision approving an annexation, the City must send notice of the decision to the Metro and other applicable public bodies, in accordance with Metro Code 3.09, to effectuate the annexation decision. 
(d)  The City must file the annexation with the Secretary of State as provided in ORS 222. 
(6)  Effective Date. The effective date of the annexation is as specified by the City Council in the annexation ordinance. If an effective date of an annexation is more than one year after the date the ordinance proclaiming annexation is adopted, the City must provide notice to the county clerk as provided in ORS 222. 
(Ord. 1414-18;12-10-18)  
TDC 32.310. - Appeals (Request for Review). 
(1)  Appeals Generally. 
(a)  Type I Decisions. Type I decisions are final at the local level and may only be appealed to Circuit Court through a writ of review process under state law. 
(b)  Type II Decisions. Type II decisions may only be appealed by a person who has submitted written comments within the 14-day comment period before the decision of the City Manager. 
(c)  Type III Decisions. Type III decision may be made by any person who submitted written comments prior to or during the public hearing, or provided testimony at the public hearing. 
(d)  Type IV-A and Type IV-B Decisions. There is no local appeal for Type IV decisions. Type IV decisions appealed to the Land Use Board of Appeals must follow applicable state laws. 
(2)  Timing and Submittal Requirements for a Notice of Appeal—Type II and Type III Decisions. A Notice of Appeal must be made within 14 calendar days of the date of mailing the written Notice of Decision or Notice of Adoption. The Notice of Appeal must be on forms provided by the City and be accompanied by the appeal fee. The notice of appeal must contain the following: 
(a)  Identification of the decision sought to be appealed, including its assigned case number, the title or caption of the decision, and the decision date; and 
(b)  The name and mailing address of the appellant and a statement establishing the appellant's standing to appeal the decision, including how the appellant is adversely affected by the decision. 
(3)  Proper Filing of Notice of Appeal is Jurisdictional. The timely and complete filing of the notice of appeal and payment of the appeal fee are jurisdictional. The City Manager cannot accept a notice of appeal that does not comply with this section. The City Manager's determination that an appellant has failed to comply with this section is final. 
(4)  Appeals Hearing Process. 
(a)  The appeal body for appeals will be either the Architectural Review Board, Planning Commission, or City Council as provided in Table 32-1. All appeals are "de novo" meaning new evidence and argument may be submitted at the appeal hearing. 
(b)  Appeal hearings conducted by the Architectural Review Board or Planning Commission will follow the Type III hearings process in accordance with TDC 32.230. 
(c)  Appeal hearings conducted by the City Council will follow the Type IV-A hearing process in accordance with TDC 32.240. 
(5)  Withdrawing an Appeal. 
(a)  At any time before the close of an appeal hearing, any appellant may withdraw the appeal. The appellant must provide written notice of the withdrawal prior to the hearing, or orally at the hearing. 
(b)  If the withdrawal is made before public notice of the hearing is sent, the City will refund the appeal fee. 
(c)  Where multiple people or parties sign and file a single Notice of Appeal, all parties to the original filing must consent to the withdrawal of the appeal. 
(d)  A withdrawn appeal cannot be refiled by any party and no decision by the appeal body is necessary. 
(e)  If all appeals are withdrawn, the City Manager must issue a Notice of Appeal Withdrawal to the applicant, the appellant, and the parties who received a Notice of Final Decision. The Notice of Appeal Withdrawal must state the new effective date of the original decision is the date of the withdrawal of the appeal(s). 
(Ord. 1414-18;12-10-18)  
CHAPTER 33 - APPLICATIONS AND APPROVAL CRITERIA 
 
TDC 33.010. - Annexations. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish the application requirements for annexing territory to the City Limits, consistent with Metro Code 3.09 and Oregon law. 
(2)  Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all applications for annexation to the City of Tualatin. 
(3)  Procedure Type. Annexations are processed in accordance with the annexation procedure in TDC Chapter 32.260. 
(4)  Specific Submittal Requirements. In addition to the general application submittal requirements in TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal), an applicant(s) for a quasi-judicial annexation must submit the following: 
(a)  The Application for Annexation form; 
(b)  The Petition to Annex to the City of Tualatin form; 
(c)  A legal description of the subject territory including any abutting public street right-of-way that is not yet in the City Limits; 
(d)  The Certification of Legal Description and Map form; 
(e)  The Certification of Property Ownership form; 
(f)  The Certification of Registered Voters form; 
(g)  The Property Owner Information Sheet form; 
(h)  The City application fee, and the Metro application fee in a separate check made payable to Metro; 
(i)  The three column by ten row matrix sheet listing the Assessors Map Number and Tax Lot Number, name and mailing address for: 
(i)  The owner (fee title) of the subject territory, and 
(ii)  Recipients pursuant to TDC 32.240 (3) and the governing jurisdiction of any public street right-of-way to be annexed; 
(j)  The Annexation Property Information Sheet form; 
(k)  A copy of the County Assessors Maps showing the subject territory, any public street right-of-way to be annexed and the lots within 1,000 feet of the subject territory including any public street right-of-way. The subject territory and right-of-way to be annexed must be outlined with a wide, light colored ink marker; 
(l)  If necessary, a letter from the County or State Road Authority stating its consent to annex the right-of-way described in the legal description; and 
(m)  Any information required by the City Manager in addition to the above. 
(5)  Approval Criteria. To grant an annexation application, the Council must find: 
(a)  The territory to be annexed is within the Metro Urban Growth Boundary; 
(b)  The owners of the territory to be annexed have petitioned to be annexed; 
(c)  The application conforms to the applicable criteria in Metro Code 3.09; and 
(d)  The application is consistent with applicable provisions of ORS Chapter 222. 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
TDC 33.020. - Architectural Review. 
(1)  Purpose. The City Council finds that excessive uniformity, dissimilarity, inappropriateness, or poor quality of design in the exterior appearance of structures and the lack of proper attention to site development and landscaping, in the business, commercial, industrial, and certain residential areas of the City hinders the harmonious development of the City; impairs the desirability of residence, investment or occupation in the City; limits the opportunity to attain the optimum use and value of land and improvements; adversely affects the stability and value of property; produces degeneration of property in such areas with attendant deterioration of conditions affecting the peace, health and welfare of the City; and destroys a proper relationship between the taxable value of property and the cost of municipal services therefore. The purposes and objectives of community design standards are to: 
(a)  Encourage originality, flexibility and innovation in site planning and development, including the architecture, landscaping and graphic design of development. 
(b)  Discourage monotonous, drab, unsightly, dreary and inharmonious development. 
(c)  Promote the City's natural beauty and visual character and charm by ensuring that structures and other improvements are properly related to their sites, and to surrounding sites and structures, with due regard to the aesthetic qualities of the natural terrain, natural environment, and landscaping. Exterior appearances of structures and other improvements should enhance these qualities. 
(d)  Encourage site planning and development to incorporate bikeways, pedestrian facilities, greenways, wetlands, and other natural features of the environment and provide incentives for dedication of access easements and property to the public through shift of residential density, system development charge credits, landscaping credits and setback allowances. 
(e)  Protect and enhance the City's appeal to tourists and visitors and thus support and stimulate business and industry and promote the desirability of investment and occupancy in business, commercial and industrial properties. 
(f)  Stabilize and improve property values and prevent blighted areas and thus increase tax revenues. 
(g)  Achieve the beneficial influence of pleasant environments for living and working on behavioral patterns and thus decrease the cost of governmental services. 
(h)  Foster civic pride and community spirit so as to improve the quality and quantity of citizen participation in local government and in community growth, change and improvement. 
(i)  Sustain the comfort, health, safety, tranquility and contentment of residents and attract new residents by reason of the City's favorable environment and thus promote and protect the peace, health and welfare of the City. 
(j)  Determine the appropriate yard setbacks, building heights, minimum lot sizes when authorized to do so by City ordinance. 
(2)  Applicability. 
(a)  The following types of development are subject to Architectural Review: 
(i)  Any exterior modifications to improved or unimproved real property; 
(ii)  Any remodeling that changes the exterior appearance of a building; 
(iii)  Any site alteration which alters the topography, appearance or function of the site; and 
(iv)  Any change in occupancy from single family use to commercial or industrial use. 
(b)  Examples of development subject to Architectural Review, include but are not limited to the following: 
(i)  New buildings, condominiums, townhouse, single family dwellings, or manufactured dwelling park; 
(ii)  Construction, installation, or alteration of a building or other structure; 
(iii)  Landscape improvements; 
(iv)  New, improved, or expanded parking lots; 
(v)  New, or alterations to, above ground public utility facilities, pump stations, pressure reading stations, water reservoirs, electrical substations, and natural gas pumping stations; 
(vi)  New wireless communication facilities, and new attached wireless communication; 
(vii)  Installation of decorative lighting; and 
(viii)  Exterior painting, awnings, or murals. 
(c)  Exceptions to Architectural Review. The following applications for development do not require Architectural Review: 
(i)  The addition or alteration of an existing single-family dwelling if it involves: 
(A)  Less than 35% of the structure's existing footprint; 
(B)  No new story; 
(C)  Less than 35% of an existing front or rear wall plane; or 
(D)  A side wall plane that abuts the side yard of an adjacent dwelling. 
(ii)  The modification by the City of greenways, parks, other Parks and Recreation Department improvements, and right-of-way landscaping improvements. 
(3)  Types of Architectural Review Applications—Procedure Type. 
(a)  Single Family Dwelling, Clear and Objective. Development applications submitted for a single family dwelling in compliance with the Clear and Objective Standards in TDC 73A.110 are subject to Type I review. 
(b)  Accessory Dwelling Unit. Development applications submitted for an accessory dwelling unit incompliance with the Clear and Objective Standards in TDC 34.600(Accessory Dwelling Units Standards) are subject to Type I review. 
(c)  General Development. All development applications, (except Single Family Dwelling, Clear and Objective and Large Commercial, Industrial, and Multifamily Development) are subject to Type II Review. 
(d)  Large Commercial, Industrial, and Multifamily Development. Development applications that propose any of the following are subject to Type III Review by the Architectural Review Board as the hearing body: 
(i)  New Commercial Buildings 50,000 square feet and larger; 
(ii)  New Industrial Buildings 150,000 square feet and larger; and 
(iii)  New Multifamily Housing Projects with 100 units or more units (or any number of units abutting a single family district). 
(e)  Minor Architectural Review. An application for a Minor Architectural Review must be approved, approved with conditions, or denied following review based on finding that: 
(i)  The proposed development is in compliance with all applicable standards and objectives in TDC Chapter 73A through 73G; 
(ii)  The proposed development is in compliance with all conditions of approval on the original decision; and 
(iii)  The modification is listed in 33.020(7)(a). 
(4)  Application Materials. The application must be on forms provided by the City. In addition to the application materials required by TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal), the following application materials are also required: 
(a)  The project name and the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the architect, landscape architect, and engineer on the project; 
(b)  Existing conditions plan, site plan, grading plan, utility plan, landscape plan, and lighting plan all drawn to scale; 
(c)  A materials board that includes example building materials and textures; 
(d)  Title report; and 
(e)  A Service Provider Letter from Clean Water Services. 
(5)  Approval Criteria. 
(a)  Single Family Dwelling, Clear and Objective. Applications for Single Family Dwelling, Clear and Objective, must comply with the standards in TDC 73A.110. 
(b)  General Development. 
(i)  Applications for General Single Family Dwellings (not clear and objective), must comply with TDC 73A.140. 
(ii)  Applications for General Development must comply with the applicable standards and objectives in TDC Chapter 73A through 73G. 
(c)  Large Commercial, Industrial, and Multifamily Development. Applications for Large Commercial, Industrial, and Multifamily Development must comply with the applicable standards and objectives in TDC Chapter 73A through 73G. 
(6)  Conditions of Approval. 
(a)  Architectural Review decisions may include conditions of approval that apply restrictions and conditions that: 
(i)  Protect the public from the potentially deleterious effects of the proposal; 
(ii)  Fulfill the need for public facilities and services created by the proposal, or increased or in part attributable to the proposal; and 
(iii)  Further the implementation of the requirements of the Tualatin Development Code. 
(b)  Types of conditions of approval that may be imposed include, but are not limited to: 
(i)  Development Schedule. A reasonable time schedule placed on construction activities associated with the proposed development, or portion of the development. 
(ii)  Dedications, Reservation. Dedication or reservation of land, or the granting of an easement for park, open space, rights-of-way, bicycle or pedestrian paths, Greenway, Natural Area, Other Natural Area, riverbank, the conveyance of title or easements to the City or a non-profit conservation organization, or a homeowners' association. 
(iii)  Construction and Maintenance Guarantees. Security from the property owners in such an amount that will assure compliance with approval granted. 
(iv)  Plan Modifications. Changes in the design or intensity of the proposed development, or in proposed construction methods or practices, necessary to assure compliance with this chapter. 
(v)  Other Approvals. Evaluation, inspections or approval by other agencies, jurisdictions, public utilities, or consultants, may be required for all or any part of the proposed development. 
(vi)  Access Limitation. The number, location and design of street accesses to a proposed development may be limited or specified where necessary to maintain the capacity of streets to carry traffic safely, provided that sufficient access to the development is maintained. 
(7)  Modifications to Previously Approved Final Architectural Review Decisions. An applicant who wishes to modify a previously approved final Architectural Review decision may utilize one of the following procedures: 
(a)  Minor Architectural Review (MAR). Minor Architectural Review is a Type I process. Minor Architectural Review is used to process a proposal for one of the following: 
(i)  Adding awnings, modifying previously approved exterior paint colors, or murals; 
(ii)  Relocating windows or doors; 
(iii)  Changing exterior material; 
(iv)  Expanding the gross floor area of a development, including primary and accessory buildings, may be expanded by no more than 200 square feet maximum. 
(v)  Adding or replacing new antennas on an existing Wireless Facility or Attached Wireless Facility or adding equipment within the existing equipment footprint of an existing Wireless Facility equipment space, so long as the modification does not constitute a substantial change. For the purpose of this subsection, "substantial change" means the following: 
(A)  The mounting of the proposed antenna on the tower would increase the existing height of the tower by more than ten percent, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed antenna may exceed the size limits set forth in this subsection by up to an additional five percent if necessary to avoid interference with existing antennas; or 
(B)  The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved (not to exceed four) or more than one new equipment shelter; or 
(C)  The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed antenna may exceed the size limits set forth in this subsection to the extent necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to connect the antenna to the tower via cable; or 
(D)  The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve excavation outside the current tower site, defined as the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site. 
Increases to height allowed by this subsection above the existing tower is based on the existing height of the tower, excluding any tower lighting required in the original land use approval or in the proposed modification request. 
To the extent feasible, additional equipment must maintain the appearance intended by the original facility, including, but not limited to, color, screening, landscaping, mounting configuration, or architectural treatment. 
(vi)  Replacing an existing Wireless Facility tower, provided the replacement tower must not exceed the height of the original tower by more than ten percent, or the diameter of the original tower by more than 25 percent at any given point. 
(vii)  Changing structure setback or lot coverage by less than ten percent from the most recently approved Architectural Review approved through a Type II or Type III process; 
(viii)  Changing access location or parking lots that does not result in an increase of Average Daily trips by more than 100 trips from the Average Daily Trips in an Architectural Review most recently approved through a Type II or Type III process; or 
(ix)  Removing trees originally required to be retained or planted by a previously approved Architectural Review proposal. 
(b)  Full Architectural Review. Modifications to a previously approved final Architectural Review decision that does not qualify as a Minor Architectural Review (MAR) may only be modified by proceeding through the regular Architectural Review process. 
(8)  Effective Date. The effective date of an Architectural Review decision or Minor Architectural Review decision is the date the notice of decision is mailed. 
(9)  Permit Expiration. Architectural Review decisions (including Minor Architectural Review decisions) expire two years from the effective date unless the applicant has received a building, or grading permit submitted in conjunction with a building permit application, substantial construction has occurred pursuant to the building permit, and an inspection has been performed by a member of the Building Division. 
(10)  Extension of Permit Expiration. 
(a)  An Architectural Review approval may be extended if the applicant, or successor interest, submits a written request for an extension of time within two years of the effective date. 
(b)  A Minor Architectural Review approval may not be extended. A new application is required if the permit expires. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a request for an extension of time, the City will process the extension request as follows: 
(i)  If the City Manager approved the Architectural Review, then the City Manager will decide the extension request under the Type II procedures in TDC 32.220. 
(ii)  If the Architectural Review Board (ARB) approved the Architectural Review, then the ARB will decide the extension request under the Type III quasi-judicial procedures in TDC 32.230. 
(d)  The City must provide notice of the extension request to past recipients of the Architectural Review notice of decision and the applicant must post a sign pursuant to TDC 32.150. 
(e)  The City Manager or Architectural Review Board, as applicable, may grant the extension of time upon finding the following: 
(i)  The applicant submitted a written extension request prior to the expiration date; 
(ii)  There have been no significant changes in any conditions, ordinances, regulations or standards of the City or applicable agencies that affect the previously approved project so as to warrant its resubmittal for Architectural Review; 
(iii)  If the previously approved application included a special study, the applicant provided a status report includes a letter from a recognized professional that states that conditions have not changed after the original approval and that no new study is warranted; and 
(iv)  If the site has been neglected so as to allow the site to become blighted, the deciding party must factor this into its decision. 
(f)  The City Manager or Architectural Review Board, as applicable, may grant or deny the extension request. The decision must be in writing and must be made within 60 (60) days of receipt of the request for extension. If the decision is to grant the extension, the extension can be no more than a single one-year extension. 
(g)  Upon making the decision, the City must provide notice of the extension decision as provided in TDC 32.220 for Type II decisions made by the City Manager and TDC 32.230 for Type III decisions made by the Architectural Review Board. 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
TDC 33.030. - Permit for New Driveway Approach and Closure Decisions. 
(1)  Purpose. To provide a process for the review of requests for driveway approaches and closures, as provided in TDC 75.020 and TDC 75.030. 
(2)  Applicability. All requests for driveway approaches and closures are as provided in this section and TDC 75.020 and TDC 75.030. 
(3)  Procedure Type. Driveway approaches and closure applications are subject to Type II Review in accordance with TDC Chapter 32. 
(4)  Specific Submittal Requirements. In addition to the general submittal requirements in TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal), the application must be accompanied by a detailed description of factors related to the approval criteria, including, but not limited to a Transportation Impact Analysis, as well as the submittal requirements in TDC 75.020 and TDC 75.030. 
(5)  Approval Criteria. If the City Manager finds the applicable criteria in TDC 75.020 and TDC 75.030 have been met. 
(6)  Conditions of Approval. The City may impose conditions on the construction of arterial access including, but not limited to: 
(a)  Dedication of additional right-of-way; 
(b)  Creation of a joint access; 
(c)  Construction of left turn lanes; 
(d)  Construction of right turn lanes; 
(e)  Installation of traffic signals; and 
(f)  Limitation of access to right turn in, right turn out by construction of raised median barriers or other means. 
(7)  Permit Expiration. The expiration date for permits granting a new driveway approach must be as specified in the decision. 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
TDC 33.040. - Conditional Use Permit. 
(1)  Purpose. It is the intent of this chapter to provide a set of procedures and standards for conditional uses of land or structures which, because of their unique characteristics relative to locational features, design, size, operation, circulation and public interest or service, require special consideration in relation to the welfare of adjacent properties and the community as a whole. It is the purpose of the regulations and standards set forth below to: 
(a)  Allow practical latitude for utilization of land and structures, while maintaining adequate provision for the protection of the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the community and adjacent properties; and 
(b)  Provide machinery for periodic review of conditional use permits to provide for further conditions to more adequately assure conformity of such uses to the public welfare. 
(c)  Provide siting criteria for the conditional uses specified herein and guidelines for the imposition of conditions to the end that such uses will: 
(i)  Be consistent with the intent and purpose of the zone in which it is proposed to locate such use, meet the requirements of the Tualatin Community Plan with regard to providing benefit to the general welfare of the public, and fill a probable need of the public which can best be met by a conditional use at this time and in this place; and 
(ii)  Comply with the requirements of the zone within which the conditional use is proposed and in accordance with conditions attached to such use under the authority of this chapter. 
(2)  Applicability. A request for a conditional use, modification of an existing conditional use permit, or a review of an existing conditional use permit may be initiated by a property owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
(3)  Procedure Type. Conditional use permits are processed in accordance with the Type III review procedures in Chapter 32. 
(4)  Specific Submittal Requirements. In addition to the general submittal requirements in TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal), the applicant must submit the following additional information and materials: 
(a)  Project title; 
(b)  The architect, landscape architect and engineer; 
(c)  A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions and arrangement of the proposed development; 
(d)  A Service Provider Letter from Clean Water Services (CWS) indicating that a "Stormwater Connection Permit Authorization Letter" will likely be issued; and 
(e)  If a railroad-highway grade crossing provides or will provide the only access to the subject property, the applicant must indicate that fact in the application and the City must notify the ODOT Rail Division and the railroad company that the application has been received. 
(5)  Approval Criteria. The applicant must provide evidence substantiating that all the requirements of this Code relative to the proposed use are satisfied and demonstrate that the proposed use also satisfies the following criteria: 
(a)  The use is listed as a conditional use in the underlying zone; 
(b)  The characteristics of the site are suitable for the proposed use, considering size, shape, location, topography, existence of improvements and natural features; 
(c)  The proposed development is timely, considering the adequacy of transportation systems, public facilities, and services existing or planned for the area affected by the use; 
(d)  The proposed use will not alter the character of the surrounding area in any manner that substantially limits, impairs, or precludes the use of surrounding properties for the primary uses listed in the underlying zone; and 
(e)  The proposal satisfies those objectives and policies of the Tualatin Community Plan that are applicable to the proposed use. 
(6)  Conditions of Approval. The Hearing Body may impose, in addition to the regulations and standards expressly specified in this chapter, other conditions found necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood or the City as a whole. In no event will this Chapter be used as a means to exclude multi-family housing from the City. 
(7)  Compliance with Conditions and Revocations. 
(a)  Any previously granted conditional use permit may be revoked by the Planning Commission, after a hearing conducted in the manner required for approval of a conditional use permit initially, upon the following grounds: 
(i)  Failure to comply with the conditions of approval; 
(ii)  Discontinuance of the use for a period in excess of two years; 
(iii)  Failure to comply with other applicable provisions of the Tualatin Community Plan regarding design, dimensional or use requirements; or 
(iv)  A change in the Tualatin Community Plan or Zone Standards of the zone within which the use is located that have the effect of no longer allowing a new conditional use permit application to be considered in such zone. 
(b)  Revocations initiated under TDC 33.040(7)(a)(i) or (ii) above must not be initiated for at least six months after approval of the conditional use permit. Revocations initiated under TDC 33.040(7)(a)(i), (ii) and (iii) above has the effect of making the previously granted conditional use permit void until a new application is submitted and granted. Revocations initiated under TDC 33.040(7)(a)(iv) above has the effect of making the previously granted conditional use a nonconforming use. 
(8)  Automatic Termination of Conditional Use; Request for Extension. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by the Planning Commission in the written decision granting approval of the conditional use permit, a conditional use permit automatically is null and void two years after the effective date upon which it was granted, unless the applicant, or successor in interest, has done one of the following within two years of the effective date of the conditional use permit: 
(i)  Secured a building permit and commenced construction of the building or structure in conformance of the building permit and conditional use permit. 
(ii)  Commenced the activity or installation of the facility or structure authorized by the conditional use permit. 
(iii)  Submitted a request for an extension of time on the conditional use permit to avoid the permit's becoming null and void. 
(b)  A request for an extension must be submitted prior to the expiration date of the conditional use permit, as established by the Planning Commission in granting the conditional use permit. 
(c)  Upon receipt of the request for an extension of time, the Planning Commission will hear the matter under the quasi-judicial procedures in TDC 32.230. The Planning Commission may grant or deny the extension of time, provided the extension of time does not exceed two years. 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
TDC 33.050. - Industrial Master Plans. 
(1)  Purpose. The Industrial Master Plan sets particular standards for development within the Industrial Master Plan Area (defined by such plan), in accordance with the Tualatin Community Plan, the Southwest Tualatin Concept Plan (SWCP) and the Leveton Tax Increment Plan. Such approved plans are intended to achieve a campus-like setting within an Industrial Master Plan Area, while allowing development to occur independently on a number of smaller parcels within that area. It is the intent of this chapter to provide procedures and criteria for the submission and review of such Industrial Master Plan applications. Development standards approved through a Master Plan process establishes alternative development standards that supersede conflicting provisions in the Tualatin Development Code. 
(2)  Applicability. 
(a)  An Industrial Master Plan is required for any development in the Manufacturing Business Park (MBP) Zone in a Regionally Significant Industrial Area (RSIA). 
(i)  For properties in the Regionally Significant Industrial Area (RSIA) of the MBP Zone, lots or parcels may be divided into smaller lots or parcels of 20,000 sq. ft or larger when the Industrial Master Plan identifies at least one lot or parcel of 100 acres in size or larger and one lot or parcel 50 acres in size or larger. 
(b)  An Industrial Master Plan is optional for any development in the Manufacturing Park (MP) Zone or Manufacturing Business Park (MBP) Zone. An Industrial Master Plan is required to do any of the following: 
(i)  Modify the requirements for internal circulation, building location and orientation, street frontage, parking, setbacks, building height, or lot size as provided in TDC Chapter 62 for the Manufacturing Park (MP) Zone and TDC Chapter 64 for the Manufacturing Business Park (MBP) Zone; and 
(ii)  Provide for individual parcels of less than 40 acres in the Manufacturing Park Zone. However, the parcels must not be less than 15 acres north of SW Leveton Drive and five acres south of SW Leveton Drive, unless otherwise provided under TDC 62.050(1). 
(c)  An Industrial Master Plan must be submitted for the entire Industrial Master Plan Area and include all owners of property within the area. 
(3)  Procedure Type. Industrial Master Plans must be processed in accordance with the Type III review procedures as specified in Chapter 32. 
(4)  Specific Submittal Requirements. In addition to the general submittal requirements in TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal), the applicant must submit the following additional information and materials: 
(a)  The printed names and signatures of all property owners within the area of the proposed Industrial Master Plan. 
(b)  A written statement describing all alternate development standards that may include the following: 
(i)  Setbacks from each lot line to buildings, parking areas and circulation areas. Required setbacks may be exact, or minimum and maximum ranges may be specified. Required setbacks may be greater than or less than those required under TDC 62.060 or TDC 64.060; 
(ii)  Locations of shared parking and circulation areas and access improvement, including truck maneuvering and loading areas and common public or private infrastructure improvements; 
(iii)  Building heights and placement and massing of buildings with respect to parcel boundaries; and 
(iv)  Location and orientation of building elements such as pedestrian ways or accesses, main entrances and off-street parking or truck loading facilities, including the number of off-street parking spaces and loading docks required. 
(v)  Lot dimensions and area; 
(A)  For properties in the Manufacturing Park (MP) Zone, an individual parcel must not be less than 15 acres north of SW Leveton Drive and five acres south of SW Leveton Drive, unless otherwise provided under TDC 62.050(1). 
(B)  For properties in the Regionally Significant Industrial Area (RSIA) of the MBP Zone, lots or parcels may be divided into smaller lots or parcels of 20,000 sq. ft or larger when the Industrial Master Plan identifies at least one lot or parcel of 100 acres in size or larger and one lot or parcel 50 acres in size or larger in the RSIA; and 
(vi)  Location of required building and parking facility landscaped areas. 
(c)  Except as specifically provided in TDC 33.050(1) above, all other provisions of this Code apply within an Industrial Master Plan Area. 
(5)  Approval Criteria. 
(a)  Public facilities and services, including transportation, existing or planned, for the area affected by the use are capable of supporting the proposed development or will be made capable by the time development is completed. 
(b)  The location, design, size, color and materials of the exterior of all structures for the proposed development and use is compatible with the character of other developments within the same general vicinity. 
(c)  The internal circulation, building location and orientation, street frontage, parking, setbacks, building height, lot size, and access are in accordance with TDC Chapter 62 for the Manufacturing Park (MP) Zone and TDC Chapter 64 for the Manufacturing Business Park (MBP) Zone unless otherwise approved through the Industrial Master Plan process. 
(6)  Conditions of Approval. 
(a)  The Planning Commission may impose, in addition to the regulations and standards expressly specified in this chapter, other conditions found necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood or the City as a whole and for compliance with the Metro UGMFP Title IV policies and requirements. 
(b)  An Industrial Master Plan may be approved based on proposed parcel boundaries; in this case development under the Industrial Master Plan must be conditioned on creation of the proposed parcels through the subdivision or partition process or may be the subject of a concurrent land division application. Partition applications associated with an Industrial Master Plan may be approved by City Council in accordance with TDC 36.230(8). 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
TDC 33.060. - Reinstatement of Nonconforming Use or Development. 
(1)  Purpose. To establish a process by which nonconforming uses or nonconforming development (other than signs) can be reinstated in accordance with TDC Chapter 35. 
(2)  Applicability. A nonconforming use or nonconforming development may not be reinstated unless approved in accordance with this section. 
(3)  Procedure Type. Requests for reinstatement of a nonconforming use or nonconforming developments are processed in accordance with the Type III review procedures in Chapter 32. 
(4)  Specific Submittal Requirements. An application for reinstatement of a nonconforming use must comply with the general submittal requirements in TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal). 
(5)  Approval Criteria. 
(a)  The nonconforming use or nonconforming development, if reinstated, will not be materially detrimental to the objectives of the Tualatin Community Plan. 
(b)  The nonconforming use or nonconforming development, if reinstated, will not have an unreasonable detrimental effect upon the value or use of property located within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property on which the reinstated nonconforming use or structure is sought. 
(c)  The request for reinstatement of a nonconforming use or nonconforming development was filed with the Planning Department not more than six months from the date on which the nonconforming use or nonconforming development was terminated. 
(6)  Conditions of Approval. The Planning Commission may attach conditions to the reinstatement that it finds necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property including, but not limited to, compliance with those provisions of the Tualatin Community Plan that are necessary to protect the health, peace, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
TDC 33.070. - Plan Amendments. 
(1)  Purpose. To provide processes for the review of proposed amendments to the Zone Standards of the Tualatin Development Code and to the Text or the Plan Map of the Tualatin Community Plan. 
(2)  Applicability. Quasi-judicial amendments may be initiated by the City Council, the City staff, or by a property owner or person authorized in writing by the property owner. Legislative amendments may only be initiated by the City Council. 
(3)  Procedure Type. 
(a)  Map or text amendment applications which are quasi-judicial in nature (e.g. for a specific property or a limited number of properties) is subject to Type IV-A Review in accordance with TDC Chapter 32. 
(b)  Map or text amendment applications which are legislative in nature are subject to Type IV-B Review in accordance with TDC Chapter 32. 
(4)  Specific Submittal Requirements. An application for a plan map or text amendment must comply with the general submittal requirements in TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal). 
(5)  Approval Criteria. 
(a)  Granting the amendment is in the public interest. 
(b)  The public interest is best protected by granting the amendment at this time. 
(c)  The proposed amendment is in conformity with the applicable objectives of the Tualatin Community Plan. 
(d)  The following factors were consciously considered: 
(i)  The various characteristics of the areas in the City; 
(ii)  The suitability of the areas for particular land uses and improvements in the areas; 
(iii)  Trends in land improvement and development; 
(iv)  Property values; 
(v)  The needs of economic enterprises and the future development of the area; needed right-of-way and access for and to particular sites in the area; 
(vi)  Natural resources of the City and the protection and conservation of said resources; 
(vii)  Prospective requirements for the development of natural resources in the City; 
(viii)  The public need for healthful, safe, esthetic surroundings and conditions; and 
(ix)  Proof of change in a neighborhood or area, or a mistake in the Plan Text or Plan Map for the property under consideration are additional relevant factors to consider. 
(e)  If the amendment involves residential uses, then the appropriate school district or districts must be able to reasonably accommodate additional residential capacity by means determined by any affected school district. 
(f)  Granting the amendment is consistent with the applicable State of Oregon Planning Goals and applicable Oregon Administrative Rules, including compliance with the Transportation Planning Rule TPR (OAR 660-012-0060). 
(g)  Granting the amendment is consistent with the Metropolitan Service District's Urban Growth Management Functional Plan. 
(h)  Granting the amendment is consistent with Level of Service F for the p.m. peak hour and E for the one-half hour before and after the p.m. peak hour for the Town Center 2040 Design Type (TDC Map 9-4), and E/E for the rest of the 2040 Design Types in the City's planning area. 
(i)  Granting the amendment is consistent with the objectives and policies regarding potable water, sanitary sewer, and surface water management pursuant to TDC 12.020, water management issues are adequately addressed during development or redevelopment anticipated to follow the granting of a plan amendment. 
(j)  The applicant has entered into a development agreement. This criterion applies only to an amendment specific to property within the Urban Planning Area (UPA), also known as the Planning Area Boundary (PAB), as defined in both the Urban Growth Management Agreement (UGMA) with Clackamas County and the Urban Planning Area Agreement (UPAA) with Washington County. TDC Map 9-1 illustrates this area. 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
TDC 33.080. - Signs—Permits, Design Review, and Variances. 
(1)  Purpose. To implement the standards of TDC Chapter 38 and the Sign Objectives in Chapter 20. Sign Variance review provides a public hearing process to review special situations that are not anticipated by the Sign Regulations in TDC Chapter 38, including TDC 38.100, 38.110, 38.120 and 38.140-38.240. 
(2)  Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to sign permits, sign design review and sign variances as required in accordance with TDC Chapter 38. 
(3)  Procedure Type. Sign permits, sign design review and variances are processed in accordance with the procedures in TDC Chapter 32 as follows: 
(a)  Sign Permits are subject to Type I review. 
(b)  Sign Design Reviews are subject to Type I review. 
(c)  Sign Variances are subject to Type III review. 
(4)  Specific Submittal Requirements. In addition to the general submittal requirements in TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal), the applicant must submit the information required by TDC 38.070 (Sign Permit Process). 
(5)  Approval Criteria. 
(a)  A Sign Permit may be granted if the City Manager finds that the proposed sign is in compliance with the regulations in TDC Chapter 38. 
(b)  Sign Design Review may be approved if the City Manager finds that the proposed sign is in compliance with the regulations in TDC Chapter 38 and the clear and objective standards in TDC 38.075. 
(c)  Sign Variances. All six of the following criteria must be met before a variance can be granted: 
(i)  A hardship is created by exceptional or extraordinary conditions applying to the property that do not apply generally to other properties in the same zone, and such conditions are a result of lot size or shape or topography over which the applicant or owner has no control; 
(ii)  The hardship does not result from actions of the applicant, owner or previous owner, or from personal circumstances, or from the financial situation of the applicant or owner or the company, or from regional economic conditions; 
(iii)  The variance is the minimum remedy necessary to eliminate the hardship; 
(iv)  The variance is necessary for the preservation of a property right of the owner substantially the same as is possessed by owners of other property in the same zone however, nonconforming or illegal signs on the subject property or on nearby properties does not constitute justification to support a variance request; 
(v)  The variance must not be detrimental to the general public health, safety and welfare, and not be injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity; and 
(vi)  The variance must not be detrimental to the applicable Sign Design Objectives, TDC 20.030. 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
TDC 33.090. - Temporary Outdoor Sales Permit. 
(1)  Purpose. Temporary Outdoor Sales is the temporary sale of goods or merchandise outside of a building located at a single location for fewer than 55 consecutive days. This includes the temporary sales of holiday vegetation, fireworks, and produce. Temporary outdoor sales may be conducted at mobile stand, tent, or in the open air. This section establishes an application process for the permitting of the temporary sale of seasonal goods or merchandise from a location outside of a building in a mobile stand, tent or in the open air. 
(2)  Applicability. 
(a)  Temporary Outdoor Sales Permits are only allowed in the following zones: 
(i)  Central Commercial (CC); and 
(ii)  General Commercial (CG). 
(b)  This section is not intended to circumvent the strict application of the provisions governing permitted and conditional uses in CC and CG zones. 
(c)  Exemptions: A Temporary Outdoor Sales Permit is not required for: 
(i)  Activities in public spaces subject to a Community Services Special Event Permit; 
(ii)  Seasonal displays or sales located in Architectural Review approved plaza areas adjacent to buildings in the Central Commercial and General Commercial Zones; or 
(iii)  Mobile food units authorized by the Tualatin Municipal Code. 
(3)  Procedure Type. Applications for Temporary Outdoor Sales Permits are subject to Type I Review in accordance with TDC Chapter 32. 
(4)  Specific Submittal Requirements. An application for a Temporary Outdoor Sales Permit must comply with the general submittal requirements in TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal). 
(5)  Approval Criteria. 
(a)  The total number of days that a parcel of land may be used for temporary outdoor sales in a calendar year is 55 days. 
(b)  The proposed outdoor sale must be located entirely within private property in a Central Commercial or General Commercial Zone and the applicant must have the written permission from the property owner to utilize the subject property. 
(c)  The outdoor sale must be located on a site with Architectural Review approved access, parking and landscaping improvements. 
(d)  The use is listed as a permitted use in the Central Commercial or General Commercial Zones. 
(e)  The proposed outdoor sale will not result in vehicular traffic congestion. 
(f)  The applicant can make provision for adequate parking facilities. 
(g)  The outdoor sale will not result in the elimination of parking spaces required by the applicable City ordinance unless the business or businesses using such required spaces are closed for business on the day of the sale. 
(h)  The outdoor sale will meet all state and county health rules and regulations. 
(6)  Application Fee for Temporary Uses. The application fee does not apply to non-profit or charitable organizations. 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
TDC 33.100. - Temporary Sales Office. 
(1)  Purpose. To allow for a temporary sales office for the purpose of facilitating the sale of lots or parcels within a subdivision or partition. 
(2)  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to residentially zoned properties where the property owner wishes to utilize a temporary sales office, for the purpose of facilitating the sale of lots or parcels within such subdivision or partition, but for no other purpose. 
(3)  Procedure Type. Temporary Sales Office applications are subject to Type I Review in accordance with TDC Chapter 32. 
(4)  Specific Submittal Requirements. An application for Temporary Sales Office must comply with the general submittal requirements in TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal). 
(5)  Approval Criteria. The applicant must demonstrate compliance with the following standards: 
(a)  The subdivision or partition where the temporary sales office is proposed to be located must have a recorded plat. 
(b)  The office must be located within the boundaries of the subdivision or partition where the lots or parcels to be sold are situated. 
(c)  The property to be used for a temporary sales office must not be permanently improved for such purpose; providing, however, that a structure designed primarily for other residential purposes or a portion thereof may be used temporarily as a sales office. 
(d)  The applicant must pay the standard water and sewer hook-up fees if connection to these facilities is required for the temporary sales office. 
(e)  The applicant must obtain Plumbing Permits to connect to the water and sewer utilities if connection to these facilities is required for the temporary sales office. 
(f)  Parking for the sales office must only be allowed in the public street adjacent to the sales office and in any driveway constructed for the temporary sales office. 
(g)  Any signs placed on the lot where the temporary sales office is located must meet the requirements of the Sign Code. 
(6)  Permit Expiration. 
(a)  The permission granted must not exceed three years from the date of the City Manager's approval. 
(b)  The granting of permission to use real property for a temporary sales office does not constitute a temporary change of zoning, and the City Manager may impose such terms and conditions as deemed advisable. 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
TDC 33.110. - Tree Removal Permit/Review. 
(1)  Purpose. To regulate the removal of trees within the City limits other than trees within the public right-of-way which are subject to TDC Chapter 74. 
(2)  Applicability. No person may remove a tree on private property within the City limits, unless the City grants a tree removal permit, consistent with the provisions of this Section. 
(3)  Exemptions. The following actions are exempt from the requirements of a tree removal permit. 
(a)  General Exemption. Four or fewer trees may be removed within a single calendar year from a single parcel of property or contiguous parcels of property under the same ownership without a permit, if the tree is: 
(i)  Not located in the Natural Resource Protection Overlay District (NRPO); 
(ii)  Not located in the Wetlands Protection Area (WPA) of the Wetlands Protection District (WPD); 
(iii)  Not a Heritage Tree; and 
(iv)  Not previously required to be retained or planted under an approved Architectural Review decision. 
(b)  Forest Harvesting Exemption. Forest Harvesting Uses, as provided by Agricultural Uses in TDC 39.300 are exempt. 
(c)  Orchard Exemption. Orchards Uses, as provided by Agricultural Uses in TDC 39.300, are exempt. 
(d)  Public Property Exemption. Tree removal on federal, state, county, or City property is exempt from the requirements of a tree removal permit. This exemption includes, but is not limited to road, improvements and maintenance to City parks, rights-of-way, water, sanitary sewer, and stormwater facilities. (Removal of trees from public right-of-way are governed by TDC Chapter 74.) 
(3)  Procedure Type. Tree Removal Permit applications are subject to Type II Review in accordance with TDC Chapter 32. Tree Removal Permit applications submitted with an Architectural Review, Subdivision, or Partition application will be processed in conjunction with the Architectural Review, Subdivision, or Partition decision. 
(4)  Specific Submittal Requirements. In addition to the general submittal requirements in TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal), an applicant must submit the following: 
(a)  Tree Preservation Plan. A tree preservation plan drawn to scale must include: 
(i)  The location, size, species, and tag identification number of all trees on-site eight inches or more in diameter; 
(ii)  All trees proposed for removal and all trees proposed to be preserved; 
(iii)  All existing and proposed structures; 
(iv)  All existing and proposed public and private improvements; and 
(v)  All existing public and private easements. 
(b)  Tree Assessment Report. A tree assessment prepared by a certified arborist must include: 
(i)  An analysis as to whether trees proposed for preservation may be preserved in light of the development proposed, are healthy specimens, and do not pose an imminent hazard to persons or property if preserved; 
(ii)  An analysis as to whether any trees proposed for removal could reasonably be preserved in light of the development proposed and health of the tree; 
(iii)  a statement addressing the approval criteria set forth in TDC 33.110(5); 
(iv)  the name, contact information, and signature of the arborist preparing the report; and 
(v)  The tree assessment report must have been prepared and dated no more than one calendar year preceding the date the development or Tree Removal Permit application is deemed complete by the City. 
(c)  Tree Tags. All trees on-site must be physically identified and numbered in the field with an arborist-approved tagging system that corresponds to the Tree Preservation Plan and Tree Assessment Report. 
(5)  Approval Criteria. 
(a)  An applicant must satisfactorily demonstrate that at least one of the following criteria are met: 
(i)  The tree is diseased and: 
(A)  The disease threatens the structural integrity of the tree; or 
(B)  The disease permanently and severely diminishes the esthetic value of the tree; or 
(C)  The continued retention of the tree could result in other trees being infected with a disease that threatens either their structural integrity or esthetic value. 
(ii)  The tree represents a hazard which may include but not be limited to: 
(A)  The tree is in danger of falling; or 
(B)  Substantial portions of the tree are in danger of falling. 
(iii)  It is necessary to remove the tree to construct proposed improvements based on Architectural Review approval, building permit, or approval of a Subdivision or Partition Review. 
(b)  If none of the conditions in TDC 33.110(5)(a) are met, the certified arborist must evaluate the condition of each tree. 
(i)  Evergreen Trees. An evergreen tree which meets any of the following criteria as determined by a certified arborist will not be required to be retained: 
(A)  Trunk Condition—extensive decay and hollow; or 
(B)  Crown Development—unbalanced and lacking a full crown; 
(ii)  Deciduous Trees. A deciduous tree which meets any of the following criteria as determined by a certified arborist will not be required to be retained: 
(A)  Trunk Condition—extensive decay and hollow; 
(B)  Crown Development—unbalanced and lacking a full crown; or 
(C)  Structure—Two or more dead limbs. 
(6)  Emergencies. If emergency conditions occur requiring the immediate cutting or removal of trees to avoid danger or hazard to persons or property, an emergency permit must be issued by the City Manager without payment of a fee and without formal application, provided the owner provides enough information to the City Manager to document that an emergency exists. If an emergency exists and the City Offices are closed, the emergency condition may be abated provided the person files information documenting the emergency and necessity of immediate removal of the tree as soon as practical after the City Offices reopen. An "emergency condition" for purposes of this section is when a tree presents an immediate danger of collapse, and represents a clear and present hazard to persons or property. For the purposes of this section, "immediate danger of collapse" means that the tree is already leaning, and there is a significant likelihood that the tree will topple or otherwise fail and cause damage before a tree cutting permit could be obtained through the nonemergency process. "Immediate danger of collapse" does not include hazardous conditions that can be alleviated by pruning or treatment. Examples of emergency conditions include: 
(a)  A tree leaning on a structure; 
(b)  A tree leaning on another tree and there is a significant likelihood that the tree will topple or otherwise fail; or 
(c)  If a utility service has been interrupted and repairs cannot be completed without the removal of a tree. 
(7)  Conditions of Approval. Any tree required to be retained must be protected in accordance with the TDC 73B and 73C. 
(8)  Permit Expiration. A Tree Removal Permit is valid for one year from the date of issue. A Tree Removal Permit approved in conjunction with an Architectural Review, Subdivision, or Partition decision is valid as provided in the terms of the Architectural Review, Subdivision, or Partition decision. 
(9)  Tree removal in violation of Zone Standards. 
(a)  In addition to any applicable civil violation penalties, any property owner who removes, or causes to be removed, one or more trees in violation of applicable TDC provisions must pay an Enforcement Fee and a Restoration Fee to the City of Tualatin, as follows: 
(i)  Enforcement Fee of $837.00 per incident, plus $10.00 for each tree removed; and 
(ii)  Restoration Fee of $2,000.00 per tree removed. 
(b)  The City Manager may administratively reduce or waive these fees based upon a demonstration of hardship, adequate mitigation, or other good cause shown. 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
TDC 33.120. - Variances and Minor Variances. 
(1)  Purpose. To establish a procedure for the granting of Variance and Minor Variances to the standards of the Tualatin Development Code. Exceptions: 
(a)  Variances to the requirements of TDC Chapter 70 (Floodplain District) must be in accordance with TDC Chapter 70. 
(b)  Sign variances must be in accordance with Section 33.080. 
(2)  Applicability. Variances may be granted to the requirements of the TDC as provided in this Section when it can be shown that, owing to special and unusual circumstances related to a specific piece of property, the literal interpretation of the TDC would cause an undue or unnecessary hardship. 
(a)  Variances may be requested for the following: 
(i)  Standards in TDC Chapters 40-69 and 71-73A through 73F. 
(b)  Minor variances may be requested for the following: 
(i)  In Residential Low Density Zone (RL) except for Small Lot Subdivisions: 
(A)  Up to a ten percent variation from the required lot area, and/or 
(B)  Up to a 20 percent variation from the required lot width, building coverage, setbacks, projections into required yards and structure height development standards for permitted uses. 
(ii)  For single family dwellings in Small Lot Subdivisions in Residential Low Density (RL) and Residential Medium to Low Density Zone (RML): 
A.  Up to a ten percent variation from the required lot area; and/or 
B.  Up to a 20 percent variation from the required lot width, building coverage, setbacks, projections into required yards and structure height development standards. 
(c)  Prohibited. Variances and minor variances are not allowed: 
(i)  To permit a use of land that is not permitted or conditionally permitted in a zone. 
(ii)  For Level I (Clear and Objective) Single-family Architectural Review standards referenced in TDC 40.140 and 41.130 and set forth in TDC 73A.110. 
(3)  Procedure Type. 
(a)  Applications for a Minor Variance are subject to Type II review in accordance with TDC Chapter 32. 
(b)  Applications for a Variance are subject to Type III review in accordance with TDC Chapter 32. 
(4)  Specific Submittal Requirements. In addition to the general submittal requirements in TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal), an applicant must submit the following additional information: 
(a)  The name, addresses and telephone numbers of the architect, landscape architect and engineer; and 
(b)  If requesting a variance to lot width, building coverage, setbacks, projections into required yards and structure height then a property survey stamped by a qualified professional is required. 
(5)  Approval Criteria for Granting a Minor Variance. A minor variance must not be granted unless the application shows the following approval criteria are met: 
(a)  A hardship is created by an unusual situation that is the result of lot size, lot shape, topography, development circumstances or being able to use the land or public infrastructure more efficiently; 
(b)  The hardship does not result from regional economic conditions; 
(c)  The minor variance will not be injurious to property abutting the subject property; and 
(d)  The minor variance is the minimum remedy necessary to alleviate the hardship. 
(6)  Approval Criteria for Granting a Variance that is not a Minor Variance or for a Wireless Communication Facility. A variance must not be granted unless it can be shown that criterion (a) is met and three of the four approval criteria (b)-(e) are met for non-sign requests: 
(a)  A hardship is created by exceptional or extraordinary conditions applying to the property that do not apply generally to other properties in the same zone or vicinity and the conditions are a result of lot size or shape, topography, or other physical circumstances applying to the property over which the applicant or owner has no control. 
(b)  The hardship does not result from actions of the applicant, owner or previous owner, or from personal circumstances or financial situation of the applicant or owner, or from regional economic conditions. 
(c)  The variance is necessary for the preservation of a property right of the applicant or owner substantially the same as is possessed by owners of other property in the same zone or vicinity. 
(d)  The variance must not be detrimental to the applicable objectives of the Tualatin Community Plan and must not be injurious to property in the zone or vicinity in which the property is located. 
(e)  The variance is the minimum remedy necessary to alleviate the hardship. 
(7)  Approval Criteria for Granting a Variance for a Wireless Communication Facility. A variance to the separation or height requirements for wireless communication facilities must not be granted unless it can be shown that the following criteria are met. The criteria for granting a variance to the separation or height requirements for wireless communication facilities is limited to this section, and does not include the standard variance criteria of Section TDC 33.120(6), Approval Criteria for Granting a Variance that is not for a Wireless Communication Facility. 
(a)  The City may grant a variance from the provisions of TDC 73F, which requires a 1,500 foot separation between WCFs, providing the applicant demonstrates compliance with (i) or (ii) below. 
(i)  Coverage and Capacity. 
(A)  It is technically not practicable to provide the needed capacity or coverage the tower is intended to provide and locate the proposed tower on available sites more than 1,500 feet from an existing wireless communication facility or from the proposed location of a wireless communication facility for which an application has been filed and not denied. The needed capacity or coverage must be documented with a Radio Frequency report; 
(B)  The collocation report, required as part of the Architectural Review submittal, must document that the existing WCFs within 1,500 feet of the proposed WCF, or a WCF within 1,500 feet of the proposed WCF for which application has been filed and not denied, cannot be modified to accommodate another provider; and 
(C)  There are no available buildings, light or utility poles, or water towers on which antennas may be located and still provide the approximate coverage the tower is intended to provide. 
(ii)  Site Characteristics. The proposed monopole location includes tall, dense evergreen trees that will screen at least 50 percent of the proposed monopole from the RL District or from a small lot subdivision in the RML District. 
(b)  The City may grant a variance to the maximum allowable height for a WCF if the applicant demonstrates: 
(i)  It is technically not practicable to provide the needed capacity or coverage the tower is intended to provide at a height that meets the TDC requirements. The needed capacity or coverage must be documented with a Radio Frequency report; and 
(ii)  The collocation report, required as part of the Architectural Review submittal, must document that existing WCFs, or a WCF for which an application has been filed and not denied, cannot be modified to provide the capacity or coverage the tower is intended to provide. 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
CHAPTER 34 - SPECIAL REGULATIONS 
Home Occupations 
Microwave Receiving Dishes 
Automobile Service Station Spacing Requirements 
Congregate Care and Retirement Housing Facilities 
Manufactured Dwelling Parks 
Accessory Dwelling Units 
Religious Uses  
HOME OCCUPATIONS 
 
TDC 34.010. - Purpose and Definitions. 
(1)  The purpose of this Home Occupation Code is: 
(a)  To allow residents an opportunity to use their residences to engage in small-scale business activities; 
(b)  To allow for small-scale business activities in a residence as a means to reduce commutes and traffic; 
(c)  To establish standards by which home occupations operate; and 
(d)  To ensure that home occupations are conducted subordinate to the residential use of the property, in a manner neither detrimental nor disruptive, in terms of appearance or operation, to neighboring properties and residents. 
(2)  It is not the intent of TDC 34.031-34.055 to prohibit telecommuting. 
(3)  For purposes of this TDC section the following terms have the following meanings: 
(a)  Employee. All persons, excluding the owner-operator, working on the premises in the home occupation. 
(b)  Equipment. Physical assets of the home occupation, excluding motor vehicles. 
(c)  Motor Vehicle. A self-propelled mechanical device moving or movable over the highways, roads and streets of the City, excepting devices that move exclusively on stationary rails. 
(d)  Owner-operator. A person undertaking a home occupation; the proprietor of a home occupation.  
TDC 34.020. - Allowed Home Occupations. 
(1)  A person must not operate a home occupation or allow a home occupation to occur on property in violation of TDC 34.010 through 34.030. 
(2)  The following occupations are permitted as home occupations, so long as the home occupation complies with the standards in TDC 34.030: 
(a)  Professional occupations including, but not limited to: accounting, architecture, computer consulting, counseling, clergy, drafting, editing, engineering, financial advising, graphic design, immediate disposition company, landscape design, law, psychology, publishing, realty and writing; 
(b)  Personal services including, but not limited to: haircutting, manicures and licensed massage therapy; 
(c)  Instructional services including, but not limited to: arts, crafts, language, music and scholastic teaching; 
(d)  Home craft businesses including, but not limited to: arts, catering, dressmaking, jewelry making, millinery, music, photography, pottery, sculpture, tailoring and weaving; 
(e)  Trades, repair and service people who work off-site but maintain an office at home 
(f)  Repair services including, but not limited to: hand-held instruments, watch and clock repair; and 
(g)  Other home occupations, as determined by a code interpretation pursuant to TDC 31.070.  
TDC 34.030. - Home Occupation Standards. 
The following standards apply to home occupations in the City of Tualatin: 
(1)  A residence that houses a home occupation may have only one sign and the sign must comply with TDC 38.110(11). 
(2)  A person operating a home occupation must obtain a business license from the City of Tualatin. This person must also maintain all other permits required by other agencies for the home occupation. 
(3)  Home occupations may include the retailing of goods not produced by the home occupation but directly related to the home occupation if: 
(a)  The retailing is secondary and ancillary to the home occupation; or 
(b)  The retailing occurs in a presentation and sale of goods or services to a social gathering of invited guests no more than six times in a calendar year at the home occupation location. 
(4)  All materials and equipment must be stored inside built structures on the premises. Interior storage of materials and equipment must be secondary to the residential use of the dwelling. Storage must not be used as a material or equipment staging area. Equipment may be stored on the home occupation vehicle. 
(5)  Noise, smoke and odors may not exceed those created by normal residential use. 
(6)  The home occupation must be owned and operated by a resident at the home occupation site. The home occupation may employ one other on-site employee who is not a resident of the building. Off-site employees are permitted. 
(7)  The home occupation must not be used as a headquarters or meeting location for the assembly of employees or subcontractors for any reason, including staging or dispatch of employees or subcontractors to other locations, except as specified under TDC 34.030(14). Off-site employees and subcontractors may not keep their motor vehicles at the home occupation during a work day. 
(8)  The residence must not be altered in a manner that will change its primary residential appearance or use. A home occupation does not change the dwelling unit classification as a dwelling unit in the Oregon Uniform Building Code. 
(9)  Only one motor vehicle not exceeding 15,000 pounds GVW is permitted for use in the home occupation at the home occupation location. No other motor vehicle storage is permitted for the home occupation. No commercial motor vehicle as defined in ORS 801.208 may be allowed as part of a home occupation. 
(10)  On-street parking may not prevent access to mailboxes, driveways, fire hydrants, garbage or recycling receptacle pick-up. 
(11)  The home occupation may generate no more than ten one-way client and subcontractor vehicular trips per day. For home occupations relating to instructional services, no more than 20 one-way client and subcontractor vehicular trips may be permitted per day. Trips attributable to the residential use are not attributed to the home occupation in determining compliance with this section. 
(12)  No employee, client, subcontractor or delivery trips to the home occupation may be made between 10:00 pm and 7:30 am. 
(13)  A person may not work on three or more motor vehicles per week at a residence. If a person is, the City will presume that the person is operating an unauthorized home occupation. 
(14)  A board or staff meeting of the home occupation may be held quarterly at the site of the home occupation.  
MICROWAVE RECEIVING DISHES 
 
TDC 34.100. - Microwave Dishes Screened. 
(1)  The purpose of TDC 34.100 is to regulate microwave receiving dishes so as to minimize their visual impact. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, "microwave receiving dish" means any conical or dish-shaped device or structure used for receiving television or other telecommunication signals transmitted from satellites or earth-based transmitters. Microwave receiving dishes may also be known as "television receive only" (TVRO) dishes, "satellite direct service" (SDS) dishes, "multi-distance service" (MDS) dishes, and "earth stations." 
(3)  All microwave receiving dishes having a diameter of more than three feet must be screened by sight-obscuring masonry walls or dense landscape buffers, as approved through the Architectural Review process, subject to the provisions of TDC 73B.  
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION SPACING REQUIREMENTS 
 
TDC 34.200. - Spacing Requirement for Automobile Service Stations near Child Day Care. 
All pump islands of any automobile service stations must be a minimum of 400 feet away from the exterior walls and outdoor play areas associated with a Child Day Care Center or Family Day Care Center, irrespective of any structures in between.  
CONGREGATE CARE AND RETIREMENT HOUSING FACILITIES 
 
TDC 34.400. - Congregate Care and Retirement Housing Facility Standards. 
(1)  Congregate care and retirement housing facilities may be allowed as a conditional use in a Low Density Residential (RL), Medium Low Density Residential (RML), Medium High Density Residential (RMH), High Density Residential (RH), or High Density Residential-High Rise (RH-HR) Planning District, in accordance with the provisions of TDC Chapter 32, and subject to these standards. 
(2)  The following conditions apply to all congregate care and retirement housing facilities: 
(a)  The building must be designed or renovated specifically for retirement housing. Any required State license must be obtained before the building is occupied. Public services must have capacity to serve the proposed development; 
(b)  The housing may be provided as congregate care or as separate apartment units in a retirement housing facility or any combination thereof; 
(c)  Walkways must be paved and lighted and must not exceed eight percent in grade; 
(d)  Buffering of noise and screening of lighting is required; 
(e)  The requirements of the Planning District must be met unless specifically modified by this section; 
(f)  Occupancy is limited to persons 55 years of age and older. In the case of couples, one member of the couple must be 55 years of age or older. This restrictive condition must be recorded in the County deed records; 
(g)  The site must be at least one-half acre in size; 
(h)  Retail sales or other commercial uses are not permitted; and 
(i)  Proposals must be presented according to the requirements of TDC Chapter 32 relating to Conditional Uses. 
(3)  The allowable density is one and one-half times the density of the underlying Planning District. 
(4)  For congregate care facilities, one-half of a parking space must be provided for each unit. For retirement housing facilities, one parking space per unit must be provided. 
(5)  Landscaping/open space must be at least 30 percent of the site, unless it can be shown that other alternatives for open space are available.  
MANUFACTURED DWELLING PARKS 
 
TDC 34.500. - Manufactured Dwelling Park Development Standards. 
(1)  The standards contained in this section apply to all manufactured dwelling park developments, which are established after the effective date of this section, and to all increases in the numbers of spaces contained in or attached to parks, which are in existence on the date this section becomes effective. 
(2)  Manufactured dwelling park developments and modifications to existing manufactured dwelling parks to which this section applies are reviewed through the Architectural Review Process for compliance with the Tualatin Development Code and any other applicable regulations and ordinances of the City. No person may establish, operate, rent, lease, or occupy a manufactured dwelling park or manufactured dwelling park space without first applying for and obtaining approval through the Architectural Review Process. 
(3)  Only those manufactured homes and mobile homes, which have a Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) label certifying that the structure is constructed in accordance with federal law are permitted. Recreational vehicles and camping vehicles must not be used for residential purposes in manufactured dwelling parks and must not be rented a space or hooked up to sewer, water, or electrical facilities within a manufactured dwelling park. 
(4)  The minimum gross acreage for a manufactured dwelling park is one acre. 
(5)  The manufactured dwelling park street system must include at least one direct access to a public street, containing a right-of-way width of not less than 50 feet. 
(6)  Each manufactured dwelling space must be designed to include at least two standard size automobile parking spaces, and may be designed either end-to-end or side-to-side. Such parking spaces must be paved in accordance with City standards for residential driveways. 
(7)  Each manufactured dwelling must have its wheels, axles, tongue, and traveling lights removed. 
(8)  Each manufactured dwelling must have a continuous and permanently affixed skirt installed. Such skirting must be composed of the same material and finish as the exterior of the manufactured dwelling or material with a brick-like finish or as otherwise approved through the Architectural Review Process. 
(9)  No extension, accessory structure, or other out building may be attached to a manufactured dwelling, except for structures conforming to the definition contained in state law concerning accessory structures. 
(10)  The distance between any two manufactured dwellings, including any approved accessory building, structure, awning, or tipout, must be ten feet or more on either side and either end. 
(11)  The distance between a manufactured dwelling, including approved accessory buildings, structures, awnings, or tipouts, and the nearest manufactured dwelling park property line or other permanent park structure must be 15 feet or the setback requirement of the RML District, whichever is greater. 
(12)  The distance between a manufactured dwelling and the nearest manufactured dwelling park street must be eight feet or more. 
(13)  The distance between a manufactured dwelling and the nearest manufactured dwelling park sidewalk must be five feet or more.  
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS 
 
TDC 34.600. - Accessory Dwelling Units Standards. 
(1)  The purpose of accessory dwelling units is to: 
(a)  Provide needed space for elderly family members or returning adult children; 
(b)  Encourage affordable housing units; 
(c)  Allow small households to retain large houses as residences; 
(d)  Permit young households to achieve home ownership; and 
(e)  Encourage living areas that minimally affect the quality or character of existing neighborhoods. 
(2)  An accessory dwelling unit must comply with the following standards: 
(a)  An accessory dwelling unit is allowed in: 
(i)  The RL Planning District; and 
(ii)  In the RML Planning District if part of a Small Lot Subdivision as specified under TDC 41.020(13); 
(b)  There must be no more than one accessory dwelling unit per lot; 
(c)  An accessory dwelling unit must not exceed a maximum of 800 square feet of gross floor area; 
(d)  Neither a garage, or a former garage, may be converted to an accessory dwelling unit; 
(e)  In addition to the parking spaces required in TDC 73C for the detached single-family dwelling, one paved on-site parking space must be provided for the accessory dwelling unit and the space must not be within five feet of a side or rear property line; 
(f)  The accessory dwelling unit' s front door must not be located on the same street frontage as the detached single family dwelling' s front door unless the door for the accessory dwelling unit already exists; 
(g)  The accessory dwelling unit must not be sold separate from the single family dwelling or as a condominium; 
(h)  The accessory dwelling unit must be served by the same water meter as the single family dwelling; 
(i)  The accessory dwelling unit must be served by the same electric meter as the single family dwelling, unless other applicable requirements, such as building codes, prohibit it; 
(j)  The accessory dwelling unit must be served by the same natural gas meter as the single family dwelling, unless other applicable requirements, such as building codes, prohibit it; 
(k)  An attached accessory dwelling unit must be connected to the single family dwelling by an internal doorway; 
(l)  If the gross floor area of the existing single family dwelling is to be enlarged when an accessory dwelling unit is created, the proposed enlargement must not increase the gross floor area of the single family dwelling more than ten percent; 
(m)  An accessory dwelling unit must provide at least two Residential Roof Design Elements in TDC 73A.120 (Site Design), and at least four Residential Wall Design Elements in TDC 73A.130 (Site Design); and 
(n)  An accessory dwelling unit must not be located in front of the primary structure.  
RELIGIOUS USES 
 
TDC 34.700. - Religious Uses. 
(1)  Whenever a church, synagogue, temple, mosque, chapel, meeting house or other nonresidential place of worship is allowed on real property under City zoning ordinances. The following uses are also allowed: 
(a)  Worship services; 
(b)  Religion classes; 
(c)  Weddings; 
(d)  Funerals; 
(e)  Meal programs; 
(f)  Child care, but not including private or parochial school education for prekindergarten through grade 12 or higher education; and 
(g)  Providing housing or space for housing in a building that is detached from the place of worship, provided: 
(i)  At least 50 percent of the residential units provided under this paragraph are affordable to households with incomes equal to or less than 60 percent of the median family income for the county in which the real property is located; 
(ii)  The real property is in an area zoned for residential use that is located within the City; 
(iii)  The housing or space for housing complies with applicable land use regulations and meets the standards and criteria for residential development for the underlying zone; and 
(iv)  The property is subject to a covenant appurtenant for a period of 60 years from the date of the certificate of occupancy that restricts the owner and each successive owner of the building or any residential unit contained in the building from selling or renting any residential unit as housing that is not affordable to households with incomes equal to or less than 60 percent of the median family income for the county in which the real property is located. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, the City may prohibit or regulate the use of real property by a place of worship if the city finds that the level of service of public facilities, including transportation, water supply, sewer, or storm drain systems are not adequate to serve the place of worship. 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
CHAPTER 35 - NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS 
 
TDC 35.010. - Purpose and Intent. 
(1)  To carry out the purposes, goals and objectives of the Tualatin Community Plan, it is necessary and desirable that all uses and structures incompatible with permitted uses or structures in each planning district be strictly regulated and permitted to exist only under specific regulations. It is the purpose of such specific regulations and control over such incompatible uses and structures that such nonconforming uses or structures be discontinued or brought into conformity with permitted uses or structures in each planning district. 
(2)  This Chapter sets the requirements for: 
(a)  Nonconforming uses; 
(b)  Nonconforming development; 
(c)  Nonconforming lots; 
(d)  Nonconforming signs; and 
(e)  Nonconforming wireless facilities. 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
TDC 35.020. - Nonconforming Use. 
(1)  Generally. A nonconforming use is any use on real property that was lawfully established under the applicable City or county land use regulations at the time the use was established, but which use is no longer allowed due to the adoption of, or amendment to, the City's land use regulations, or annexation of the property into the City. A nonconforming use may be continued on the real property until terminated as provided in this Chapter, provided it conforms to the requirements of this Chapter. 
(2)  Ordinary Repairs and Maintenance. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, buildings and structures occupied by nonconforming uses may be repaired and maintained. 
(3)  Alteration or Enlargement of Nonconforming Use Prohibited. 
(a)  A nonconforming use of land may be continued, but not altered or enlarged, except: 
(i)  Improvements to required paving, landscaping, or other aesthetic improvements to the premises; and 
(ii)  Aesthetic changes to the external dimensions of the building; 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), the following nonconforming uses may be altered or enlarged: 
(i)  Warehouse and distribution center uses existing on April 12, 2000 in the Manufacturing Park District; 
(ii)  The Winona Cemetery (9900 SW Tualatin Road); 
(iii)  The PGE Substation (6280 SW Borland Road); 
(iv)  The Stafford Hills Racquet and Fitness Club (5916 SW Nyberg Lane); and 
(v)  Conditional uses located in the RL Planning District that obtained conditional use approval before January 13, 2011. 
(4)  Changing Location of Nonconforming Use Prohibited. A nonconforming use cannot be moved, in whole or in part, from one lot to another lot, except as to bring the use into conformance with this Code. 
(5)  Termination of a Nonconforming Use. 
(a)  A nonconforming use is deemed terminated when: 
(i)  A nonconforming use of land is discontinued for more than 12 months; 
(ii)  A nonconforming use dependent upon a building or structure is declared a "dangerous building" pursuant to TMC Chapter 4-03 or the state building code. Termination of the use is effective upon the date the order declaring the building or structure a dangerous building becomes final; or 
(iii)  A nonconforming use dependent upon a building or structure is destroyed or damaged by any cause to an extent requiring the discontinuance of the use for more than six months while making repairs. Termination of the use is effective upon the date of the damage or destruction. 
(b)  Once a nonconforming use is terminated, any subsequent use of the subject lot must conform to the current standards and criteria of this Code. After a nonconforming use is terminated, the use must not be allowed to resume, in whole or in part, under the same or different ownership or management. 
(6)  Reinstatement of Nonconforming Use. A nonconforming use that was terminated may only be reinstated as provided in TDC 33.060. 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
TDC 35.030. - Nonconforming Development. 
(1)  Generally. A nonconforming development is any development which met the applicable City or County development standards imposed at the time the development was constructed, but which no longer complies with development standards due to the adoption of, or amendment to, the City's land use regulations, or annexation of the property into the City. A nonconforming development may be continued until the development's nonconforming status is terminated as provided in this Chapter provided it conforms to the requirements of this Chapter. Examples of nonconforming developments, include but are not limited, nonconformity by reason of restrictions on lot area, lot coverage, location on a lot, setbacks, height, yard, equipment, access, parking, landscaping, or other physical restriction, or requirement. 
(2)  Ordinary Repairs and Maintenance. Except as provided by this Chapter, nonconforming developments may be repaired and maintained. 
(3)  Alteration or Enlargement of Nonconforming Development Prohibited. 
(a)  A nonconforming development may be continued, but not altered or enlarged, except: 
(i)  aesthetic changes to the external dimensions of the building; 
(ii)  A development conforming as to use but nonconforming as to setback or yard requirements may be altered or enlarged, providing the alteration or enlargement does not result in a violation of the change to setback or yard requirements. 
(iii)  A nonconforming development may be altered or enlarged when such alteration or enlargement will bring the development or use into conformity with the Planning District Standards for the property. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), the following nonconforming developments may be altered or enlarged: 
(i)  Warehouse and distribution centers existing on April 12, 2000 in the Manufacturing Park District; 
(ii)  The Winona Cemetery (9900 SW Tualatin Road); 
(iii)  The PGE Substation (6280 SW Borland Road); 
(iv)  The Stafford Hills Racquet and Fitness Club (5916 SW Nyberg Lane); and 
(v)  Conditional uses located in the RL Planning District that obtained conditional use approval before January 13, 2011. 
(4)  Termination of Nonconforming Development. 
(a)  A nonconforming development is deemed terminated if: 
(i)  A nonconforming development is declared a "dangerous building" pursuant to TMC Chapter 4-03 or the state building code. Termination of the nonconforming development is effective upon the date the order declaring the development a dangerous building becomes final; and 
(ii)  If a nonconforming development is destroyed or damaged by any cause to an extent requiring the discontinuance of the development for more than six months while making repairs. Termination of the nonconforming development is effective upon the date of the damage or destruction. 
(b)  Once a nonconforming development is terminated the development must be removed or any subsequent development of the subject lot must conform to the current standards and criteria of this Code. 
(5)  Reinstatement of Nonconforming Development. A nonconforming development that was terminated may only be reinstated as provided in TDC 33.060. 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
TDC 35.040. - Nonconforming Lots. 
(1)  Generally. A nonconforming lot is a legal lot or lot of record that met the minimum area or lot dimension at the time the lot was created, but which do not meet the dimension or area standards of the zoning district in which the property is located. 
(2)  Ordinary Repairs and Maintenance. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, buildings and structures located on nonconforming lots may be repaired and maintained. 
(3)  Use of Nonconforming Lot. A nonconforming lot may be occupied by a use permitted in the zone in which the property is located, subject to other requirements of the zone. 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
TDC 35.200. - Nonconforming Signs. 
(1)  Generally. A nonconforming sign is a lawfully erected sign including existing signs legally erected prior to May 13, 1992, either in the City or in those portions of Washington or Clackamas Counties which were annexed to the City after erection of the sign and do not comply with the provisions of the Tualatin Development Code, are nonconforming signs. They are allowed to remain provided they comply with the provisions of this Section. 
(2)  Ordinary Repairs and Maintenance. To retain nonconforming sign status, nonconforming signs must not be structurally altered. The sign face or the copy on the sign face, or both, may be changed after first obtaining a sign permit. Sign maintenance and repair are required and may occur without first obtaining a sign permit. 
(3)  Alteration or Enlargement of Nonconforming Signs Prohibited. 
(a)  A nonconforming sign in a former Freeway Oriented Activity Area or in a CC or CG Planning District may be continued, but not structurally altered or enlarged, except when the sign height, sign face height and sign face area are reduced by a minimum of 25 percent of the nonconforming dimension or area and a minimum of two Sign Design Elements—Structure & Site and Sign Design—Sign Exterior of TDC 38.075 are incorporated into the sign. 
(b)  A nonconforming sign in a ML or MG Planning District may be continued, but not structurally altered or enlarged, except where a nonconforming pole sign's total sign height and sign face area are reduced to no higher than 15 feet and no greater than 40 square feet, respectively. 
(4)  Termination of Nonconforming Sign. 
(a)  A nonconforming sign is deemed terminated if one of the following occurs: 
(i)  A nonconforming sign is relocated from one location to another on the same tax lot or to a different tax lot; 
(ii)  The use on the tax lot where a Freeway Oriented Activity Sign is located is changed; 
(iii)  A nonconforming sign's structure, including but not limited to the support elements or framework, is changed, except as allowed in TDC 35.200(3) and in the ML and MG Districts; 
(iv)  A nonconforming sign is damaged by an act of God, including but not limited to wind, earthquake, floodwater, to the extent that the sign contractor's estimated cost of the repair exceeds by more than 75 percent the original cost of the sign or the cost of the most recent renovation to the sign, whichever is greater. The original cost or cost of the most recent renovation must be determined by sign value information submitted at the time a sign permit was issued. If such information was not submitted, the property owner or other person having such information must submit documentation showing the cost; or 
(v)  A sign permit is issued for a new conforming sign on the same property or on abutting property under the same ownership containing a nonconforming sign of the same type as the one for which the sign permit is issued. A "sign of the same type" means a freestanding pole or monument sign for a freestanding pole or monument sign or a wall sign for a wall sign. Before a new conforming sign is constructed all nonconforming signs of the same type, on the same property or on abutting property under the same ownership must be brought into conformance or meet the sign transition provisions of TDC 35.200(3). 
(5)  Permits for Nonconforming Signs. The City Manager must issue a sign permit for a new conforming sign provided the following condition of approval, or condition with words to the same effect, is stated on the permit: 
(a)  "A nonconforming sign of the same type for which this sign permit is issued and located on the same property or on abutting property under the same ownership must be brought into conformance prior to erecting the new conforming sign approved by this sign permit;" and 
(b)  The condition must be met by removing the nonconforming sign before construction begins, including but not limited to grading, on the new conforming sign. 
(6)  Prior Variances. Signs for which variances were granted prior to May 13, 1992 may remain provided the provisions of the variance approval are met. 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
TDC 35.300. - Wireless Communication Facilities. 
(1)  Generally. Wireless communication facilities (WCFs) that have received land use approvals from the City as meeting the provisions of the Tualatin Development Code (TDC) at the time, but do not comply with the TDC because it was amended, are nonconforming WCF's. Additionally, wireless communication facilities that no longer comply with development standards due to the adoption of, or amendment to, the City's land use regulations, or annexation of the property into the City. 
(2)  Alternation or Enlargement of Wireless Communication Facilities Prohibited. A nonconforming WCF is allowed to remain, but must not be altered or enlarged, except for the following: 
(a)  Height Increases. If the alteration or enlargement increases the height by less than ten percent or ten feet, whichever is greater. Changes in height are not cumulative; 
(b)  Width Increases. If the alteration or enlargement protrudes less than six feet from the edge of the support structure; 
(c)  Equipment Cabinets. Installing less than the standard number of new equipment cabinets, but not to exceed 4, provided installing of any new cabinets where none exist, or where such cabinets are ten percent or more larger than existing cabinets is not allowed; and 
(d)  Excavation. Any excavation or deployment outside the current site of the tower or base station. 
(Ord. 1414-18; 12-10-18)  
CHAPTER 36 - SUBDIVIDING, PARTITIONS, AND PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS 
 
TDC 36.010. - Purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare while allowing for efficient development of property and to implement the requirements of the Tualatin Development Code, City Ordinances, state law, and other applicable regulations. 
(2)  The provisions in this Chapter will be administered to ensure orderly growth and development, and implement and facilitate the provisions in the Tualatin Community Plan, Tualatin Community Map and capital improvement plans.  
TDC 36.020. - Expedited Land Division. 
An expedited land division, as defined by ORS 197.360(1), provides an alternative to the standard review procedures for land divisions in TDC Chapter 36. When an applicant requests an expedited land division, the application will be processed as provided in ORS 197.360 through ORS 197.380, in lieu of the procedures in TDC Chapter 36.  
TDC 36.030. - Variances and Minor Variances. 
(1)  A person seeking a Variance or Minor Variance to the provisions of this Chapter must submit an application under TDC 33.120 (Variances and Minor Variances) and comply with its terms. 
(2)  Notwithstanding TDC 33.120, Variances or Minor Variances for subdivisions and partitions will be processed as part of the Property Line Adjustment decision, Tentative Partition Plan decision, Tentative Subdivision decision, Tentative Phased Subdivision decision, Tentative Manufactured Dwelling Park, Tentative Subdivision Plan decision, or Tentative Replat decision, as applicable.  
TDC 36.040. - Applications and Submittal Requirements. 
(1)  Applications subject to this Chapter must follow the procedures specified in TDC Chapter 32; however, in case of conflict the procedures specified in TDC Chapter 36 prevail. 
(2)  Additional Submittal Requirements. In addition to the application materials required by TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal), the following application materials are also required to subdivide, partition, or replat land: 
(a)  Subdivision or partition plan map; 
(b)  Proposed plat name, approved by the County Surveyor; 
(c)  The names, addresses, and contact information of the design engineer and surveyor; 
(d)  The date the plan was prepared; 
(e)  North arrow; 
(f)  Scale of drawing; 
(g)  Location of the subdivision or partition by 1-4 Section, Township and Range; 
(h)  Preliminary utility plans for existing and proposed water, sanitary sewer and storm drainage, including the size and grade; 
(i)  Existing and proposed streets (public and private), including location, centerline, right-of-way and pavement width, approximate radius of curves and approximate grades of proposed streets on the subject property and within three hundred feet of the site; 
(j)  An outline plan demonstrating that the adjacent property can be divided in the future in a manner that is consistent with the subdivision plan, and illustrating the connections to transit routes, pedestrian and bike facilities, and accessways to adjacent properties; 
(k)  Easements, including location, width and purpose of all recorded and proposed easements in or abutting the site; 
(l)  Flood areas, including the location of any flood plain, drainage hazard areas and other areas subject to flooding or ponding; 
(m)  Natural resources, including the location of natural features, such as rock outcroppings, wetlands, water courses, creeks, wooded areas and trees having a trunk diameter of eight inches or greater, as measured at a point four feet above ground level, proposed to be removed and to be retained on site; 
(n)  Approximate lot dimensions, including all existing property lines and their lengths and the approximate location and dimensions of all proposed lots; 
(o)  Approximate area of each lot; 
(p)  Proposed lot numbers; 
(q)  Existing structures, including the location and present use of all structures, wells and septic tanks on the site and an indication of which structures, wells and septic tanks are to remain after platting; indicate all City-designated historic landmarks; 
(r)  All lots intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use; 
(s)  A vicinity map showing a minimum one-mile radius; 
(t)  Contour lines with intervals at a minimum of two feet for slopes up to five percent and five feet for slopes over five percent; 
(u)  For subdivisions and phased subdivisions, a completed trip generation estimate on forms provided by the City and a Traffic Impact Analysis; 
(v)  If a variance or minor variance is requested to the dimensional standards of the lots, or the minimum lot size, adequate information to show compliance with the approval criteria in TDC 33.120(5) for a minor variance or TDC 33.120(6) for a variance; 
(w)  A "Service Provider Letter" from Clean Water Services; 
(x)  If a railroad-highway grade crossing provides or will provide the only access to the subject property, the applicant must indicate that fact in the application, and the City must notify the ODOT Rail Division and the railroad company that the application has been received; 
(y)  A completed City fact sheet; 
(z)  A title report for the property(ies) subject to the application; 
(aa)  Other supplementary material as may be required, such as deed restrictions, a statement of ownership, use, covenants, conditions, limitations, and responsibility for maintenance; and 
(bb)  Other information required by the City Manager.  
TDC 36.100. - Property Line Adjustments. 
(1)  Applicability. Property line adjustment approval is required before a property line can be relocated or eliminated. A property line adjustment is required to relocate or eliminate all or a portion of a common property line between two abutting units of land that were lawfully established, as defined by ORS 92.010(3)(a). Property line adjustments cannot be used to create an additional unit of land, or to create units of land that are nonconforming. 
(2)  Procedure Type. A property line adjustment is processed as a Type I procedure under TDC 32.210. 
(3)  Submittal Requirements. In addition to the application materials required by TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal), the following application materials are also required: 
(a)  A copy of recorded deeds for the existing units of land; 
(b)  A site plan, drawn to scale, indicating: 
(i)  The dimensions and areas of the units of land before and after the proposed property line adjustment; and 
(ii)  Setbacks, building separations, lot coverage, vehicular access, and public and private utilities. 
(c)  A copy of the proposed property line adjustment deed containing: 
(i)  The names of the owners; 
(ii)  Legal description of the adjusted lines; 
(iii)  References to original recorded deeds; and 
(iv)  Place for the signatures of all parties, along with proper acknowledgment. 
(4)  Approval Criteria. A property line adjustment must be approved if all of the following criteria are met: 
(a)  The property line adjustment will not create an additional unit of land; 
(b)  The property line adjustment will not create nonconforming units of land or nonconforming development, or increase the degree of nonconformity in existing units of land or existing development; 
(c)  The property line adjustment involves only units of land that were lawfully established, where the instruments creating the units of land have been properly recorded; 
(d)  The property line adjustment is not prohibited by any existing City land use approval, or previous condition of approval, affecting one or both of the units of land; 
(e)  The property line adjustment does not involve the relocation or elimination of any public easement or right-of-way; and 
(f)  The property line adjustment does not adversely affect the availability or access to public and private utilities or streets. 
(5)  Multiple Property Line Adjustments. If more than three property line adjustment applications affecting the same unit of land are proposed within a six month period, the property line adjustments must be processed as follows: 
(a)  When the units of land are within a recorded plat, the property line adjustments affecting the units of land must be by replat; and 
(b)  When the units of land are not within a recorded plat, the property line adjustments affecting the units of land must be by partition. 
(6)  Monumentation. Property line adjustments must be surveyed and monumented as required by state law. 
(7)  Expiration; Recording. 
(a)  Property line adjustment approval expires two years from the effective date, unless a property line adjustment deed is recorded in the deed records of the appropriate county. 
(b)  Multiple property line adjustments processed according to subsection (5) expire as provided in the expiration period specified for replats, partitions, or subdivisions as applicable. 
(c)  Evidence demonstrating that the property line adjustment deed has been recorded with the appropriate county must be provided to the City Manager after recording.  
TDC 36.110. - Tentative Partition Plan. 
(1)  Applicability. Tentative Partition Plan approval is required before land can be divided into three or fewer parcels within a calendar year. When the area of a proposed partition is such that it can be further divided resulting in four or more lots or parcels, the development standards applicable to subdivisions set forth in TDC 36.120 (Tentative Subdivision Plan) apply and any improvements resulting from the application of those standards to the proposed partition must be constructed. 
(2)  Procedure Type. A Tentative Partition Plan is processed as a Type II procedure under TDC 32.220. 
(3)  Submittal Requirements. 
(a)  Prior to submitting an application for a Tentative Partition Plan, the applicant must comply with the pre-application conference requirements in TDC 32.110 (Pre-Application Conference) and Neighborhood/Developer Meeting requirements in TDC 32.120 (Neighborhood/Developer Meetings). 
(b)  In addition to the submittal requirements for a Type II application under TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal), an application for a Tentative Partition Plan must include the information required in TDC 36.040(2)(Additional Submittal Requirements). 
(4)  Approval Criteria. A Tentative Partition Plan must be approved if all of the following criteria are met: 
(a)  The Tentative Partition Plan complies with the standards of this Chapter and with all applicable provisions of the TDC, including, but not limited to the following: 
(i)  Lot standards, including, but not limited to, standards for lot area, lot width and depth, lot frontage, and designation of front and rear lot lines; 
(ii)  City infrastructure standards; and 
(iii)  Any special development standards, including, but not limited to, floodplain development, special setbacks, geological or geotechnical analysis, and vision clearance. 
(b)  The Tentative Partition Plan does not impede the future use or development of the property or adjacent land. 
(c)  Development within the Tentative Partition Plan can be adequately served by City infrastructure. 
(d)  The street system in and adjacent to the Tentative Partition Plan conforms to the Tualatin Transportation System Plan. 
(e)  The street system in and adjacent to the Tentative Partition Plan is designed so as to provide for the safe, orderly, and efficient circulation of traffic into, through, and out of the partition area. 
(f)  The Tentative Partition Plan takes into account the topography and vegetation of the site so the need for variances is minimized to the greatest extent practicable. 
(g)  The layout, size, and dimensions of the parcels within the Tentative Partition Plan take into account the topography and vegetation of the site, such that the least disruption of the site, topography, and vegetation will occur from the reasonable development of the parcels. 
(5)  Effective Date. The effective date of a Tentative Partition Plan approval is the date the notice of decision is mailed. 
(6)  Permit Expiration. Tentative Partition Plan approval expire in two years of the effective date, unless an application for final plat is submitted within two years of the effective date, or an extension is granted under TDC 36.210 (Extension of Approval Decision).  
TDC 36.120. - Tentative Subdivision Plan. 
(1)  Applicability. Tentative Subdivision Plan approval is required before land is divided into four or more lots within a calendar year. For Phased Subdivisions, see TDC 36.130 (Phased Tentative Subdivision Plan). For Manufactured Dwelling Park Subdivisions, see TDC 36.140 (Manufactured Dwelling Park Tentative Subdivision Plan). 
(2)  Procedure Type. A Tentative Subdivision Plan is processed as a Type II procedure under 32.220. 
(3)  Submittal Requirements. 
(a)  Prior to submitting an application for a Tentative Subdivision Plan, the applicant must comply with the pre-application conference requirements in TDC 32.110 (Pre-Application Conference) and Neighborhood/Developer Meeting requirements in TDC 32.120 (Neighborhood/Developer Meetings). 
(b)  In addition to the submittal requirements for a Type II application under TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal), an application for subdivision tentative plan must include the information required in TDC 36.040(2) (Additional Submittal Requirements). 
(4)  Approval Criteria. A Tentative Subdivision Plan must be approved if all of the following criteria are met: 
(a)  The Tentative Subdivision Plan complies with the standards of this Chapter and with all applicable provisions of the TDC, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(i)  Lot standards, including, but not limited to, standards for lot area, lot width and depth, lot frontage and designation of front and rear lot lines. 
(ii)  City infrastructure standards; and 
(iii)  Any special development standards, including, but not limited to, floodplain development, special setbacks, geological or geotechnical analysis, and vision clearance. 
(b)  The Tentative Subdivision Plan does not impede the future use or development of the property or adjacent land. 
(c)  Development within the Tentative Subdivision Plan can be adequately served by City infrastructure. 
(d)  The street system in and adjacent to the Tentative Subdivision Plan conforms to the Tualatin Transportation System Plan. 
(e)  The street system in and adjacent to the Tentative Subdivision Plan is designed so as to provide for the safe, orderly, and efficient circulation of traffic into, through, and out of the subdivision. 
(f)  The Tentative Subdivision Plan provides safe and convenient bicycle and pedestrian access from within the subdivision to adjacent residential areas and transit stops, existing or planned schools, parks, shopping areas, transit stops, employment centers, and other neighborhood amenities. 
(g)  The Tentative Subdivision Plan mitigates impacts to the transportation system consistent with the approved Traffic Impact Analysis, where applicable. 
(h)  The Tentative Subdivision Plan takes into account the topography and vegetation of the site so the need for variances is minimized to the greatest extent practicable. 
(i)  The Tentative Subdivision Plan takes into account the topography and vegetation of the site, such that the least disruption of the site, topography, and vegetation will result from the reasonable development of the lots. 
(5)  Effective Date. The effective date of a Tentative Subdivision Plan approval is the date the notice of decision is mailed. 
(6)  Permit Expiration. Tentative Subdivision Plan approval expires approval expires two years from the effective date, unless an application for final plat is submitted within two years of the effective date, or an extension is granted under TDC 36.210 (Extension of Approval Decision).  
TDC 36.130. - Phased Tentative Subdivision Plan. 
(1)  Applicability. Phased Tentative Subdivision Plan approval is required before land is divided as a phased subdivision. When the subdivision of land is phased, one tentative plan is approved for the entire phased subdivision, and each individual phase receives separate final plat approval. 
(2)  Procedure Type. A Phased Tentative Subdivision Plan is processed as a Type II procedure under TDC 32.220 (Type II Procedure). 
(3)  Submittal Requirements. 
(a)  Prior to submitting an application for a Phased Tentative Subdivision Plan, the applicant must comply with the pre-application conference requirements in TDC 32.110 (Pre-Application Conference) and Neighborhood/Developer Meeting requirements in TDC 32.120 (Neighborhood/Developer Meetings). 
(b)  In addition to the submittal requirements for a Type II application under TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal), an application for a Phased Tentative Subdivision Plan must include the information required in TDC 36.040(2) (Additional Submittal Requirements). 
(c)  An application for a Phased Tentative Subdivision Plan must also include: 
(i)  A phasing plan that indicates the tentative boundaries of each phase; 
(ii)  The sequencing of the phases; 
(iii)  The tentative configuration of lots in each phase; and 
(iv)  A plan for the construction of all required city infrastructure in each phase. 
(4)  Approval Criteria. A Phased Tentative Subdivision Plan must be approved if all of the following criteria are met: 
(a)  The Phased Tentative Subdivision Plan meets all of the criteria for Tentative Subdivision Plan approval in TDC 36.110 (Tentative Subdivision); 
(b)  Connectivity for streets and City utilities between each phase ensures the orderly and efficient construction of required public improvements among all phases; 
(c)  Each phase is substantially and functionally self-contained and self-sustaining with regard to required public improvements; and 
(d)  Each phase is designed in such a manner that all phases support the infrastructure requirements for the phased subdivision as a whole. 
(5)  Modification Pursuant to Final Plat Approval. If the approval of a final plat for a phase of a phased subdivision requires the change of a boundary of a subsequent phase, or a change to the conditions of approval, the tentative phased subdivision plan must be modified prior to approval of the final plat. 
(6)  Effective Date. The effective date of a Phased Subdivision Plan approval is the date the notice of decision is mailed. 
(7)  Permit Expiration. Tentative Phased Subdivision plan approval expires as follows: 
(a)  The first phase expires two years of from the effective date, unless an application for final plat is submitted or an extension is granted under TDC 36.210 (Extension of Approval Decision); and 
(b)  All subsequent phases expire ten years from the effective date, and an extension under TDC 36.210 (Extension of Approval Decision) is not available for subsequent phases of a phased subdivision.  
TDC 36.140. - Manufactured Dwelling Park Tentative Subdivision Plan. 
(1)  Applicability. A manufactured dwelling park or mobile home park that existed as of July 2, 2001, must receive Manufactured Dwelling Park Tentative Subdivision Plan approval before the land is divided as a manufactured dwelling park or mobile home park subdivision. 
(2)  Procedure Type. A Manufactured Dwelling Park Tentative Subdivision Plan is processed as a Type II procedure under TDC 32.220 (Type II Procedure). 
(3)  Submittal Requirements. 
(a)  Prior to submitting an application for a Manufactured Dwelling Park Tentative Subdivision Plan, the applicant must comply with the pre-application conference requirements in TDC 32.110 (Pre-Application Conference) and Neighborhood/Developer Meeting requirements in TDC 32.120 (Neighborhood/Developer Meetings). 
(b)  In addition to the submittal requirements for a Type II application under TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal), an application for a Manufactured Dwelling Park Tentative Subdivision Plan must include the information required in TDC 36.040(2) (Additional Submittal Requirements). 
(4)  Approval Criteria. A Manufactured Dwelling Park Tentative Subdivision Plan must be approved if all of the following criteria are met: 
(a)  The proposed area to be subdivided is in compliance with the development standards for manufactured dwelling parks or mobile home parks applicable at the time the park was approved, or the park is a nonconforming use. For purposes of this subsection, a park is in compliance if the City did not issue a written notice of noncompliance prior to before July 2, 2001; 
(b)  The Manufactured Dwelling Park Tentative Subdivision Plan does not increase or decrease the number of lots, as defined in ORS 446.003, approved for the park, change the external boundary lines or setback requirements, or make other development changes; provided, however, the tentative manufactured dwelling park subdivision plan may provide for a reduction in the number of lots if the reduction involves only lots that have never been used for the placement of manufactured dwellings; 
(c)  The Manufactured Dwelling Park Tentative Subdivision Plan restricts the use of lots in the subdivision to the installation of manufactured dwellings, and restricts any other property in the subdivision to use as common property, as defined in ORS 94.550, or for public purposes; 
(d)  The applicant has recorded with the county the waiver of right to remonstrance required under ORS 92.835; and 
(e)  The Manufactured Dwelling Park Tentative Subdivision Plan is in compliance with the applicable requirements of ORS 92.010 to 92.179. 
(5)  Conditions of Approval. Conditions of approval of a Manufactured Dwelling Park Tentative Subdivision Plan may only include conditions that: 
(a)  Were conditions of the original manufactured dwelling park approval; and 
(b)  Are required by ORS 92.830 to 92.845. 
(6)  Effective Date. The effective date of a Manufactured Dwelling Park Tentative Subdivision Plan approval is the date the notice of decision is mailed. 
(7)  Permit Expiration. Manufactured Dwelling Park Tentative Subdivision Plan approval expires two years from the effective date, unless an application for final plat is submitted within two years of the effective date, or an extension is granted under TDC 36.210 (Extension of Approval Decision).  
TDC 36.150. - Replat. 
(1)  Applicability. A replat is required to reconfigure lots or parcels and public easements in a recorded partition or subdivision plat, to increase or decrease the number of lots in a subdivision, or where multiple property line adjustments require a replat. Tentative Replat Plan approval is required before a replat can occur. 
(2)  Procedure Type. A Tentative Replat Plan is processed as a Type II procedure under 32.220. 
(3)  Submittal Requirements. 
(a)  Prior to submitting an application for a Tentative Replat Plan, the applicant must comply with the pre-application conference requirements in TDC 32.110 (Pre-Application Conference) and Neighborhood/Developer Meeting requirements in TDC 32.120 (Neighborhood/Developer Meetings). 
(b)  In addition to the submittal requirements for a Type II application under TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal), an application for a Tentative Replat Plan must include the information required in TDC 36.040(2) (Additional Submittal Requirements). 
(c)  If the Tentative Replat Plan will vacate an easement, the plan must show the easement proposed to be vacated. 
(4)  Approval Criteria. A Tentative Replat Plan must be approved if all of the following criteria are met: 
(a)  The Tentative Replat Plan does not propose to vacate any public street or road, or any recorded covenants or restrictions; 
(b)  The Tentative Replat Plan will not create nonconforming units of land or nonconforming development, or increase the degree of nonconformity in existing units of land or development; 
(c)  The Tentative Replat Plan complies with the standards of this Chapter and with all applicable provisions of the TDC; 
(d)  The Tentative Replat Plan complies with all applicable provisions of ORS Chapter 92; 
(e)  The Tentative Replat Plan is not prohibited by any existing City land use approval or previous condition of approval, affecting one or both of the units of land; and 
(f)  The Tentative Replat Plan does not adversely affect the availability of, or access to, City infrastructure or public or private utilities or streets. 
(5)  Notice to Utilities. When a utility easement is proposed to be realigned, reduced in width, or eliminated by a Tentative Replat Plan, notice of the Tentative Replat Plan application must be mailed to all affected utility companies or public agencies. Any utility company that desires to maintain an easement that would be realigned, reduced in width, or eliminated by a proposed Tentative Replat Plan must notify the City Manager in writing within 14 days of the mailing date of the notice. If an objection to the realignment, reduction in width, or elimination of an easement is received within the 14 day period, the utility easement will not be realigned, reduced in width, or eliminated. 
(6)  Effective Date. The effective date of a Tentative Replat Plan approval is the date the notice of decision is mailed. 
(7)  Permit Expiration. Tentative Replat Plan approval expires two years from the effective date, unless an application for final plat is submitted within two years of the effective date, or an extension is granted under TDC 36.210 (Extension of Approval Decision).  
TDC 36.160. - Final Plat. 
(1)  Applicability. Final plat approval is required before a final plat of a partition, subdivision, phased subdivision, and manufactured dwelling park subdivision is recorded. 
(2)  Procedure. Final plats are exempt from the procedures TDC 32.220 (Type II Procedure), and instead follow the procedures set forth in this section. Final plats must be reviewed by the City prior to recording with county. 
(3)  Submittal Requirements. Applications for final plat must be submitted prior to expiration of tentative plan approval. 
(4)  Approval Criteria. A final plat must be approved if all of the following criteria are met: 
(a)  The final plat is in substantial conformance with the approved tentative plan or tentative replat plan. 
(b)  For phased subdivisions in commercial and industrial zones, unless the divergence from the tentative plan would require a modification of any condition of approval, the final plat for each phase may diverge from the tentative plan and still be in substantial conformance with the approved tentative plan for that phase if there is: 
(i)  A decrease or increase in the number of lots within the particular phase; 
(ii)  A change in the location or width of public rights-of-way within the specific phase; provided, however, the change does not materially affect connectivity, does not increase or decrease the number of connections to streets set forth in the tentative plan, does not change the point of connection with existing or planned streets, and does not change the street designation from one classification to another; 
(iii)  A change in the location or width of a public utility easement, so long as the change does not adversely affect connectivity with constructed or planned utilities; 
(iv)  A decrease in the number of phases; or 
(v)  An increase or decrease in the area of a specific phase. 
(c)  If the approval of a final plat for a specific phase requires the change of a boundary of a subsequent phase, or a change to the conditions of approval, the tentative plan must be modified first to reflect the changes. 
(d)  The final plat complies with all applicable provisions of ORS Chapter 92. 
(e)  Conditions of approval imposed on the tentative plan or tentative replat have been met; 
(f)  The final plat dedicates, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances and without any reservation or restriction other than reversionary rights upon vacation, all City infrastructure, if such dedication is required by the Tualatin Development Code or as a condition of approval; 
(g)  The City Manager has certified that: 
(i)  All required public improvements and private improvements are completed and approved; or 
(ii)  The owner of the property subject to the final plat has executed and filed with the City an Improvement Agreement under TDC 36.320 (Improvement Agreement for Public Improvements), requiring all City infrastructure and private improvements to be completed within 24 months of the final plat approval. 
(5)  Approval or Rejection of Final Plat. 
(a)  If the City Manager finds that the final plat does not meet the approval criteria set forth in subsection (3) of this section, the City Manager must notify the applicant of the deficiencies and afford the applicant opportunity to comply. Rejection of a final plat does not affect tentative plan or tentative replat approval. 
(b)  If the City Manager finds that the final plat meets the approval criteria set forth in subsection (3) of this section, the City Manager must endorse approval on the final plat, and the applicant may process and record the final plat. 
(6)  Recording of Final Plat. The approved final plat must be recorded within ten years of the effective date of the tentative plan or tentative replat approval. No building permits for development of lots or parcels will be issued until the final plat is recorded. 
(7)  Operation and Maintenance of Facilities and Common Property. Where facilities and common property, including, but not limited to, private streets, parking areas, privately owned pedestrian walkways and bikeways, and landscape strips, are included within the development, the recorded covenants, conditions, and restrictions for the development must include a provision that such facilities and common property be perpetually operated and maintained by a property owners' association. Each property owner must be a member of the property owners' association. The association must have the power to levy and assess against privately owned property in the development all necessary costs for operation and maintenance of such facilities and common property. The documents creating such association must be approved by the City Manager. 
(8)  Operation and Maintenance of Flag Lot Accessways. Where a flag lot accessway serving more than one lot or parcel is included within a development, reciprocal and irrevocable access rights for all lots or parcels served by the flag lot accessway must be included on the final plat and in the deeds for the individual lots or parcels. Maintenance of the flag lot accessway must be shared between the owners of the properties served by the flag lot accessway and an agreement requiring maintenance of the flag lot accessway must be recorded in the deeds for the individual lots or parcels.  
TDC 36.200. - Modification of Prior Approval. 
(1)  Applicability. The approval of a tentative partition plan, tentative subdivision plan, tentative phased subdivision plan, manufactured dwelling park tentative subdivision plan, or tentative replat may be modified after its effective date if the proposed modification meets the criteria set forth in this section. Modifications that do not meet the criteria in this section require submittal of a new application for tentative partition plan, tentative subdivision plan, tentative phased subdivision plan, manufactured dwelling park tentative subdivision plan, or tentative replat. 
(2)  Procedure Type. Modifications pursuant to this section are processed as a Type I procedure under TDC 32.210. 
(3)  Submittal Requirements. In addition to the submittal requirements under TDC 32.220, an application for a modification must include the following: 
(a)  For modification of a tentative partition plan approval, the information required under TDC 36.100(3)(Submittal Requirements). 
(b)  For modification of a tentative subdivision plan approval, the information required under TDC 36.110(3)(Submittal Requirements). 
(c)  For modification of a phased tentative subdivision plan approval, the information required under TDC 36.120(3)(Submittal Requirements). 
(d)  For modification of a tentative manufactured dwelling park subdivision plan approval, the information required under TDC 36.130(3)(Submittal Requirements). 
(e)  For modification of a tentative replat approval, the information required under TDC 36.140(3)(Submittal Requirements). 
(4)  Criteria. An application for modification pursuant to this section must be approved if all of the following criteria are met: 
(a)  The proposed modification is not substantially inconsistent with the conditions of the original approval; and 
(b)  Accessways to adjacent streets or properties must not be relocated more than 25 feet from the location approved on the subdivision plan. In addition, accessways must not be relocated to a different adjacent property. 
(c)  Stub streets must not be changed to non-through streets. 
(d)  Culs-de-sac must not be changed to stub streets. 
(e)  Density decreases must not exceed a 20 percent reduction in the total number of approved lots or dwelling units. 
(f)  The proposed modification must not result in a change or deletion of a condition of approval of the subdivision plan approval. 
(g)  The proposed modification will not result in significant changes to the physical appearance of the development, the use of the site, and the impacts on surrounding properties. 
(5)  Expiration. The modification does not affect the expiration of the original decision.  
TDC 36.210. - Extension of Approval Decision. 
(1)  Applicability. The City Manager may grant a one-year extension of a Tentative Partition Plan decision, Tentative Subdivision decision, Tentative Phased Subdivision decision, Tentative Manufactured Dwelling Park Tentative Subdivision Plan decision, and Tentative Replat decision. 
(2)  Procedure Type. Extensions pursuant to this section are processed as a Type I procedure under TDC 32.210. 
(3)  Criteria. An application for an extension of Tentative Partition Plan decision, Tentative Subdivision decision, Tentative Phased Subdivision decision, Tentative Manufactured Dwelling Park Tentative Subdivision Plan decision, or Tentative Replat decision will be approved if all of the following criteria are met: 
(a)  There have been no significant changes in any conditions, ordinances, regulations, or other standards of the City or applicable agencies that affect the previously approved subdivision so as to warrant its resubmittal; and 
(b)  If the applicant did not neglect the site, its maintenance, or otherwise allowed the site to become blighted. 
(4)  Number of Extensions. The City Manager cannot grant more than a single one-year extension.  
TDC 36.300. - Special Platting Standards for Greenways and Natural Areas. 
Lots and parcels for Greenways and Natural Area are lots or parcels created as part of a partition, subdivision, phased subdivision, manufactured dwelling park subdivision, or replat for the purpose of preservation and management of natural resources through the sale or transfer to a public agency or a non-profit entity. As used in this section, natural resources include, but are not limited to, areas of wildlife habitat, riparian areas, areas of sensitive ecological areas, or areas that contain rare or endangered species. Conservation lots or parcels proposed as part of a partition, subdivision, phased subdivision, manufactured dwelling park subdivision, or replat will be approved subject to the following: 
(1)  A greenway or natural area lot or parcel must be primarily undeveloped and in a natural state. 
(2)  A greenway or natural area lot or parcel has no minimum standards for lot area, width, depth, or frontage. 
(3)  A greenway or natural area lot or parcel must be designated as such on the tentative plan and the final plat. 
(4)  The deed conveying the greenway or natural area lot or parcel must contain a covenant that requires long-term preservation and management of the lot or parcel as a significant natural resource.  
TDC 36.310. - Approval of Streets and Rights of Way. 
(1)  The plat of a partition, subdivision, phased subdivision, manufactured dwelling park subdivision, or replat must provide for the dedication of all public rights-of-way, reserve strips, easements, tracts and accessways, together with public improvements therein approved and accepted for public use. 
(a)  The applicant must comply with the requirements of TDC Chapter 74, Public Improvement Requirements. 
(b)  The applicant must comply with the design and construction standards set forth in the Public Works Construction Code. 
(c)  The applicant must provide evidence to the City that property intended to be dedicated to the public is free of all liens, encumbrances, claims and encroachments. 
(2)  The plat of a partition, subdivision, phased subdivision, manufactured dwelling park subdivision, or replat must indicate the ownership and location of private easements and tracts, and the ownership and location of private improvements within public rights-of-way and easements. 
(3)  Approval of the final plat of a partition, subdivision, phased subdivision, manufactured dwelling park subdivision, or replat by the City constitutes acceptance of all public rights-of-way, reserve strips, easements, tracts and accessways shown thereon, as well as public facilities located therein.  
TDC 36.320. - Improvement Agreement for Public Improvements. 
(1)  An applicant may submit the subdivision plat for City acceptance prior to installing all required public improvements if the applicant submits a signed Improvement Agreement and written assurances, to City Manager. 
(2)  The Improvement Agreement must be in a form approved by the City and contain the following provisions: 
(a)  A promise by the owner to complete the required public improvements within 24 months of final plat approval. 
(b)  Monetary assurance for the full value of all required public improvements in one of the following forms: 
(i)  A Corporate Surety Bond issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the State of Oregon; or 
(ii)  A cash deposit; or 
(iii)  Cash in escrow. 
(c)  A statement that if the owner fails to perform all of the conditions of the Improvement Agreement that the City may collect on the assurance and pursue any and all remedies available to it at law and in equity to enforce the Improvement Agreement. 
(3)  The value of the monetary assurance must be based upon of the costs of the City completing the public improvements and include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  Related engineering; 
(b)  Right-of-way acquisition; 
(c)  Easement acquisition and public contracting costs; 
(d)  Labor and materials; and 
(e)  Incidental expenses. 
(4)  In the event the applicant fails to perform all provisions of the Improvement Agreement, the City is authorized, but not required, to complete unfinished or improperly constructed portions of the required public improvements and to use the assurance for reimbursement to cover the City's costs, including bringing any necessary action to collect such funds. 
(a)  If the amount of the assurance exceeds the actual cost and expense incurred by the City to satisfy the provisions of the Compliance Agreement upon the applicant's failure to do so, the City will release the balance. 
(b)  If the amount of the assurance is less than the actual costs incurred by the City, the owner is liable to the City for such additional costs. A City lien must be placed on the subdivision still owned by the owner in an amount which represents the difference between the City costs and the amount received by the City pursuant to the applicant's assurance. 
(5)  If the applicant fails to perform under the provisions of the Improvement Agreement the City may, as an additional but not exclusive remedy, refuse to issue building permits for properties subject to the Improvement Agreement. 
(6)  The remedies provided by this section for violation of an Improvement Agreement are in addition to any other remedies available to the City at law and in equity.  
TDC 36.330. - Issuance of Building Permits. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, the City must not issue a building permit or permits to connect to City utility services for lots within a subdivision or partition plat until the City Manager has determined that the corresponding public improvements are substantially complete to assure that the health and safety of the citizens will not be endangered from inadequate public facilities. 
(2)  Subject to submittal and approval of, and compliance with, the subdivision plan, as well as sufficient security to assure completion of the public portions of the subdivision, the applicant or individual lot owners within the subdivision may receive a building permit or utility service for not more than 50 percent of the platted lots within the subdivision prior to: 
(a)  The completion of all required public improvements in accordance with the Public Works Construction Code; and 
(b)  The acceptance of the public improvements by resolution of the City Council. 
(3)  The City must not issue building permits or utility service approval for any lot which together with previously approved lots would exceed 50 percent of the platted lots within the subdivision until: 
(a)  All required public improvements have been completed in accordance with the Public Works Construction Code; and 
(b)  The public improvements have been accepted by resolution of the City Council. 
(4)  City approval for use of a public improvement prior to the final approval and acceptance by the City of the subdivision plat does not constitute a release or waiver of any security which has been filed to assure compliance with the subdivision plan approval or any related agreements. 
(5)  For a subdivision or partition in commercial, institutional, or manufacturing zones (planning districts) or multi-family residential developments which require Architectural Review approval, the City Manager may authorize building permits to be issued prior to the public improvements being substantially complete provided the following conditions are satisfied: 
(a)  A Public Works Permit for the public improvements has been issued; 
(b)  An Architectural Review for the development has been approved; 
(c)  The subdivision or partition plat is recorded; 
(d)  All easements and dedications required of any development approval have been recorded; and 
(e)  Building permits are conditioned to deny occupancy until the public improvements in the subdivision are complete and are accepted by resolution of the City Council.  
TDC 36.340. - Existing Structures and Appurtenances. 
(1)  Any existing structures proposed to be demolished must be removed prior to the City approval of the subdivision or partition plat. Any structures determined to be a historic City landmark must be reviewed in accordance with TDC Chapter 68. 
(2)  Any existing wells must be abandoned in the manner prescribed by State and County regulations prior to the City approval of the subdivision or partition plat. 
(3)  Any existing underground fuel or oil tanks, septic tanks and similar underground storage tanks must be removed or filled as required by the Department of Environmental Quality prior to the City's approval of the subdivision or partition plat.  
TDC 36.400. - Lot Dimensions. 
(1)  Double Frontage and Reverse Frontage. 
(a)  Double frontage and reversed frontage lots must be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from railroad tracks or crossings, traffic arterials or collectors, adjacent nonresidential uses, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(b)  Residences on double frontage lots must be oriented towards the lower classification street adjacent to the lot: 
(i)  Local street instead of collector or arterial; and 
(ii)  Collector street instead of arterial. 
(c)  If two local streets are adjacent to a series of adjacent double frontage lots, then residences on all such lots must be oriented towards the same local street. 
(2)  Large Lots. When subdividing, partitioning or adjusting land into large lots which at some future time are possible to be resubdivided, repartitioned, or readjusted to a size which more closely conforms to the other lots in the subdivision or area, the applicant must submit a future streets plan. The future streets plan must indicate that proposed large lots be of such size and shape and contain such building site restrictions as will provide for the extension and opening of streets at such intervals and the subsequent division of any such large lot into smaller size lots which meet the requirements of the TDC. 
(3)  Side Lot Lines. The side lines of lots, as far as practicable, must run at right angles to the street upon which the lots face. 
(4)  Lot Size and Shape. The lot size, width, shape and orientation must be appropriate for the location of the lot and comply with the zone (planning district) standards for the type of development and use contemplated. 
(5)  Frontage on Public Streets. All lots created after September 1, 1979 must abut a public street, except for the following: 
(a)  Secondary condominium lots, which must conform to TDC 73C and TDC 75; 
(b)  Lots and tracts created to preserve wetlands, greenways, Natural Areas and Stormwater Quality Control Facilities identified by TDC Chapters 71, 72, and the Surface Water Management Ordinance, TMC Chapter 3-5 respectively, or for the purpose of preserving park lands in accordance with the Parks and Recreation Master Plan; 
(c)  Residential lots where frontage along a public street is impractical due to physical site restraints. Access to lots must occur via a shared driveway within a tract. The tract must have no adverse impacts to surrounding properties or roads and may only be approved if it meets the following criteria: 
(i)  Does not exceed 250 feet in length; 
(ii)  If the tract exceeds 150 feet in length, it has a turnaround facility as approved by the Fire Marshal for fire and life safety; 
(iii)  The tract does not serve more than six lots; 
(iv)  A public street is not needed to provide access to other adjacent properties as required by TDC Chapter 74; 
(v)  A recorded document providing for the ownership, use rights, and allocation for liability for construction and maintenance has been submitted to the City Manager prior to issuance of a building permit; and 
(vi)  Access easements have been provided to all properties needing access to the driveway. 
(d)  Lots in the Manufacturing Park Zone Planning District which have access to the public right-of-way in accordance with TDC 73C and TDC Chapter 75 via permanent access easement over one or more adjoining properties, creating uninterrupted vehicle and pedestrian access between the subject lot and the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 1427-19 , § 16, 11-25-19)  
TDC 36.410. - Small Lot Subdivisions for RL and RML Zones. 
(1)  Conditional Use Permit Required. 
(a)  A conditional use permit is required before lots smaller than 6,500 square feet are permitted in RL and RML zones. An applicant must comply with the provisions of TDC 33.040 (Condition Use Permit). 
(b)  In addition to the submittal requirements for a Conditional Use Permit in TDC 33.040, a Tree Survey is required. The purpose of the tree survey is to show that, by utilizing the small lot subdivision provisions, a greater number of trees can be preserved than would be possible without use of the small lot subdivision provisions. 
(2)  Small Lot Standards. In addition to the general subdivision requirement in TDC 36.120, a subdivision that includes the small lots must also meet the following standards: 
(a)  RL Zone. In the RL zone, small lot subdivisions must comply with the following: 
(i)  Small lots must be no less than 5,000 and no more than 6,499 square feet; 
(ii)  Maximum building coverage for lots between 5,000 and 6,499 square feet must be 45 percent and for lots greater than 6,499 square feet must be 35 percent; 
(iii)  Minimum lot width must be at least 30 feet. Lots that have frontage on a public street must have a minimum lot width of 50 feet or 30 feet for lots on a cul-de-sac bulb. For flag lots, the minimum lot width at the street must be sufficient to comply with at least the minimum access requirements contained in TDC 73C; 
(iv)  The minimum number of lots for the entire subdivision is 10; 
(v)  The small lots must be part of a subdivision that contains lots of at least 7,000 square feet that are necessitated by trees, steep terrain or other topographic constraints. The number of small lots cannot exceed 35 percent of the total number of lots in the subdivision; 
(vi)  When a small lot abuts an existing lot or is across from a lot on a local street of a City-approved and recorded subdivision or partition, the small lot must be no more than 500 square feet smaller than the size of the abutting lot or lot across the street. For purposes of this subsection, a small lot is directly across the street if one or more of its lot lines—when extended in a straight line across the local street—intersect the property line of the lot across the street; 
(vii)  When a subdivision is constructed in phases, a small lot in a later phase may abut or be directly across a local street from an existing lot in an earlier phase; and 
(viii)  When a tract or easement is between a small lot and an existing lot in a City approved and recorded subdivision or partition, the small lot must be separated from the existing lot by at least 50 feet. 
(b)  RML Zone. In the RML zone, small lot subdivisions must comply with the following: 
(i)  Small lots must be no less than 4,500 square feet; 
(ii)  Maximum building coverage must not exceed 45 percent; 
(iii)  Minimum lot width must be at least 30 feet. Lots that have frontage on a public street must have a minimum lot width of 50 feet or 30 feet for lots on a cul-de-sac bulb. For flag lots, the minimum lot width at the street must be sufficient to comply with at least the minimum access requirements contained in TDC 73C; 
(iv)  Front yard setback must be a minimum of 20 feet to the garage and 12 feet to the house; 
(v)  Side yard setback must be a minimum of five feet; 
(vi)  On corner lots, the setback for yards adjacent to streets must be a minimum of 20 feet to the garage and 12 feet to the house in the yard where a driveway provides access to a street other than an alley and must be a minimum of 12 feet in the yard where no driveway access exists; and 
(vii)  Rear yard setback must be a minimum of 15 feet.  
TDC 36.420. - Increased Density for Greenway and Natural Area Dedications in the RL zone. 
In the RL zone, creation of single-family lots smaller than 6,500 square feet will be permitted if land is dedicated for a Greenway or Natural Area in accordance with the following standards. 
(1)  Number of Lots. One small lot is permitted for each 6,500 square foot Greenway or Natural Area Lot created in the subdivision or partition process. 
(2)  Minimum Lot Size and Location. The small lot must: 
(a)  Be no less than 5,000 square feet and no more than 5,999.99 square feet; 
(b)  Have an average lot width of at least 30 feet; 
(c)  Lots that have frontage on a public street must have a minimum lot width of 50 feet or 30 feet for lots on a cul-de-sac bulb; 
(d)  Have a maximum building coverage of 45 percent; 
(e)  When a small lot abuts an existing lot or is across from a lot on a local street of a City-approved and recorded subdivision or partition, the small lot must be no more than 500 square feet smaller than the size of the abutting lot or lot across the street. For purposes of this subsection, a small lot is directly across the street if one or more of its lot lines—when extended in a straight line across the local street—intersect the property line of the lot across the street; 
(f)  When a tract or easement is between a small lot and an existing lot in a City approved and recorded subdivision or partition, the small lot must be separated from the existing lot by at least 50 feet; and 
(g)  When a subdivision is constructed in phases, a small lot in a later phase may abut or be directly across a local street from an existing lot in an earlier phase. 
(3)  Maximum Density. The subdivision's or partition's density, net of the Greenway or Natural Area lots, must not exceed 7.5 dwelling units per acre. 
(4)  Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lots. Each Greenway or Natural Area Lot in the development must be located wholly in: 
(a)  Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or 
(b)  Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor. 
(5)  Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural Area Lot must be one of the following: 
(a)  Dedicated to the City at the City's option; or 
(b)  Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to another public entity; or 
(c)  Dedicated to a non-profit conservation organization; or 
(d)  Retained in private ownership. 
(6)  Ownership Considerations. The City will consider at a minimum the following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway or Natural Area Lot, and other factors may be considered: 
(a)  Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway, pedestrian or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other public facility; 
(b)  Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more significant trees; 
(c)  Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a unique or intrinsically valuable element; 
(d)  Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties; 
(e)  Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility; 
(f)  Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need; 
(g)  Does the lot contain environmental hazards; 
(h)  Geologic stability of the lot; and 
(i)  Future maintenance costs for the lot. 
(Ord. 1427-19 , § 17, 11-25-19)  
TDC 36.500. - Enforcement and Penalties. 
(1)  The City Manager is responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(2)  It is a civil infraction to violate to: 
(a)  Violate any of the provisions of this Chapter; or 
(b)  Selling, offering to sell, contracting to sell land or an interest in land, contrary to the provisions of this Chapter, or contrary to the subdivision or partition plat, or the survey map of the property line adjustment. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18)  
CHAPTER 38 - SIGN REGULATIONS 
 
TDC 38.010. - Title. 
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Sign Regulation Chapter" of the Tualatin Development Code. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96)  
TDC 38.020. - Authority. 
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority delegated to the City of Tualatin under the Oregon Constitution Article XI, Section two and the City of Tualatin Charter of 1967, as amended. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96)  
TDC 38.030. - Purpose and Intent. 
(1)  The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to: 
(a)  implement the Sign Objectives in TDC Chapter 20; 
(b)  ensure orderly signage; and 
(c)  establish reasonable regulations for sign design, construction, installation, repair and maintenance. 
(2)  The regulations may result in a reduction in an owner's desired level of signage. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96)  
TDC 38.040. - Jurisdiction. 
This Chapter applies to signs within the City Limits and all the planning districts of the City of Tualatin. Other regulations of the City may also apply to signs. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96)  
TDC 38.050. - Exempt Signs. 
The following signs are exempt from the regulations of this Chapter, but may be subject to other regulations of the City. 
(1)  Signs authorized and installed by the Unified Sewerage Agency or public utilities, such as electricity, natural gas, telephone and cable television, which are directly related to utility facilities in the public right-of-way and easements, and which aid public safety, identify the location of underground or aboveground facilities, or assist the public utility in repairing or maintaining its facilities. Signs erected for office uses, storage yards and other primary activities of the agency or company are not exempt. 
(2)  Signs erected by the City of Tualatin or the Tualatin Development Commission. 
(3)  Signs and traffic control devices erected by the State of Oregon or the counties of Washington or Clackamas in the public right-of-way or public easements for traffic control, traffic safety or public works construction purposes. 
(4)  Signs not legible from public rights-of-way or from outdoor areas open to the public, such as parking lots, outdoor hallways and pass-throughs. 
(5)  Signs inside a building, except window signs. 
(6)  Signs affixed to vehicles where the communicative purpose is incidental to the use as a vehicle. 
(7)  Garage sale signs, erected in accordance with Ordinance No. 554-81, as amended. 
(8)  Street addresses. 
(9)  "Neighborhood Watch" and "Block Home" signs. 
(10)  City-awarded plaques related to historic resources and heritage trees. 
(11)  "No parking," "handicapped/disabled parking" and "car pool/van pool" signs. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96)  
TDC 38.060. - Sign Permit Required. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2), no person shall erect, construct, modify, relocate, use or replace a sign, change a sign face, or alter a sign or sign structure unless a sign permit and any required building permit and electrical permit have been issued. 
(2)  The following signs are not required to obtain a sign permit; however, they shall comply with applicable sign regulations: 
(a)  Exempt signs in accordance with TDC 38.050; 
(b)  A directory sign's change of readerboard copy of two inches or less in height; 
(c)  Lawn signs; 
(d)  Temporary window signs and displays that do not meet the definition of a sign, for example, murals; 
(e)  Inlaid floor signs in the Mixed Use Commercial District; and 
(f)  Directional signs in the Mixed Use Commercial District. 
(3)  A separate sign permit application shall be submitted for each sign erected, constructed, modified, relocated, replaced, face changed or structurally altered and for sign repair that includes these activities. Sign maintenance requires no permit. All proposed work on a sign shall be shown in the sign permit application. 
(4)  When required by the Oregon Building Code or the Building Official, a separate building permit must be obtained from the City for the erection, construction, modification, relocation, replacement, change of sign face or alteration of a sign or sign structure. 
(5)  When required by the State Electrical Code or the Building Official, an electrical permit shall be obtained from the issuing authority before connecting an electrical sign to a source of electricity. The electrical components of signs shall meet the applicable electrical standards as shown by certification from those testing laboratories approved by the State of Oregon as meeting the testing standards for electrical safety as required by Oregon Revised Statutes 479.510—479.855 and Oregon Administrative Rule 918-330-000, as constituted on the effective date of this ordinance or as may hereafter be amended. 
(6)  Building and electrical permits shall be applied for in accordance with the procedures of the issuing agency, provided such permits are not issued until a sign permit has been issued. 
(7)  The City Manager may require a sign permit application be submitted for each sign on a property required to have a permit if no permit for such sign has been previously issued. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96; Ord. 1176-04, 11-22-04; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 6, 6-22-20)  
TDC 38.070. - Sign Permit Process. 
(1)  Sign permits are subject to the review procedures in TDC Chapter 32 (Procedures) and the sign application requirements of TDC Chapter 33 (Applications). A person may apply for a sign permit and any required building permit and/or electrical permit concurrently. A decision on the sign permit shall be issued first, followed by decisions on the related building or electrical permits. 
(2)  A sign permit application form, checksheet and instruction sheet shall be established and made available by the City Manager. Sign permit applications which do not provide the information required by this ordinance, the application form, checksheet and instruction sheet may be rejected by the City Manager. The City Manager shall determine if an application provides the required information. 
(3)  A complete sign permit application shall be submitted to and reviewed by the City Manager. The application is not complete unless the application fee is submitted with the application. The application shall be approved, approved with conditions or denied by the City Manager, whose decision is final. The City Manager shall not approve a sign permit to erect any new freestanding or wall signs on a tax lot with one or more nonconforming freestanding or wall signs erected on it unless the statement in TDC 35.200(3) (Nonconforming Situations) appears on the sign permit. An application for a sign that is erected prior to submitting the application and does not meet the requirements of this Chapter shall be denied. 
(4)  Where a sign permit is required, a sign contractor registered with the State of Oregon Construction Contractors Board shall be the applicant. A person, other than the registered sign contractor, may deliver and submit the application to the City Manager. The application shall contain or include the following information: 
(a)  Name, mailing address and telephone number of: 
(i)  The land and building owners or authorized agents, 
(ii)  The company and a contact person for which the sign is intended, and 
(iii)  The sign contractor company and a contact person; 
(b)  The sign contractor's Construction Contractors Board Number; 
(c)  The signatures of the land and building owners and the sign contractor applicant; 
(d)  Tax map, lot number and street address of the property for which the sign is intended; 
(e)  A site plan drawn to scale showing the proposed location of the sign, existing signs and their heights, widths, face areas and percentage of wall area, property lines, distance of the sign to the property lines, vehicle access points and driveways, the dripline of trees if the proposed sign is to be within five feet of the dripline of a tree and the outline of existing and proposed structures on the property; 
(f)  Two sets of clearly legible blueprints, ink drawings or photocopies of the plans and specifications for the proposed sign drawn to scale; 
(g)  Applications for wall signs shall include elevations drawn to scale, including dimensions (height and width), of the owned or leased wall to which the sign is to be attached. Such elevations shall show the building owner's designated sign band; 
(h)  The sign permit application fee; and 
(i)  Other information requested by the City Manager, including but not limited to recorded easements, property line dimensions and the location of on-site and abutting sidewalks. 
(5)  After a complete sign permit application has been submitted and accepted, the applicant may request in writing that the application be withdrawn. The City Manager may return the application, and reimbursement of the application fee, if any, shall be in accordance with TDC 38.080. 
(6)  If the work authorized by the sign permit is not completed within 90 days after the date of sign permit issuance, the permit shall expire and be null and void. Upon written request of the applicant, submitted to the City Manager prior to the expiration date, one 90-day extension of the sign permit approval may be granted by the City Manager if there have been no amendments to the specific sign regulations that applied to the proposed sign at the time the sign permit was first approved. The City Manager's decision shall be in writing and mailed to the applicant. As used in this subsection "completed" means the work performed meets the approved sign permit and any conditions attached thereto. 
(7)  The City Manager may revoke any sign permit where there has been a violation of the provisions of this Chapter or a misrepresentation of fact on the permit application, the materials submitted as part of the application, or both. 
(8)  The City Manager may issue a sign permit, if a sign permit is required, to erect a temporary sign on a property with no building, provided the proposed temporary sign meets all applicable regulations. 
(9)  The City Manager shall not issue a sign permit to erect a permanent sign, or to change a sign face on an existing permanent sign, on a property with no building or with an unoccupied building. 
(10)  The City Manager shall not issue a sign permit to erect a permanent sign, or to change a sign face on an existing permanent sign, on an unoccupied building. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18)  
TDC 38.075. - Purpose of Sign Design Review. 
(1)  Purpose of Sign Design Review. The purpose of Sign Design Review is to implement the purposes and objectives of TDC Chapter 20 Sign Design and promote freestanding signs in commercial areas that are attractive to the community, compatible with the design and architecture of the development and the community, and provide adequate business identification. 
(2)  Standards for Sign Design Review. Development of the following is subject to the provisions set forth in TDC 38.075(3) and standards and criteria set forth in TDC 38.220, in addition to all other applicable TDC standards: 
(a)  New freestanding monument or pole sign including Service Station signs allowed in TDC 38.110(17)(a-b). 
(b)  Transition of a nonconforming freestanding monument or pole sign in CC/CG Planning Districts subject to TDC 35.200 (Nonconforming Situations). 
(3)  No Sign or Building permits shall be issued for signs described in TDC 38.075(2) until plans for the proposed sign have been approved pursuant to the following review, and all other applicable TDC standards are met: 
(a)  LEVEL 1—Clear and Objective Sign Design Review. 
(i)  A Level I Sign Design Review decision is a ministerial decision. 
(ii)  Application for Level I (Clear and Objective) Sign Design Review shall be made pursuant to the Type I procedures set forth in TDC 32.210 (Procedures) and the application provisions in TDC 33.080 (Application and Approval Criteria). 
(iii)  A proposed sign that meets all standards set forth in TDC 38.075(4) shall be administratively approved by the City Manager. 
(iv)  Variances to standards set forth in TDC 38.075(3) are prohibited. 
(4)  Sign Design Standards: 
(a)  Level I (Clear and Objective) Sign Design Review Standards. Signs shall: 
(i)  On sign face elevations, provide support poles, pylons, columns or monument base that have a width at least 30 percent of the sign face width; provide at least three of the Sign Design Elements—Sign Structure & Site in TDC 38.075(3)(a)(ii) and provide at least three of the Sign Design Elements—Sign Exterior in TDC 38.075(3)(a)(iii). The amount of required support pylon or column width in elevation may be reduced in two percent increments to not less than ten percent of the sign face width for each additional Sign Design Element provided. 
(ii)  Sign Design Elements—Sign Structure & Site. Sign structure & site includes (minimum of three applied): 
(A)  Two or more individual pole, pylon or column supports separated by a minimum of 24 inches. 
(B)  Monument-style base occupying 75 percent or greater of sign face width. 
(C)  Sign setback minimum of five feet from property lines, measured to any feature of sign structure. 
(D)  Minimum 36-inch pylon or column width or diameter. 
(E)  Landscape plantings including shrubs and groundcover or hardscape features including decorative rock or masonry located at the base of the freestanding sign. 
(iii)  Sign Design Elements—Sign Exterior. Sign Exterior Design includes (minimum of three applied:) 
(A)  F/rame trim, cap, wing, grill, exposed bracketing or other decorative sign frame element(s); 
(B)  Variation in sign profile including use of asymmetrical & curvilinear shapes and planes, and irregular height of sign elements; 
(C)  Use of three or more exterior sign materials that are elements of the site's building architecture, including masonry, concrete, ceramic, glass (figured, block or tile), stucco, metal fabric, metal tubing and wood timber materials; 
(D)  Use of 3-dimensional lettering and graphic: 
(E)  Use of "halo," baffled and shrouded indirect illumination sources, or internally-lighted "push thru" lettering and graphic; and 
(F)  No more than 20 percent of sign face feature is illuminated with direct lighting (exposed incandescent bulb, neon tube, LED or LCD electronic bulbs) or internally-lighted panels (fluorescent tube or other light source behind a translucent panel). 
(Ord.1302-10 §5, 5-24-10;Ord 1414-18, 12-10-2018 )  
TDC 38.080. - Sign Permit Fees. 
(1)  Fees for sign permit applications, extensions of sign permit approvals, sign variances, sign interpretations and other sign application actions shall be established and amended by City Council Resolution. 
(2)  The sign permit fee shall be doubled when a sign subject to permit requirements has been erected in whole or in part, including but not limited to excavation, prior to obtaining a sign permit. 
(3)  If a complete sign permit application is withdrawn, the permit fee shall be refunded in whole provided the sign permit application review process has not begun. The review process begins when staff lists the application on the sign permit application log sheet. If the sign application review process has begun, the application fee shall not be refunded. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96)  
TDC 38.090. - Sign Ordinance Interpretations. 
An interpretation of Chapter 38 or the sign definitions in Chapter 31 must be in accordance with TDC 31.070. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96; Ord 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 38.100. - General Provisions. 
(1)  Location. Except for traffic control devices, public signs and special event banner signs, signs shall be located on private property outside of the public right-of-way and shall not extend over or into the public right-of-way. Signs shall not be constructed in or extend over or into easements for public sewer, water or storm drain lines or within five feet of such lines, or within the dripline of existing trees. Shingle signs in the Central Tualatin Overay District may extend over the publicly owned promenade, public sidewalks and private walkways. 
(2)  Vision Clearance Area. Signs may be located in vision clearance areas provided they do not extend into the space from higher than 24 inches above the curb, or if no curb exists from higher than 30 inches above grade, to lower than eight feet above the curb or grade, except as noted below in this subsection. Support structures, such as posts, for freestanding signs which extend higher than eight feet above grade may be located in a vision clearance area only if the combined total width of the support structures in the vision clearance area is one foot or less and the combined total depth of support structures in the vision clearance area is one foot or less. 
(3)  Pedestrian Area Clearance. Signs erected over or extending over private or public pedestrian walkways or paths shall provide a vertical clearance of at least eight feet from the surface of the walkway or path to the lowest portion of the sign. 
(4)  Signs Incorporated Into Fences. Except for signs at subdivision entrances located in a private tract median island within a public right-of-way, monument signs may be affixed to and be part of a masonry fence. Pole signs shall be affixed only to the ground. 
(5)  Copy. Copy shall be placed only on the sign face. 
(6)  Dedication for Right-of-Way. Signs and their structures and foundations shall be removed from property subject to dedication to the public before such dedication shall be accepted by the City. 
(7)  Illumination. 
(a)  Lights providing indirect illumination onto signs shall be directed so the source of light is not visible from the public right-of-way or from properties in residential planning districts. 
(b)  Neon or LED lighting is the only permitted lighting for direct illumination of all sign types except for electronic signs as described in TDC 38.140(2)(e). Neon, LED incandescent and fluorescent lighting are permitted for indirect or internal illumination. 
(c)  The surface brightness of any sign shall not exceed that produced by the diffused output obtained from 800 milliampere fluorescent light sources spaced not closer than eight inches on center. 
(8)  Sign Maintenance and Repair. All signs shall be maintained in good order and repair at all times. Signs which have become faded, worn, damaged or are unsafe or pose a danger to the public shall be maintained, repaired or removed. 
(9)  Signage For Additional Uses in the Central Urban Renewal District and the Leveton Tax Increment Financing District. In specific situations the Tualatin Development Code permits selected uses from a given "home" planning district to locate in another "receiving" planning district as an additional use when the "receiving" district is in the Central Tualatin Overlay District or the Leveton Tax Increment Financing District. When an additional use exists in a "receiving" planning district, the sign regulations of the "home" planning district shall apply to the additional use. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96; Ord. 966-97 §1, 1-13-97; Ord. 1322-11 §2, 5-9-11; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 38.105. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of the Chapter, the following words and phrases mean: 
Sign. An identification, description, illustration, symbol, letter, number, logo, fluorescent tube or row of tubes, incandescent bulb or string of bulbs, or graphic information or device, but not an architectural feature of a building, including the structural supports, which is affixed directly or indirectly, or temporarily or permanently, upon a building, vehicle, structure or land. Signs identify or direct attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution, business, use, idea, belief, candidate or political issue. Murals and painted highlights are not signs. 
A-Frame (also known as an A-Board or Sandwich Board) Sign. A double-faced portable sign constructed with an A-shaped frame, composed of two sign boards attached at the top and separated at the bottom, and not supported by a structure in the ground. 
Abandoned Sign. A sign, associated with a business, lessor, owner, product, use of property or activity, which is no longer conducted or available on the premises where such sign is displayed for on-premise signs, or on other premises for off-premise signs. 
Agricultural Sign. A sign allowed on property which is used for the sale of seasonal agricultural produce. 
Alteration, Structural of Signs. Modification of the location, size, shape or height of a sign structure, including, but not limited to, the addition of illumination to a non-illuminated sign and the replacement of sign structure materials with other than comparable materials, for example, metal parts replacing wood parts. 
Animated Sign. A sign or display manifesting either kinetic or illusionary motion occasioned by natural, manual, mechanical, electrical, or other means. Animated signs include the following types: 
Naturally Energized Animated Sign: Signs whose motion is activated by wind or other atmospheric impingement. Wind driven signs include flags, pennants, streamers, spinners, metallic disks, or other similar devices designed to move in the wind. 
Mechanically Energized Animated Sign: Signs manifesting a repetitious pre-programmed physical movement or rotation in either one or a series of planes activated by means of mechanically based drives. 
Electrically Energized Animated Sign: Illuminated signs whose motion or visual impression of motion is activated primarily by electrical means. Electrically energized animated signs are of two types: 
Flashing Signs: Illuminated signs exhibit a pre-programmed repetitious cyclical interruption of illumination from one or more sources in which the duration of the period of illumination (on phase) varies with the duration of the period of darkness (off phase), and in which the intensity of illumination varies from zero (off) to 100 percent (on) during the programmed cycle. 
Illusionary Movement Signs: Illuminated signs exhibit the illusion of movement by means of a preprogrammed repetitious sequential switching action in which illuminated elements of the sign and are turned on or off to visually simulate the impression of motion characteristic of chasing, running, blinking, oscillating, twinkling, scintillating, or expanding and contracting light patterns. 
Awning Sign. A type of wall sign painted or printed on, or attached flat against the surface of the nonrigid material of an awning. 
Balloon Sign. An inflatable, stationary, temporary sign of any shape anchored by some means to a structure or the ground. It includes simple children's balloons, hot and cold air balloons, helium filled balloons, blimps, and other dirigibles. 
Banner Sign. A temporary sign made of nonrigid material without an enclosing framework. National flags, flags of political subdivisions and symbolic flags of an institution, group or a business are excluded. 
Special Event Banner Sign. A banner sign that is temporarily displayed over a public right-of-way for a limited period of time for a special event. A special event occurs on a specific date or dates, is open to the community, and has been declared a special event by the City Council. 
Bench Sign. A sign that is displayed on a bench. 
Canopy Sign. A type of wall sign painted or printed on, or attached to the canopy fascia. 
Change of Copy. The change of any written or graphic information upon the face of a sign. 
Construction Signs. 
Private Construction Sign. A temporary sign displayed in conjunction with a construction project on private property. 
Public Utility Facilities Construction Sign. A temporary sign displayed in conjunction with a construction project for public streets, public waterlines, public sewer lines and pump stations, public storm drain lines and other similar public facilities. 
Copy. Any written or graphic information on a sign. 
Directional Sign. A permanent sign designed and erected to guide the circulation of vehicles or pedestrians or both which are on the site. 
Directory Sign. A permanent informational sign designed and erected to list the businesses, business occupants or tenants within buildings on the site and to be read by passengers of vehicles or pedestrians or both which are on the site. 
Electrical Sign. A sign or sign structure in which electrical wiring, connections, or fixtures are used. 
Entry/Exit Sign. A permanent sign designed and erected to show the location of vehicular access onto or off of a location from or to the public right-of-way. 
Erect (for signs). The act of constructing, reconstructing, building, rebuilding, installing, reinstalling, locating, relocating, placing or replacing a sign structure, changing undamaged copy on a sign face, changing an undamaged sign face, suspending or attaching components of a sign and the installation of electrical parts, wiring or illumination of a sign. It does not include sign maintenance or repair. "Erect" shall not include changes in copy of a mechanical readerboard. 
Festoon Sign. A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, lights, pennants, streamers, pinwheels or similar signs. 
Fin Sign. A sign which is supported by a pole or poles or columns and partly by a building. 
Freestanding Sign. A sign attached to the ground by one or more poles, columns, or similar supports and not attached to a building, such as pole and monument signs. 
Grade (for signs). The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the sign and the property line, or when the property line is more than five feet from the sign, between the sign and a line five feet from the sign. 
Height of Sign. The vertical distance from grade to the highest point of a sign, including any projection, decoration or trim of the sign face or structure. 
Illegal Sign. A sign which is erected, constructed, altered, relocated, maintained or repaired in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
Illuminated Sign. A sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of lighting the sign. 
Illumination/Lighting Types: 
Illumination, Direct. Lighting wherein the light source is visible. 
Illumination, Fluorescent Tube. Lighting wherein an electrical current is passed through a gas-filled tube, with a coating of fluorescent material on its inner surface, which emits visible light. 
Illumination, Incandescent Bulb. Lighting wherein an electrical current is passed through a filament inside a bulb and the filament emits visible light. The filament source of light may be visible as in clear bulb or bare bulb illumination or it may not be visible as in frosted or painted bulb lighting. 
Illumination, Indirect. Lighting wherein the light source is separate from the object to be illuminated, including but not limited to a sign face or cabinet, and is directed to shine on the object or sign. 
Illumination, Internal. Lighting wherein the light source and the bulb or tube enclosing the light source are enclosed within a structure, including but not limited to a sign and are not visible. 
Illumination, LED. Lighting produced by a light-emitting-diode which emits visible light. 
Illumination, Neon. Lighting wherein an electrical current is passed through a tube containing neon gas which emits visible light. 
Inlaid Floor Sign. For the Mixed Use Commercial District only, a sign on private property that is incorporated into the floor/walkway area in a customer entry area. This sign is intended to be seen only by people looking down who are at a customer entry area and not to be seen by people in a public right-of-way or a public access parking lot. An Inlaid Floor Sign is not a wall sign or a freestanding sign. 
Lawn Sign. A temporary, freestanding or A-frame sign. 
Location (for signs). A lot, site, building wall, or any place upon which a sign is or can be erected, attached or maintained. 
Major Commercial Center (for signs). A development in the Central Commercial or General Commercial Planning Districts, or in the Office Commercial and Mid-rise Office Commercial, or in the Light Manufacturing Planning District and in the Central Urban Renewal District where additional General Commercial uses are permitted in accordance with the Tualatin Development Code (TDC 60.030), and which is on one tax lot of at least 3.0 acres and has either (1) at least one building of no less than 30,000 square feet of gross floor area, or has (2) at least two buildings with one having no less than 12,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
Marquee. A projecting, permanent, roofed structure attached to and supported only by a building. 
Marquee Sign. A type of wall sign painted, printed on, or attached to the marquee fascia. 
Monument Sign. A freestanding sign which is permanently affixed at grade and has a monolithic or columnar line and which maintains essentially the same contour from grade to top. 
Mural. A pictorial or graphic decoration, illustration, visual representation or art work which is applied directly to a wall and does not contain letters, numbers, logos, brand names or trademarks. Murals are Architectural Features which are reviewed through the Architectural Review process. 
Nonconforming Sign. A lawfully erected sign that does not meet the requirements of TDC Chapter 38 including a sign lawfully erected and existing, and properly maintained and repaired prior to May 13, 1992. 
Nonmedical Uses (for signs). In the Medical Center District nonmedical uses are supporting retail and service uses for the convenience of patients, patient visitors, staff physicians and on-site employees and include only the following: (1) bank branch/automatic teller machine not greater than 1,000 square feet of gross floor area; (2) barber/beauty shop not greater than 750 square feet of gross floor area; (3) child day care not greater than 4,000 square feet of gross floor area; (4) credit union not greater than 1,000 square feet of gross floor area; (5) fitness center not greater than 15,000 square feet of gross floor area; (6) florist/gift shop not greater than 750 square feet of gross floor area; (7) pharmacy not greater than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area; and (8) restaurant/delicatessen/coffee shop not greater than 1,500 square feet of gross floor area. 
Obscene Sign. A sign or other advertising structure displaying any matter in which the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to a prurient interest in sex, or is patently offensive because it affronts contemporary community standards relating to the description or representation of sexual matters, and is utterly without redeeming social value. 
Obstructing Sign. A sign, including its supports and structure, which interferes with the use of a fire escape, exit or a window such that light, ventilation or ingress and egress is reduced below the minimum required by law. 
Off-premise Sign. A sign which identifies or gives directions to a use or activity and which is located on premises other than where the activity or use is provided. 
Overhead Door Sign. A sign located at the uppermost area of the overhead door opening or immediately above an overhead door opening. 
Pennant. A sign that is a triangular flag which is tapered to a point or swallowtail. 
Plaque Sign. For the Mixed Use Commercial District only, a type of wall sign associated with and located near a customer entry area. 
Project Sign. For the Mixed Use Commercial District only, a type of sign to identify a project. For the purposes of this definition a project is a functionally integrated and coordinated development on at least ten acres that may include more than one lot and be separated by a public street. The project is reviewed through the Architectural Review process as one application, as two or more simultaneous applications, or as two or more applications for phases of the same development. 
Public Sign. A sign erected and maintained by a special purpose district, public school district, municipal, county, state or federal government, or any political subdivision or agency thereof. 
Readerboard, Electronic Message Center (Changeable Copy) Sign. A sign on which copy can be changed electronically by using patterns of lights that may be changed at intermittent intervals. 
Readerboard, Mechanical (Changeable Copy) Sign. A permanent sign on which copy can be changed manually, in the field, by using letters, numbers or symbols which can be affixed to the sign face or are snapped into place or are track-mounted. 
Roof (for signs). Any exterior building surface that is not vertical. 
Roof Sign. A sign erected on or attached to a roof. 
Rotating, Revolving or Moving Sign. A sign, except a banner, or portion thereof designed to move. 
Shingle/Blade Sign. A rigid sign hanging from an awning, canopy, marquee or building overhang or attached to a wall and perpendicular or at an angle to that wall. 
Sign Band. An area on each elevation of a building that establishes the location for permanent wall signs. 
Sign Band, Main Building Entrance. An area located on the wall within a distance of no more than eight feet of the main building entrance doorway. A main building entrance is one grade level entrance to a building that is the primary building entrance for occupants and visitors. 
Sign Band, Primary. The sign band associated with the first floor or ground level floor of a multi-story building. 
Sign Clearance. The distance from the grade directly below a sign to the bottom of the lowest portion of the sign. 
Sign Contractor. A person engaged in the business of sign construction, sign maintenance or sign repair and registered with the Oregon Construction Contractors Board. 
Sign Face. The surface to which a sign is affixed. A single-sided sign has one sign face. A double-sided sign may have one or more sign faces on each side. A multi-sided sign may have multiple faces and includes multi-faceted signs and signs in the shape of figures and objects. 
Sign Face Area. The portion of a sign containing copy and the background for the copy. See, Measuring Signs. 
Sign Maintenance. Normal care needed to keep a sign functional such as cleaning, painting, oiling and changing bulbs and tubes. 
Sign Repair. Fixing or replacement of broken or worn parts, sign faces or copy. Replacement is of comparable materials only. Repairs may be made with the sign in position or with the sign removed. Sign repair includes repairs to damaged signs unless the cost of the repair exceeds 50 percent of the value of the sign during the most recent period of use before repairs are initiated. 
Sign Structure. One or more supports, uprights, braces, or other framework of a sign. 
Sign, Temporary. A sign not permanently attached to the ground (set on or post driven or dug into the ground with no footing or foundation), wall or building and allowed to be displayed for only a short period of time. 
Small Projecting Sign. A rigid sign hanging from an awning, canopy, marquee or building overhang (shingle-style) or attached to a wall and perpendicular or at an angle to that wall (blade-style). 
Snipe Sign. A sign, usually composed of paper, plastic or plywood, affixed to a tree, fence post, utility pole, or similar structure. 
Spanner Panel. A cabinet, flat surface or other similar surface erected so that it is approximately vertical and attached to the posts, poles, columns or other supporting members of a canopy or other similar roof-like structure, or attached to the canopy itself. Spanner panels often span the space between the poles or extend from the poles supporting gas station pump island canopies. 
Subdivision Sign. A sign located on land in a recorded subdivision approved through the City of Tualatin subdivision review process. 
Unsafe Sign. Any sign, part of a sign or sign structure which is liable to collapse or fall due to inability to withstand wind, seismic or other loads, as specified in the Oregon Uniform Building Code of the City, or as determined by the City Building Official. Whenever any sign or part of a sign obstructs the view of motorists traveling on the public streets or on property open to the public and creates risk of property damage or personal injury, it is an unsafe sign. 
Vision Clearance Area. A triangular shaped area established at the intersection of any combination of rights-of-way, private roads, alleys and driveways. The sides of the triangle shall extend an equal and specified distance from the intersection of the property lines, or from the property lines extended along the right-of-way away from the intersection. 
Wall (for signs). The vertical face elements of a building from the perspective of an architectural elevation, including parapet walls and appurtenances such as projecting fins, columns, pilasters, canopies, marquees, showcases or decorations, wing walls, and windows, doors and other openings. 
Wall Area. The measurement in square feet of a building wall based on the height and width of an architectural elevation. 
Wall Sign. A sign which is affixed to or painted on a wall of a building. 
Wall Sign, Directory-style. A type of wall sign with a taller sign face height and with a capability to list messages for more than one building tenant. 
Wall Sign, Hospital Identification. A wall sign located on one hospital building wall intended for visibility from the I-5-SW Nyberg Avenue Interchange. 
Wall Sign, Main Building Entrance. A wall sign located on the main building entrance sign band. 
Window Sign. A sign permanently or temporarily painted on or affixed to the glazing of a window or window frame, or permanently mounted within two feet of the window pane and intended for viewing from outside the building. 
(Ord 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 7, 6-22-20)  
TDC 38.110. - Sign Types. 
(1)  Freestanding Monument Sign Provisions. 
(a)  Monument signs shall be erected on grade or set into a hillside. If the monument sign is supported by a pole, the sign shall extend down to within four inches of grade to cover the pole so that no more than four inches of the pole is visible. 
(b)  The sign faces of a monument sign shall be parallel or in a "V" shape provided the inside angle of the "V" shall not be more than 90 degrees. 
(2)  Freestanding Pole Sign Provisions. 
(a)  Freestanding Pole Sign Supports. 
(i)  Freestanding pole signs shall be supported by no more than two poles, posts, columns or similar supports. Guy wires and similar stabilization methods are not permitted. 
(ii)  The poles, posts, columns or similar supports for freestanding pole signs shall be closed to present a round, oval, polygon or similar exterior appearance. Exposed angle-iron supports such as I-beams are not permitted. 
(iii)  The poles, posts, columns or similar supports for freestanding pole signs may be covered with a pole-cover as a method of improving the appearance of the support(s). 
(iv)  The total width, including any polecover, of the poles, posts, columns or similar supports for freestanding pole signs shall be no wider than 25 percent of the sign face's width. 
(v)  The poles, posts, columns or similar supports for freestanding pole signs may be illuminated by direct illumination provided the illumination of each support is horizontal around the support and extends no more than two feet below the bottom or above the top of the sign face and in no case is less than eight feet above grade. 
(vi)  The poles, posts, columns or similar supports for freestanding pole signs shall be plumb (straight up). 
(b)  Freestanding Pole Signs. 
(i)  No portion of a freestanding pole sign shall extend on or over a building. 
(ii)  The faces of two-sided pole signs shall be parallel to each other. 
(3)  Wall Sign Provisions. 
(a)  Sign Bands. 
(i)  A sign band shall be designated for each building by the building/property owner as part of the first sign permit application for that building after the effective date of this ordinance. 
(ii)  The sign band shall be located on a wall or awning, or the fascia of a canopy or marquee, or in the space between posts or columns which are directly below with the wall above and in the same vertical line as the wall above. The sign band shall not include windows. The sign band shall be no greater in height from top to bottom than the allowed wall sign height. 
(iii)  The sign band for existing wall signs with an approved sign permit shall be that portion of the wall where the existing sign is located. 
(iv)  The sign band shall be located in the same relative position on each elevation; however, the band may reflect architectural elements and grade changes. The band may include, but is not limited to, a continuous horizontal painted band, a continuous horizontal architectural feature, a continuous horizontal band of similar exterior material such as courses of colored or textured brick, or concrete block. The sign band shall not extend above the top of a wall or a parapet. Except as provided in TDC 38.225, sign bands on awnings, canopies and marquees shall not extend above the top of nor below the bottom of the awning, canopy or marquee. 
(b)  Except for window signs, shingle/blade signs attached to a wall, and wall mounted plaque and directory signs, permanent wall signs shall be erected within the sign band. 
(c)  Wall signs may be erected on doors, provided the sign band includes the door. 
(d)  Wall Sign Extensions. Wall signs shall not extend above the top of nor below the bottom of the sign band. 
(e)  Wall Sign Depth. Wall signs shall not extend out from the wall greater than 1.33 feet (16 inches). Except as provided in TDC 38.225, shingle/blade signs attached to a wall may extend no greater than four feet. 
(f)  Wall Sign Face Orientation. Wall sign faces shall be parallel to the wall to which they are attached. Except as provided in TDC 38.225, shingle/blade signs attached to a wall shall be perpendicular to the wall to which they are attached. 
(4)  Shingle Sign, Blade and Small Projecting Sign Provisions. Shingle signs and blade signs may be erected in the Mixed Use Commercial District subject to TDC 38.225. Shingle Signs, Blade Signs and Small Projecting Signs may be erected in the Central Design District and in Major Commercial Centers and on Multi-story Buildings in the Central and General Commercial Planning Districts subject to TDC 38.220(2)(b,e) and to the following limitations after first obtaining a sign permit. 
(a)  Location: Shingle signs and blade signs and Small Projecting Signs need not be placed within the primary sign band for wall signs. Shingle signs and blade signs and Small Projecting Signs shall be attached to a wall or the underside of an awning, canopy, marquee or building overhang. 
(b)  Shingle and Small Projecting Signs (Shingle-style) attached to the underside of an awning, canopy, marquee or building overhang shall not extend out beyond the outer edge of the element to which they are attached. Blade signs attached to a wall shall be perpendicular to that wall and shall extend no greater than four feet. 
(c)  Blade signs and Small Projecting Signs (Blade-style) attached to a wall shall be perpendicular to that wall and shall extend no greater than four feet. Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(d)  Guy wires cables and similar stabilization methods are not permitted. 
(5)  Banner Signs. A temporary banner sign may be erected subject to the following limitations and after first obtaining a sign permit. 
(a)  They shall be allowed for conditional uses in the RL Planning District and permitted and conditional uses in all other planning districts. 
(b)  One per tax lot may be displayed, or in institutional, commercial and industrial planning districts one per lease space may be displayed by a tenant. 
(c)  Except as set forth in (g) below, a banner shall be erected on a building wall and secured to prevent it from flapping in the wind. 
(d)  Except as set forth in (g) below, a banner shall not be erected sooner than 30 calendar days prior to a new business opening. 
(e)  Except as set forth in (g) below, a banner shall be displayed at least seven days and may be displayed up to 60 days, but the total number of days for all banners displayed on a property shall not exceed 60 days in a calendar year. 
(f)  Except as set forth in (g) below, the banner shall be no greater than three feet in height from top to bottom and 42 square feet in area. 
(g)  Public schools are permitted banner signs subject to the following standards. A banner may be erected on a wall, freestanding sign, or monument sign, provided it is secured to prevent it from flapping in the wind. A banner shall not be erected sooner than 60 calendar days prior to the event it advertises. The total display time for all banner signs shall not be longer than 90 calendar days in a school year. A banner shall be no greater than four feet in height from top to bottom and 80 square feet in area. 
(6)  Banner Signs, Special Event. Special event banner signs may be erected after first obtaining City Council approval. The City Council shall review and determine the size, number, location and other issues related to special event banner signs. The standards applicable to temporary banners do not apply to special event banners. Special event banners shall not cross rights-of-way. 
(7)  Construction and Public Utility Facility Construction Signs. A temporary sign in association with construction on private property or of public utility facilities may be erected subject to the following limitations and after first obtaining a sign permit. 
(a)  No more than one construction sign and one public utility facility construction sign, a total of two, may be displayed at a time on a property. 
(b)  They may be erected no earlier than the day after a building permit and public works construction permit have been applied for and the appropriate fee paid. 
(c)  They may be displayed only during the period of the construction project and shall be removed no later than 15 days after the issuance of a final occupancy permit for a construction sign, or acceptance by the City of Tualatin or other public agency of the public facility for a public utility facility construction sign. 
(d)  The sign height shall be no higher than nine feet and the sign face area no greater than 32 square feet. 
(8)  Directional Signs. Directional signs may be erected subject to the following limitations and after first obtaining a sign permit. 
(a)  They shall be permanent free-standing pole or monument signs. 
(b)  They shall be allowed for conditional uses in the RL Planning District and permitted and conditional uses in all other planning districts, except the CN Planning District where they are not allowed. 
(c)  Location on Site: If they are not 100 percent visually screened from the public right-of-way, they shall be erected at least 30 feet from the public right-of-way. If 100 percent visual screening is provided, they may be within 30 feet of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Location as Part of a Fence: They may be affixed to and made part of a fence. 
(e)  Number: No more than one per aisle or aisle intersection or drive-through lane or drive-through lane intersection. 
(f)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(g)  Height of Sign: No higher than 2.5 feet. 
(h)  Sign Face Area: No more than four square feet. 
(i)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(9)  Directory Signs. Directory signs may be erected subject to the following limitations and after first obtaining a sign permit. 
(a)  They shall be permanent wall or freestanding monument signs. 
(b)  They shall be allowed in the IN, CO, CO/MR, MC, CC, CG, ML, MG and MP Planning Districts. The property the sign is to be located on shall contain at least two buildings with not less than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area each, or the property shall contain at least one building with not less than 3,000 square feet of gross floor area and have no fewer than four tenants. 
(c)  Location on Site: Wall directories shall be erected on sign bands and monument directories shall be erected at least 60 feet from a public right-of-way. 
(d)  Location as Part of a Fence: Not permitted. 
(e)  Number: One per primary public customer doorway to the business. 
(f)  Number of Sides: No more than one for a wall directory. No more than two for a monument directory, except in the MC Planning District where four are allowed. 
(g)  Height of Sign: No higher than three feet for a wall directory. No higher than six feet for a monument directory. 
(h)  Sign Face Area: Wall directories shall be no more than six square feet and monuments shall be no more than 24 square feet, except in the MC Planning District where 30 square feet is allowed. 
(i)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(j)  Height of Copy: No higher than two inches, except that 20 percent of the sign face area may have copy up to five inches. In the MC Planning District all copy may be no higher than four inches, except that 20 percent of the sign face area may have copy up to five inches. Map size is not restricted by this subsection. 
(k)  That portion of the sign containing letters two inches in height or less may be a mechanical readerboard. 
(10)  Entry/Exit Signs. Entry/exit signs may be erected subject to the following limitations and after first obtaining a sign permit. 
(a)  They shall be permanent freestanding pole or monument signs. 
(b)  They shall be allowed in the IN, CO, CO/MR, CR, MC, CC, CG, ML, MG and MP Planning Districts or at public schools in any planning district. 
(c)  Location on Site: They shall be located within 15 feet of the edge of the on-site vehicular driveway. They may be located in the vision clearance area. 
(d)  Location as Part of a Fence: They may be affixed to and made part of a fence. 
(e)  Number: One for each vehicular driveway access from a public right-of-way approved through the Architectural Review process. When the vehicular driveway access from a public right-of-way is a joint access serving two or more tax lots which are under different ownerships, two signs are permitted (one on each side of the driveway) for each joint driveway access approved through the Architectural Review process. 
(f)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(g)  Height of Sign: No higher than 2.5 feet. 
(h)  Sign Face Area: No more than four square feet. 
(i)  Illumination: Indirect or internal only. 
(11)  Home Occupation Signs. Home occupation signs may be erected subject to the following limitations without first obtaining a sign permit. 
(a)  They shall be erected only on the inside of a window. 
(b)  They shall be allowed in a dwelling unit in all planning districts. 
(c)  Number: No more than one per dwelling unit. 
(d)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(e)  Height of Sign: No higher than one foot. 
(f)  Sign Face Area: No more than one square foot. 
(g)  Illumination: Not permitted. 
(12)  Lawn Signs. Lawn signs may be erected subject to the following limitations without first obtaining a sign permit. The purpose of lawns signs is to allow property owners and real estate agencies to show that a property or building is for sale or rent, and to display political messages. 
(a)  For single family, duplex and multi-family uses. 
(i)  They shall be temporary pole or A-frame signs. 
(ii)  Number: On a property being offered for sale, one sign per public street frontage. On properties other than a property being offered for sale, no more than three signs total may be erected. An unlimited number of additional lawn signs may be erected during the period 60 days prior to and extending no more than 12 days after a general, primary or special election. 
(iii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iv)  Height of Sign: Temporary pole signs shall be no higher than six feet. Temporary A-frame signs shall be no higher than two feet. Additional lawn signs erected during the election period specified above shall be no higher than three feet. 
(v)  Sign Face Area: No more than six square feet, but additional lawn signs erected during the election period specified above shall be no more than four square feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Not permitted. 
(vii)  Removal: On a property being offered for sale, they shall be removed within 30 days of sale or transfer of possession, whichever occurs first. Additional lawn signs shall be removed within 12 days after the election. 
(viii)  Consent: They shall be erected only with the documented consent of the property owner or authorized representative. 
(b)  For undeveloped residential subdivision lots and undeveloped land in the RL Planning District. 
(i)  They shall be temporary pole or monument signs. 
(ii)  Location on Site: On private property. 
(iii)  Number: One per public street frontage. An unlimited number of additional lawn signs may be erected during the period 60 days prior to and extending no more than 12 days after a general, primary or special election. 
(iv)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(v)  Height of Sign: No higher than six feet, except additional lawn signs erected during the election period specified above shall be no higher than three feet. 
(vi)  Sign Face Area: No more than 12 square feet. 
(vii)  Illumination: Not permitted. 
(viii)  Consent: They shall be erected with the documented consent of the property owner or authorized representative. 
(c)  For undeveloped land in multi-family, institutional, commercial and industrial planning districts. 
(i)  They shall be temporary pole or monument signs. 
(ii)  Number: On a property being offered for sale, one per public street frontage. An unlimited number of additional lawn signs may be erected during the period 60 days prior to and extending no more than 12 days after a general, primary or special election. 
(iii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iv)  Height of Sign: No higher than 12 feet. Additional lawn signs erected during the election period specified above shall be no higher than three feet. 
(v)  Sign Face Area: No greater than 64 square feet for properties fronting on arterial or collector streets, and no greater than 32 square feet for properties fronting on local streets. Additional lawn signs erected during the election period specified above shall be no more than four square feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Not permitted. 
(vii)  Consent: They shall be erected with the documented consent of the property owner or authorized representative. 
(d)  For developed land in institutional, commercial and industrial planning districts. 
(i)  They shall be temporary pole or monument signs. 
(ii)  Number: On a property being offered for sale or lease, one per public street frontage. An unlimited number of additional lawn signs may be erected during the period 60 days prior to and extending no more than 12 days after a general, primary or special election. 
(iii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iv)  Height of Sign: No higher than nine feet. Additional lawn signs erected during the election period specified above shall be no higher than three feet. 
(v)  Sign Face Area: No greater than 32 square feet. Additional lawn signs erected during the election period specified above shall be no more than four square feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Not permitted. 
(vii)  Consent: They shall be erected only with the documented consent of the property owner or authorized representative. 
(13)  Overhead Door Signs. Overhead door signs may be erected subject to the following limitations after first obtaining a sign permit. 
(a)  They shall be permanent wall signs. 
(b)  They shall be allowed for permitted or conditional uses in institutional, commercial, medical center or industrial planning districts. 
(c)  Location on Building: They shall be erected at the uppermost area of the overhead door opening or on the wall immediately above an overhead door opening provided the top of the sign face is no higher than 1.5 feet above the top of the overhead door opening. 
(d)  Number: One per overhead door. 
(e)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(f)  Height Above Grade: The top of the sign face shall be no higher than 1.5 feet above the top of the overhead door opening. 
(g)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than eight inches. 
(h)  Area: No more than six square feet. 
(i)  Illumination: Indirect. 
(14)  Public Transit Shelter Signs. Public transit shelter signs may be erected subject to the following limitations without obtaining a sign permit. 
(a)  They shall be window or wall signs. 
(b)  They shall be allowed in all planning districts. 
(c)  Location on Building: On the wall or in the window of a public transit shelter. 
(d)  Number: One per wall not to exceed two walls of a public transit shelter. 
(e)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(f)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the top of the wall or window. 
(g)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than two feet. 
(h)  Area: No greater than two square feet. 
(i)  Illumination: Not permitted. 
(15)  Subdivision Identification Signs. Subdivision identification signs may be erected subject to the following limitations and after first obtaining a sign permit. 
(a)  They shall be permanent monument signs. 
(b)  They shall be allowed for approved or recorded subdivisions in the RL, RML, ML and MG Planning Districts. 
(c)  Location on Site: On private property at a subdivision entrance or on a private tract median island within the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Location as Part of a Fence: Except at a subdivision entrance on a private tract median island within the public right-of-way, the sign may be affixed to and be part of a masonry fence. 
(e)  Number: One per public street entry into the subdivision. 
(f)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(g)  Height Above Grade: In the RL and RML Districts, no higher than five feet, unless the sign is at a subdivision entrance on a private tract median island within the public right-of-way, in which case it shall be no higher than 2.5 feet. In the ML and MG Districts, no higher than eight feet. 
(h)  Width of Sign: There is no standard for signs located outside a median. A sign at a subdivision entrance on a private tract median island within the public right-of-way shall be no wider than 50 percent of the width of the median measured from curb to curb or where there is no curb from edge of pavement to edge of pavement, provided the area limitation below is met, and it shall be centered in the median. 
(i)  Area: No more than 18 square feet, except in the ML and MG Districts where the area shall be no more than 25 square feet. 
(j)  Illumination: In the RL and RML Districts, indirect, unless it is located in a median, then no illumination is allowed. In the ML and MG Districts, indirect or internal is allowed. 
(k)  Separation: In the ML and MG Districts at least 100 feet shall separate Subdivision Identification Signs from all other permanent freestanding signs, except Directional, Directory and Entry/Exit Signs. 
(16)  Window Signs. Permanent window signs, including but not limited to neon signs, washable paint such as non-water soluble, and vinyl appliqués, shall first obtain a sign permit. Temporary window signs, including but not limited to butcher paper signs, and water soluble paint, may be erected without obtaining a sign permit. Window signs may be erected subject to the following limitations. 
(a)  They shall be allowed for permitted and conditional uses in commercial or industrial planning districts. 
(b)  Location on Building: They shall be erected inside a building and located to be seen from the outside through a window. 
(c)  Number: No limit provided the sign face area standard is met. 
(d)  Area: No more than 35 percent of the owned or leased window area. 
(e)  Illumination: Direct or indirect. 
(17)  Service Station Signs. Service station signs may be erected subject to the following limitations and after first obtaining a sign permit. In those planning districts where service stations are allowed as permitted or conditional uses, service station signs are allowed only in place of and not in addition to, the signs, other than service station signs, allowed in those planning districts. 
(a)  Monument signs are permitted. Unless the service station is located in a Major Commercial Center (MCC) in the Central or General Commercial Planning Districts where the standards for a monument sign in a MCC apply, TDC 38.110(1), the following standards apply. 
(i)  Type: Monument Sign. 
(ii)  Location as Part of a Fence: The sign may be affixed to and made part of a masonry fence. 
(iii)  Number: One for a single frontage lot. Two for a corner lot with two or more frontages, provided the signs are no less than 300 feet apart from each other. Two for a through lot with two or more frontages, provided only one sign is located on each frontage. When more than one sign is permitted, one may be a monument sign and one may be a pole sign, provided the pole sign complies with (b) below and other regulations applicable to such signs. 
(iv)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(v)  Height Above Grade: No higher than eight feet. 
(vi)  Area: No more than 55 square feet. Gas product price signs shall be included in the 55 square foot maximum. 
(vii)  Illumination: Indirect or internal only. 
(viii)  Letter, Symbol, Logo Size: Letters, symbols and logos shall be at least one foot high measured from the top of the letter to the bottom of the letter. Numbers may be less than one foot high. 
(b)  Pole signs are permitted in place of the monument signs allowed in (a) above. Unless the service station is located in a Major Commercial Center (MCC) in the Central or General Commercial Planning Districts where the standards for a pole sign in a MCC apply, TDC 38.110(2), the following standards apply. 
(i)  Type: Pole Sign. 
(ii)  Number: One for a single frontage lot. Two for a corner lot with two or more frontages, provided the signs are no less than 300 feet apart from each other. Two for a through lot with two or more frontages, provided only one sign is located on each frontage. When more than one sign is permitted, one may be a monument sign and one may be a pole sign, provided the monument sign complies with (a) above and other applicable regulations. 
(iii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iv)  Height Above Grade: No higher than 15 feet. 
(v)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than eight feet. 
(vi)  Area: No more than 48 square feet. Gas product price signs shall be included in the 48 square foot maxi-mums. 
(vii)  Illumination: Indirect or internal only. 
(c)  Wall Signs Are Permitted. If used, the following standards apply. 
(i)  Type: Wall sign. 
(ii)  Location on Building: On a building wall or canopy fascia or both. No wall sign shall be located on a wall or spanner panel under the canopy roof. 
(iii)  Number: No more than one sign per building wall or canopy fascia, not to exceed three signs total. 
(iv)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(v)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the height of the sign band. 
(vi)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than four feet provided no letter or number (does not include logos) shall be more than two feet high and provided the sign face shall not extend above or below the sign band. 
(vii)  Area: No more than 24 square feet. Gas product price signs shall be included in the 24 square foot maximum. 
(viii)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(d)  Signs are permitted on gas pumps, provided no more than two sides of each pump are used and the signs do not exceed five square feet on each side. 
(e)  See TDC 38.110(4-16) for additional signage and if used, the standards of TDC 38.110(4-16) apply. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96; Ord. 966-97, §2, 1-13-97; Ord. 1176-04, 11-22-04; Ord. 1194-05, 8-22-05; Ord. 1216-06, 7-24-06; Ord. 1261-08 §4, 6-9-08; Ord. 1335-11 §2, 11-14-11; Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 8, 6-22-20)  
TDC 38.120. - Measuring Signs and Building/Structure Elevations. 
The diagrams provided in this section are intended for illustration only. Signs and building or structure elevations shall be measured as follows: 
(1)  Freestanding Pole Signs. 
(a)  Height of Sign: The measurement shall be from the grade to the highest point of the sign, including the sign face structure, pole and any projection, decoration or trim of the sign face structure or pole. 
 
(b)  Height of Sign Face: The measurement shall be from the lowest point to the highest point of the sign face, including the sign face structure and any projection, decoration or trim of the sign face or structure. 
 
(c)  Width of Sign Face: The measurement shall extend from the outer edges side to side and include the structure projection, decoration or trim of the sign face or structure, but not the supporting pole. 
 
(d)  Sign Face Area, Single and Double-Sided Signs: Only one side of a sign shall be measured. When the sides of a double sided sign are not equal, the larger side shall be measured. The measurement shall enclose the sign face, including any projection, decoration or trim of the sign face and any direct illumination on the sign pole, within not more than three squares or rectangles or both which touch and sum the areas. The squares or rectangles may be rotated. The minimum dimension of a square or rectangle connecting two sign faces is one foot. 
 
(e)  Sign Face Area for Signs With More Than Two Sides (multifaceted signs): The measurement shall enclose the sign faces and structures, including any projection, decoration or trim of the sign faces and structures and any direct illumination on the sign pole, within a square or rectangle and summing the area of the six sides. 
 
(f)  On-site Separation Between Signs: When freestanding signs are required to be separated by a specific distance from each other, the distance shall be measured beginning at the center of the footprint of one sign, then measuring by the shortest route to the nearest property line, then along the property line to the point on the property line nearest to the second sign and then by the shortest route to the center of the footprint of the second sign. If the above directions result in two or more different measurements, the shortest shall be used. 
 
(2)  Freestanding Monument Signs. 
(a)  Height of Sign: The measurement shall be from the grade to the highest point of the sign, including the sign face, structure and any projection, decoration or trim of the sign face or structure. 
 
(b)  Height of Sign Face: The measurement shall be from the lowest point to the highest point of the sign face, including any projection, decoration or trim of the sign face. 
 
(c)  Width of Sign Face: The measurement shall extend from the outer edges side to side and include any projection, decoration or trim of the sign face. 
 
(d)  Sign Face Area: Only one side of a sign shall be measured. When the sides of a double sided sign are not equal, the larger side shall be measured. The measurement shall enclose the sign face, including any projection, decoration or trim of the sign face, within not more than three squares or rectangles or both which touch and sum the areas. The squares or rectangles may be rotated. The minimum dimension of a square or rectangle connecting two sign faces is one foot. 
 
 
(e)  On-site Separation Between Signs: See Section (1)(f), above. 
(3)  Wall Signs. 
(a)  Height of Sign Face: The measurement shall be from the lowest point to the highest point of the sign face, including any projection, decoration, individual letters, cabinet or trim of the sign face. 
 
(b)  Width of Sign Face: The measurement shall extend from the outer edges side to side and shall include any projection, decoration or trim of the sign face. 
 
(c)  Sign Face Area: The measurement shall enclose the sign face, including any projection, decoration or trim of the sign face, within not more than three squares or rectangles or both which touch and sum the areas. The squares or rectangles may be rotated. The minimum dimension of a square or rectangle connecting two sign faces is one foot. 
 
(4)  Building and Structure Elevations. The measurement shall be of the tenant's owned or leased wall and from the perspective of an architectural elevation. 
(a)  Height of Elevation: The measurement shall be from the grade to the highest point, except flagpoles and similar spires, of the building or structure wall, including all vertical surfaces and non-vertical surfaces which have a vertical surface above them as shown below. 
 
 
 
(b)  Width of Elevation: The measurement shall be from the outer edges side to side, including all vertical surfaces and non-vertical surfaces which have a vertical surface above them. The following figures illustrate the methods. 
 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96)  
TDC 38.130. - Prohibited Signs. 
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the display of national flags, state flags of the United States, special purpose districts, or local governments. The following signs or advertising devices are prohibited by this Chapter. 
(1)  A sign not specifically permitted by this Chapter, except as otherwise provided in Chapter 33 (Applications) for approved sign variances and Chapter 35 (Nonconforming Situations) for legal nonconforming signs. 
(2)  A sign required to have been issued a sign permit, but for which no sign permit has been issued. 
(3)  Any sign which is erected and fails to comply with sign regulations. 
(4)  A-frame (sandwich board) sign, except as otherwise provided in TDC 38.110(12), Lawn Signs. 
(5)  Abandoned sign. 
(6)  Animated sign. 
(7)  Balloons (including children's balloons and balloons inflated by blown, pumped or forced air); blimps, festoon lighting, inflatable signs, pennants and streamers. 
(8)  Bench sign or a sign on other furniture. 
(9)  Fin sign; flashing sign. 
(10)  Indirect illuminated signs which direct light into residential districts. 
(11)  Obscene sign. 
(12)  Obstructing sign. 
(13)  Portable sign, except as otherwise provided in TDC 38.110(5) and (12) for temporary banners and lawn signs, respectively. 
(14)  Readerboard sign, mechanical or electronic, except as otherwise provided in TDC 38.110(9)(k) and 38.225(1)(j) for directory signs, 38.140(2)(b) and (2)(d)(vii), 38.150(5)(b), 38.160(2)(b), 38.170(2)(b) and 38.180(2)(b) for schools and churches, 38.240(1)(a)(vii) for schools for kindergarten through 12, and 38.220(1)(c)(viii) and 38.220(1)(d)(vii) for cinemas, theaters and churches. 
(15)  Electronic message display sign or changing image sign, except as otherwise provided in TDC 38.140(2)(e) for a public high school located on a School District property in the RL Planning District with an area of 40 acres or greater. 
(16)  Roof sign. 
(17)  Rotating, revolving or moving signs. 
(18)  Search lights, beacons or strobe lights. 
(19)  Shingle/blade signs, except as otherwise provided in TDC 38.230(1)(b)(vii), 38.220(1)(d)(viii) and 38.225(1). 
(20)  Signs attached to trees. 
(21)  Snipe signs and nonpublic signs attached to or mounted on objects within the public right-of-way, such as on utility poles. 
(22)  Signs attached to or located on a stationary vehicle or trailer which is visible from a public right-of-way or parking lot or other area accessible to the public, and intended primarily for display of the sign. 
(23)  Signs resembling official traffic signs or signals, for example signs stating "stop," "go slow," "caution," "danger" and "warning," except officially authorized or installed by the City of Tualatin, State of Oregon or Washington or Clackamas County. 
(24)  Signs with visible incandescent bulbs or fluorescent tubes or signs with a visible immediate source of illumination, except neon. The erection or placement on any exterior portion of a building or structure of incandescent or fluorescent illumination is prohibited, except incandescent bulbs of less than 15 watts during the period November 1 through January 10. 
(25)  Signs which have lost their status as legal signs either due to alteration, modification, relocation or replacement without first obtaining a sign permit when a sign permit is required. 
(26)  Signs associated with illegal uses according to the provisions of the Tualatin Development Code or decisions on applications made pursuant to the Tualatin Development Code. 
(27)  Signs which constitute a public nuisance. 
(28)  Unsafe signs. 
(29)  Signs which incorporate flames or emit sounds or odors. 
(30)  Electrical signs whose electricity is provided by any means except underground wiring. 
(31)  Signs supported in whole or in part by cables or guy wires or which have cables or guy wires extending to or from them. 
(32)  Permanent signs on a property with no building. 
(33)  Permanent signs on a building with no occupants. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96; Ord. 966-97, §3, 1-13-97; Ord. 1120-02, 11-15-02; Ord. 1176-04, 11-22-04; Ord. 1200-05, 10-24-05; Ord. 1322-11 §3, 5-9-11; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18)  
TDC 38.140. - Signs Permitted in the Residential Low Density (RL) Planning District. 
(1)  No sign shall be permitted in the RL Planning District for permitted uses and conditional uses that allow single family dwellings except the following: 
(a)  Subdivision, home occupation and public transit shelter signs in accordance with TDC 38.110(15), (11) and (14). 
(2)  No sign shall be permitted in the RL Planning District for conditional uses other than single family dwellings except the following: 
(a)  Subdivision, home occupation and public transit shelter signs in accordance with TDC 38.110(15), (11) and (14). 
(b)  Monument signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply. 
(i)  Number: One per frontage on a public street right-of-way, and no more than one on each frontage. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than five feet. 
(iv)  Area: No more than 18 square feet. 
(v)  Illumination: Indirect. 
(vi)  Location: No greater than 30 feet from the frontage property line along the public street right-of-way. 
(vii)  For churches the sign may be an internally illuminated mechanical readerboard provided it is on the frontage of an arterial or collector street designated in TDC 11, Figure 11-1, and the readerboard portion is no more than 75 percent of the allowed sign face area. 
(c)  Wall signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: In addition to the monument signs permitted in TDC 38.140(2)(b) above, each building on the site is permitted one wall sign, provided that the building has no less than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the height of the sign band. 
(iv)  Area: One wall sign on one of the buildings shall be no more than 16 square feet. Wall signs on all other buildings shall be no more than eight square feet. 
(v)  Illumination: Indirect. 
(d)  In place of one of the monument signs allowed in TDC 38.140(2)(b) above, public K-12 schools are permitted pole signs subject to the following standards: 
(i)  Number: One per school site. Not allowed on a public high school site where an electronic message display monument sign subject to TDC 38.140(2)(e) is present. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than 15 feet. 
(iv)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than five feet. 
(v)  Area: No more than 35 square feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Internal or indirect. 
(vii)  Mechanical Readerboard: The sign may be a mechanical readerboard. 
(viii)  Location: Elementary school readerboards shall be on an arterial public street right-of-way frontage or a collector frontage if no arterial frontage exists. 
(e)  In addition to a monument sign allowed in TDC 38.140(2)(b) above, a public high school (Grades 9-12) on a property of 40 acres or larger in area is permitted one freestanding monument sign with an electronic message display subject to the following standards: 
(i)  Number: One per school site. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than eight feet. 
(iv)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than six feet. 
(v)  Area of Sign Face: No more than 32 square feet with the electric display occupying no more than 75 percent of the sign face area. 
(vi)  Illumination of non-electronic sign face: Internal including halo effect illumination. 
(vii)  Electronic Message display shall have a maximum transition time between messages of two seconds, have a minimum display time where the image remains static for a period of 20 seconds or more; have a maximum luminance of 500 candelas per square meter after sunset and before sunrise; and shall be equipped with an automatic dimming feature that adjusts for ambient light levels. 
(viii)  Time of Operation: Electronic message display is restricted from the hours of 10:00 pm. to 7:00 am. 
(ix)  Location: An electronic message display shall be located within 30 feet of an arterial public street right-of-way frontage and no closer than 100 feet to a residential property. 
(f)  In place of the wall signs allowed in TDC 38.140(2)(c) above, public schools are permitted wall signs subject to the following standards: 
(i)  Number: Each building on the school site is permitted wall signage on each elevation. One sign per elevation is allowed. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the height of the sign band. 
(iv)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than five feet, except that one wall sign on the east elevation of the primary building at a public high school may be up to ten feet in height. 
(v)  Area: No more than 75 square feet, except one wall sign on the east elevation of the primary building at a public high school shall not exceed 300 square feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Internal or indirect. 
(3)  See TDC 38.110(5-15) for additional signage and if used, the standards of TDC 38.110(5-15) apply. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 1002-98 §1, 4-27-98; Ord. 1120-02, 11-15-02; Ord. 1322-11 §4, 5-9-11; Ord. 1354-13§6, 02-25-13)  
TDC 38.150. - Signs Permitted in the Residential Medium to Low Density (RML) Planning District. 
(1)  No sign shall be permitted in the RML Planning District for permitted multi-family developments of more than two dwelling units except the following: 
(a)  Home occupation and public transit shelter signs in accordance with TDC 38.110(11) and (14). 
(b)  Monument signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: One per motor vehicle access to a public street right-of-way and no more than one at each motor vehicle access. For multi-family developments located on parcels of at least 3.0 acres, an additional monument sign is permitted on each public street right-of-way frontage of a development on a collector or arterial street if motor vehicle access for the development is not taken from the collector or arterial street. The additional street frontage along the collector or arterial shall be at least 250 feet. Additional monument signs are not permitted on frontages on Interstate 5 and railroad rights-of-way. 
(ii)  Location: Monument signs permitted at the access shall be placed within 75 feet of the access. Additional monument signs allowed along collector or arterial street frontage shall be placed within 60 feet of the right-of-way. 
(iii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iv)  Height Above Grade: No higher than five feet. 
(v)  Area: No more than 18 square feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(c)  Wall Signs Are Permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: One per development in place of a monument sign. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the height of the sign band. 
(iv)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than two feet. 
(v)  Area: No more than 18 square feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(2)  No sign shall be permitted in the RML Planning District for permitted duplexes on one tax lot except the following: 
(a)  Home occupation and public transit shelter signs in accordance with TDC 38.110(11) and (14). 
(3)  No sign shall be permitted in the RML Planning District for permitted manufactured dwelling parks except the following: 
(a)  Home occupation and public transit shelter signs in accordance with TDC 38.110(11) and (14). 
(b)  Monument signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply. 
(i)  Number: One per motor vehicle access to a public street right-of-way and no more than one at each motor vehicle access. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than five feet. 
(iv)  Area: No more than 18 square feet. 
(v)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(vi)  Location: Monument signs permitted at motor vehicle accesses shall be placed within 75 feet of the centerline of the access. 
(4)  No sign shall be permitted in the RML Planning District for small lot subdivisions except the following: 
(a)  Subdivision, home occupation and public transit shelter signs in accordance with TDC 38.110(15), (11) and (14). 
(5)  No sign shall be permitted in the RML Planning District for conditional uses other than single family dwellings except the following: 
(a)  Home occupation and public transit shelter signs in accordance with TDC 38.110(11) and (14). 
(b)  See TDC 38.140(2)(b) and (c) for monument and wall signs. 
(6)  See TDC 38.110(5-15) for additional signage and if used, the standards of TDC 38.110(5-15) apply. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 966-97 §5, 1-13-97; Ord. 1002-98 §2, 4-27-98)  
TDC 38.160. - Signs Permitted in the Residential Medium to High Density (RMH) Planning District. 
(1)  No sign shall be permitted in the RMH Planning District for permitted multi-family developments except the following: See TDC 38.150(1). 
(2)  No sign shall be permitted in the RMH Planning District for conditional uses except the following: 
(a)  Home occupation and public transit shelter signs in accordance with TDC 38.110(11) and (14). 
(b)  See TDC 38.140(2)(b) and (c) for monument and wall signs. 
(3)  See TDC 38.110(5-15) for additional signage and if used, the standards of TDC 38.110(5-15) apply. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96)  
TDC 38.170. - Signs Permitted in the Residential High Density (RH) Planning District. 
(1)  No sign shall be permitted in the RH Planning District for permitted multifamily developments except the following: See TDC 38.150(1). 
(2)  No sign shall be permitted in the RH Planning District for conditional uses except the following: 
(a)  Home occupation and public transit shelter signs in accordance with TDC 38.110(11) and (14). 
(b)  See TDC 38.140(2)(b) and (c) for monument and wall signs. 
(3)  See TDC 38.110(5-15) for additional signage and if used, the standards of TDC 38.110(5-15) apply. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96)  
TDC 38.180. - Signs Permitted in the Residential High Density/High Rise (RH/HR) Planning District. 
(1)  No sign shall be permitted in the RH/HR Planning District for permitted multifamily developments except the following: 
(a)  See TDC 38.150(1)(a) and (b). 
(b)  Wall signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Location on building: On a building wall on the sign band on the first or second story. 
(ii)  Number: One per development in place of a monument sign. 
(iii)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(iv)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the height of the sign band. 
(v)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than two feet. 
(vi)  Area: No more than 18 square feet. 
(vii)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(2)  No sign shall be permitted in the RH/HR Planning District for conditional uses except the following: 
(a)  Home occupation and public transit shelter signs in accordance with TDC 38.110(11) and (14). 
(b)  See TDC 38.140(2)(b) and (c) for monument and wall signs. 
(3)  See TDC 38.110(5-15) for additional signage and if used, the standards of TDC 38.110(5-15) apply. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96).  
TDC 38.190. - Signs Permitted in the Office Commercial (CO) and Mid-Rise Office Commercial (CO/MR) Planning Districts. 
(1)  No sign shall be permitted in the CO and CO/MR Planning Districts for permitted and conditional uses except the following: 
(a)  Monument signs are permitted. If a Major Commercial Center Directory Sign is not used, the following standards apply. 
(i)  Number: One per frontage on a public street right-of-way with a maximum of two, except in the CO/MR District where the maximum of two does not apply, and no more than one on each frontage. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than ten feet. 
(iv)  Area: No more than 32 square feet. 
(v)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(vi)  Location: No greater than 30 feet from the frontage property line along the public right-of-way. 
(b)  If a Major Commercial Center Directory Sign is used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  The Directory Signs shall be freestanding monument signs. 
(ii)  The Directory Signs are allowed in a Major Commercial Center in CO, CO/MR, Planning Districts. 
(iii)  A Major Commercial Center may choose to erect up to two Major Commercial Center Directory Signs for the center. 
(iv)  Location on Site: A Major Commercial Center Directory sign shall be located out of the public right-of-way and adjacent to a private driveway or turnout in a manner that will be visually accessible to the public street and allow a driver to safely pull up and view the sign from their vehicle. The sign shall be located no greater than 50 feet from frontage property line along the public right-of-way and shall not be located within 50 feet of a Major Collector or Arterial Street right-of way. 
(v)  Location as Part of a Fence: Not permitted. 
Number of Sides: no more than two. 
Height of Sign: No higher than eight feet. 
Sign Face Area: a Major Commercial Center Directory sign may be up to 100 square feet. 
Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
Height of Copy: No higher than two inches, except that 20 percent of the sign face area may have copy up to ten inches. Map size is not restricted by this subsection. 
(c)  In addition to Directory Signs allowed in TDC 38.190(1)(b) above, additional monument signs are permitted for separate buildings in Major Commercial Centers of greater than 3.0 acres. If monuments signs are used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Location on Site: At least 150 feet shall separate additional monument signs from each other. At least 100 feet shall separate additional monument signs from the Directory Monument signs permitted in TDC 38.190(1)(b) above. 
(ii)  Number: One per individual building in the Major Commercial Center. 
(iii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iv)  Height Above Grade: No higher than six feet. 
(v)  Area: No more than 32 square feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(d)  Wall signs for one story buildings are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: One on each owned or leased wall not to exceed four walls of a building. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the height of the sign band. 
(iv)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than three feet provided that no letter or number is higher than two feet. Logos, including logos composed of letters or numbers, may be up to three feet in height. 
(v)  Area: No more than 40 square feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(e)  Wall signs for buildings with two or more building floors are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: One on each wall not to exceed four walls of a building. For one building wall with a wall area greater than 4,500 square feet, three wall signs are allowed on the sign band provided the signs are separated by a minimum of 25 feet. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the height of the sign band. 
(iv)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than three feet provided that no letter or number is higher than two feet. Logos, including logos composed of letters or numbers, may be up to three feet in height. 
(v)  Area: No more than 40 square feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(f)  Main Building Entrance wall signs for buildings with two or more building floors are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: One on a main building entrance wall sign band not to exceed one entrance of a building. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the height of the main building entrance sign band. 
(iv)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than two feet. 
(v)  Area: No more than 20 square feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(2)  See TDC 38.110(5-15) for additional signage and if used, the standards of TDC 38.110(5-15) apply. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96; Ord. 1002-98 §3, 4-27-98; Ord. 1013-99 §§3 and 4, 1-11-99, Ord. 1276-09, 3-9-09)  
TDC 38.200. - Signs Permitted in the Neighborhood Commercial (CN) Planning District. 
(1)  No sign shall be permitted in the CN Planning District except the following: 
(a)  Monument signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: No more than one. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than five feet. 
(iv)  Area: No more than 32 square feet. 
(v)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(b)  Wall Signs Are Permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: One per owner or tenant space not to exceed two walls of a building and provided such walls face a public street. 
(ii)  Number of Faces: No more than one. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the height of the sign band. 
(iv)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than one foot. 
(v)  Area: No more than 16 square feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(2)  See TDC 38.110(5-16) for additional signage and if used, the standards of TDC 38.110(5-16) apply. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96)  
TDC 38.210. - Signs Permitted in the Recreation Commercial (CR) Planning District. 
(1)  No sign shall be permitted in the CR Planning District for permitted and commercial conditional uses except the following: 
(a)  Monument signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: No more than one. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than five feet. 
(iv)  Area: No more than 32 square feet. 
(v)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(b)  Wall signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: One per owner or tenant space not to exceed two walls of a building. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the height of the sign band. 
(iv)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than two feet. 
(v)  Area: No more than 32 square feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(2)  No sign shall be permitted in the CR Planning District for multifamily conditional uses except the following: 
(a)  Home Occupation and Public Transit Shelter Signs in accordance with TDC 38.110(11) and (14). 
(b)  See TDC 38.140(2)(b) and (c) for monument and wall signs. 
(3)  No sign shall be permitted in the CR Planning District for manufactured dwelling park conditional uses except the following: 
(a)  Home occupation and public transit shelter signs in accordance with TDC 38.110(11) and (14). 
(b)  See TDC 38.140(2)(b) for monument signs. 
(4)  See TDC 38.110(5-15) for additional signage and if used, the standards of TDC 38.110(5-15) apply. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96)  
TDC 38.220. - Signs Permitted in the Central Commercial (CC) and General Commercial (CG) Planning Districts. 
(1)  Additional sign types are allowed on Multi-story Buildings, on buildings within a Major Commercial Center, and within the Central Design District. No sign shall be permitted in the CC or CG Planning Districts for permitted and conditional uses except the following: 
(a)  Monument signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: One for a single frontage lot. Two for a single frontage lot with a minimum of 1.5-2.0 acres in lot area and 500 feet of frontage on one public street, provided the signs are not less than 300 feet apart from each other. Two for a corner lot with two or more frontages, provided the signs are not less than 300 feet apart from each other. Two for a through lot with two or more frontages, provided no more than one sign is on each frontage. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than eight feet, except a Major Commercial Center sign may be up to ten feet. 
(iv)  Area: No more than 40 square feet, except a Major Commercial Center sign may be up to 55 square feet. 
(v)  Letter, Symbol, Logo, Size: Letters, symbols and logos shall be at least one foot high measured from the top of the letter/symbol/logo to the bottom of the letter/symbol/logo. Numbers may be less than one foot high. 
(vi)  Illumination: Subject to Sign Design Review Standards of TDC 38.075, direct, indirect or internal. 
(vii)  Location: No greater than 30 feet from the frontage property line along the public right-of-way. 
(viii)  Design: Subject to Sign Design Review Standards of TDC 38.075. 
(b)  Monument signs in addition to those allowed in TDC 38.220(1)(a) above are permitted for separate buildings in Major Commercial Centers of greater than 3.0 acres. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Location on Site: At least 150 feet shall separate additional monument signs from each other. At least 100 feet shall separate additional monument signs from the monument and pole signs permitted in TDC 38.220(1)(a) above and 38.220(1)(c) below. 
(ii)  Number: One per separate building up to a maximum of four buildings. 
(iii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iv)  Height Above Grade: No higher than six feet. 
(v)  Area: No more than 32 square feet. 
(vi)  Letter, Symbol, Logo, Size: See TDC 38.220(1)(a)(v). 
(vii)  Illumination: Subject to Sign Design Review Standards of TDC 38.075, indirect or internal. 
(viii)  Design: Subject to Sign Design Review Standards of TDC 38.075. 
(c)  Pole signs are permitted in place of the monument signs allowed in TDC 38.220(1)(a) above, except on an Arterial Street frontage. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: One for a single Collector or Local Street frontage lot. Two for a corner lot with two or more Collector or Local Street frontages, provided the signs are not less than 300 feet apart from each other. Two for a through lot with two or more Collector or Local Street frontages, provided no more than one sign is on each frontage. Notwithstanding the preceding sentences in TDC 38.220(1)(c)(i), a Major Commercial Center is limited to one freestanding pole sign. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: There is no restriction, except Major Commercial Center Signs are limited to two sides. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than 15 feet, except the Major Commercial Center Sign may be up to 20 feet. 
(iv)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than eight feet, except the Major Commercial Center Sign may be up to ten feet. 
(v)  Area: No more than 48 square feet, except the Major Commercial Center sign may be up to 100 square feet. 
(vi)  Letter, Symbol, Logo, Size: See TDC 38.220(1)(a)(v). 
(vii)  Illumination: Subject to Sign Design Review Standards of TDC 38.075, direct, indirect or internal, except the Major Commercial Center sign shall not be direct. 
(viii)  Mechanical Readerboard: For churches, cinemas and theaters, the sign may be a mechanical readerboard. 
(ix)  Design. Subject to Sign Design Review Standards of TDC 38.075. 
(d)  Wall Signs Are Permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: One on each owned or leased wall not to exceed four walls of a building. For walls not oriented toward and not located within 150 feet of the Wetland Protected Area or a Natural Resource Protection Overlay District (NRPO) as shown on Map 72-1, two wall signs are allowed on an owned or leased wall of 4,000-4,999.99 square feet provided the distance between the two signs is greater than 25 feet, and three wall signs on an owned or leased wall equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the height of the sign band on the owned or leased space. 
(iv)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than four feet provided no letter or number (does not include logos, caricatures, scenes, non-letters and non-numerical symbols) shall be more than two feet when erected on owned or leased walls whose area is less than 4,000 square feet, and no higher than four feet for letters, numbers, logos, caricatures, scenes and symbols when erected on owned or leased walls equal to or greater than 4,000 square feet. If a sign's square footage is less than ½ the maximum area allowed, then the height of the sign can be doubled. If the sign height is doubled, the height of any logo, symbols, caricatures or scenes may be up to five feet. 
(v)  Area: For owned or leased walls whose area is 0 to 400 square feet, a sign area of at least 24 square feet or ten percent of the wall area is allowed, whichever is greater. For walls whose area is 400 to 3,999.9 square feet, a sign area of no more than 40 square feet is allowed. For walls not oriented toward and not located within 150 feet of the Wetland Protected Area or a NRPO District as shown on Map 72-1, a total sign area of up to 100 square feet is allowed for a wall 4,000-4,999.9 square feet provided that when two wall signs are erected neither sign is larger than 75 square feet, and for walls equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet, a sign area of up to 150 square feet is allowed. 
(vi)  Illumination: Direct, indirect or internal. 
(vii)  Mechanical Readerboard: For churches, cinemas and theaters the sign may be a mechanical readerboard. 
(2)  On Multi-story Buildings and on buildings within a Major Commercial Center or within the Central Design District, additional building sign types are permitted subject to the following standards: 
(a)  Directory-style Wall Signs. One directory-style wall sign may be erected in place of one wall sign allowed in TDC 38.220(1)(d) or a blade or shingle sign allowed in TDC 38.220(2)(b). If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Location: Directory-style wall signs shall be placed within the primary sign band or in place of a 2nd Floor Tenant Wall sign as allowed in TDC 38.220(2)(c). 
(ii)  Number: In place of one wall sign allowed in TDC 38.220(1)(d), one directory-style wall sign. 
(iii)  Number of Sides. No more than one. 
(iv)  Height of Sign Face. Directory-style wall signs shall be no higher than eight feet. 
(v)  Width of Sign Face: Directory-style Wall signs shall not extend greater than 16 inches beyond the building wall. 
(vi)  Sign Face Area: No more than 32 square feet. 
(vii)  Illumination: Direct, indirect or internal. 
(b)  Shingle or Blade Signs. Except for walls that adjoin the Lake of the Commons, for each owned or leased space with ground floor frontage and in place of one wall sign or Directory-style wall sign, one shingle sign or blade sign may be erected. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Location: Shingle signs and blade signs need not be placed within the tenant wall primary sign band, but shall be located on the tenant wall or wall appurtenances. Blade signs shall be attached to the wall of a building and shingle signs shall be attached to the underside of an awning, canopy, marquee or building overhang. 
(ii)  Number: In place of one wall sign allowed in TDC 38.220(1)(d), one shingle sign or one blade sign. 
(iii)  Number of Sides: No more than two sides. 
(iv)  Height of Sign Face: Shingle signs shall be no higher than three feet. Blade signs shall be no higher than ten feet. 
(v)  Width of Sign Face: Shingle signs attached to the underside of awning, canopy, marquee or building overhang shall not extend out beyond the outer edge of the element to which they are attached. Blade signs shall not extend greater than four feet beyond the building wall. 
(vi)  Sign Face Area: No more than 24 square feet. 
(vii)  Height of Sign. The distance from the sidewalk or grade up to the bottom of the sign shall be at least eight feet. 
(viii)  Illumination: Direct, indirect or internal. 
(ix)  Blade and shingle signs shall be constructed with three-dimensional letters, numbers and graphic elements. 
(c)  2nd Floor Tenant Wall Signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: On a 2-story or more building, one per floor above the first floor with a maximum of two per building wall provided the signs are separated by a minimum of 25 feet The maximum number of 2nd Floor Tenant Wall signs is four on the building. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(iii)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than three feet provided that no letter or number is higher than two feet. Logos, including logos composed of letters or numbers, may be up to three feet in height. 
(iv)  Area: No more than 40 square feet. 
(v)  Illumination: Direct, indirect or halo. 
(vi)  Location: On the building wall of the building's 2nd Floor or above. 
(vii)  An internally illuminated cabinet sign is not allowed. 
(d)  Canopy-mounted Building Identification Signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: One per primary entrance of a 2-story or more building, with a maximum of two on the building when separated by two elevations or a minimum of 50 feet distance measured on the building wall surfaces. 
(ii)  Number of sides: No more than one. 
(iii)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than the height of the canopy fascia. For a canopy with signage on top of the fascia, the area to be used in calculating the 35 percent is the allowed height of the sign, 16 inches, multiplied by the length of the front and sides of the canopy fascia. 
(iv)  Area: No more than 35 percent of the area of a canopy fascia provided the total canopy signage is no more than 24 square feet. For a canopy with signage on top of the fascia, the area to be used in calculating the 35 percent is the allowed height of the sign, 16 inches, multiplied by the length of the front and sides of the canopy fascia. 
(v)  Illumination: Direct, indirect, or halo. 
(vi)  Location: The signage shall be on the wall above the primary entrance, on the primary entrance canopy fascia or on top of the canopy fascia. 
(vii)  Signage located on top of a canopy or as a marquee shall not be an internally-illuminated cabinet sign. 
(e)  Small Projecting Signs (shingle or blade style). For each owned or leased space with ground floor frontage, one small projecting sign may be erected. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Location: Small Projecting Signs (shingle or blade style) need not be placed within the tenant wall primary sign band. The signs shall be attached to the wall of a building or attached to the underside of an awning, canopy, marquee or building overhang. 
(ii)  Number: One per ground floor tenant wall. 
(iii)  Number of sides: No more than two sides. 
(iv)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than 1.5 feet. 
(v)  Width of Sign Face: Three feet. 
(vi)  Sign Face Area: No more than 4.5 square feet. 
(vii)  Height of Sign. The distance from the sidewalk or grade up to the bottom of the sign shall be at least eight feet. 
(viii)  Illumination: Direct, indirect or internal. 
(3)  See TDC 38.110(5-17) for additional signage and if used, the standards of TDC 38.110(5-17) apply. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96; Ord. 966-97 §4, 1-13-97; Ord. 990-98 §1, 2-9-98; Ord. 1002-98 §4, 4-27-98; Ord. 1120-02, 11-15-02; Ord. 1176-04, 11-22-04; Ord. 1994-05, 8-22-05; Ord. No. 1261-08 §5, 6-9-08; Ord. 1302-10 §4, 5-24-10; Ord. 1335-11 §3, 11-14-11; Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 9, 6-22-20)  
TDC 38.225. - Signs Permitted in the Mixed Use Commercial (MUC) Planning District. 
(1)  No sign shall be permitted in the MUC Planning District for permitted and conditional uses except the following: 
(a)  Monument signs are permitted. If used, TDC 38.110(1) and the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: One for a single frontage lot. Two for a corner lot with two or more frontages, provided the signs are not less than 300 feet apart from each other. Two for a through lot with two or more frontages, provided no more than one sign is on each frontage. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than eight feet. 
(iv)  Area: No more than 40 square feet. 
(v)  Letter, Symbol, Logo, Size: Letters, symbols and logos shall be at least one foot high measured from the top of the letter/symbol/logo to the bottom of the letter/symbol/logo. Numbers may be less than one foot high. 
(vi)  Illumination: Direct, indirect or internal. 
(vii)  Location: No greater than 30 feet from the frontage property line along the public right-of-way. 
(b)  A project sign is permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: One for a project. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: One. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than eight feet. 
(iv)  Sign Face Height: No higher than six feet. 
(v)  Sign Face Area: No more than 200 square feet. 
(vi)  Letter, Number, Symbol Size: No higher than four feet, except logos which can be up to six feet high. 
(vii)  Illumination: Direct, indirect or internal. 
(viii)  Location: At the intersection of two public streets. The sign shall be no greater than 60 feet from the frontage property line along the public right-of-way. 
(ix)  Type: The sign face shall be on a freestanding wall or a wall set into a slope. 
(x)  Separation: There shall be at least 100 feet separating the project sign from a sign allowed in TDC 38.225(1)(a). 
(c)  Wall signs are permitted. If used, TDC 38.110(3) and the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: One on each owned or leased wall not to exceed four walls of a building. Two wall signs are allowed on an owned or leased wall of 3,000-4,999.9 square feet provided the distance between the two signs is greater than 25 feet. Three wall signs are allowed on an owned or leased wall equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the height of the sign band on the owned or leased space. 
(iv)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than ten feet, provided no letter or number (does not include logos, caricatures, scenes, non-letters and non-numerical symbols) shall be more than five feet. 
(v)  Area: For owned or leased walls whose area is 0 to 400 square feet, a sign area of at least 24 square feet or ten percent of the wall area is allowed, whichever is greater. For walls whose area is 400.1 to 3,999.9 square feet, a total sign area of no more than 125 square feet is allowed. For walls whose area is equal to or greater than 4,000 square feet, a total sign area of no more than 150 square feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Direct, indirect or internal. 
(d)  Wall Mounted Plaque signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: One at each customer entry area. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the top of the door at a customer entry area. 
(iv)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than two feet. 
(v)  Sign Face Area: No more than four square feet. The area shall not be included in the area in TDC, 38.225(1)(c)(v) above. 
(vi)  Illumination: Indirect. 
(vii)  Location: To the side of a customer entry area. They need not be placed within the sign band for wall signs. 
(viii)  Sign Depth. The plaque may be flush with or inset into a wall, or may extend out from a wall no more than one inch. 
(ix)  Sign Face Orientation: The face shall be parallel to a wall. 
(e)  Shingle signs and blade signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Location: Shingle signs and blade signs need not be placed within the sign band. Blade signs shall be attached to the wall of a building and shingle signs shall be attached to the underside of an awning, canopy, marquee or building overhang. 
(ii)  Number: In addition to the wall signs allowed in TDC, 38.225(1)(c), one shingle sign or one blade sign for each owned or leased wall, except as allowed in TDC 38.225(1)(k). 
(iii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iv)  Height of Sign Face: Shingle signs shall be no higher than three feet. Blade signs shall be no higher than ten feet, except as allowed in TDC 38.225(1)(k). 
(v)  Width of Sign Face: Shingle signs attached to the underside of an awning, canopy, marquee or building overhang shall not extend out beyond the outer edge of the element to which they are attached. Blade signs shall not extend greater than four feet beyond the building wall. 
(vi)  Sign Face Area: No more than 16 square feet, except as allowed in TDC 38.225(1)(k). The area shall not be included in the area in TDC 38.225(1)(c)(v). 
(vii)  Height of Sign: The distance from the sidewalk or grade up to the bottom of the sign shall be at least eight feet. 
(viii)  Illumination: Direct, indirect or internal. 
(ix)  Guy wires, cables and similar stabilization methods are not permitted. 
(f)  Inlaid Floor signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: One for each customer entry area. 
(ii)  Height Above Grade: The surface of the sign shall not extend above the surface of the floor/walkway. 
(iii)  Sign Face Area: Not greater than 20 square feet. 
(iv)  Illumination: Direct, indirect or internal. 
(v)  Location: In a customer entry area on private property, set in the floor/walkway. 
(g)  Window signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Location on Building: They shall be erected inside a building and located to be seen from the outside through a window. 
(ii)  Number: No limit provided the sign face area standard is met. 
(iii)  Sign Face Area: No more than 35 percent of the owned or leased window area. 
(iv)  Illumination: Direct or indirect. 
(h)  Awning, Canopy and Marquee signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: No limit provided the sign face area standard is met. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(iii)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than the height of the awning or canopy. For marquees, no higher than the height of the fascia. For marquees with signage on top of the fascia, no more than 16 inches, except as allowed in TDC 38.225(1)(k). 
(iv)  Area: No more than 35 percent of the area of each awning, canopy and marquee provided the total signage of all awnings, canopies and marquees are on an owned or leased wall is no more than 40 square feet. For marquees with signage on top of the fascia, the area to be used in calculating the 35 percent is the allowed height of the sign, 16 inches, multiplied by the length of the front and sides of the marquee. 
(v)  Illumination: Direct, indirect or internal. 
(vi)  Location: For awnings and canopies, the signage shall be on the awning or canopy. For marquees the signage shall be on the fascia, or on top of the fascia provided it is individual letters, numbers or elements. 
(i)  Directional signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  They shall be permanent freestanding pole or monument signs. 
(ii)  Location on Site: If they are not 100 percent visually screened from the public right-of-way, they shall be erected at least 60 feet from the public right-of-way. If 100 percent visual screening is provided, they may be within 60 feet of the public right-of-way. 
(iii)  Location as Part of a Fence or Freestanding Wall: They may be affixed to and made part of a fence or freestanding wall. 
(iv)  Number: No more than four per vehicle or pedestrian aisle or aisle intersection. 
(v)  Number of Sides: No more than 4. 
(vi)  Height of Sign: No higher than eight feet. 
(vii)  Sign Face Area: No more than four square feet per side. If affixed to a building wall the area shall not be included in the area in TDC 38.225(1)(c)(v). 
(viii)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(j)  Directory signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  They shall be permanent wall or freestanding monument signs. 
(ii)  Location on Site: Wall directories need not be erected on sign bands. Monument directories shall be at least 60 feet from a public right-of-way and within 30 feet of a customer entry area. 
(iii)  Location as Part of a Fence or Freestanding Wall: They may be affixed to and made part of a fence or freestanding wall. 
(iv)  Number: One per customer entry area. 
(v)  Number of Sides: One for a wall directory and no more than four for a monument. 
(vi)  Height of Sign: No higher than three feet for a wall directory and six feet for a monument. 
(vii)  Sign Face Area: No more than six square feet for a wall directory and 24 square feet for a monument. 
(viii)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(ix)  Height of Copy: No higher than two inches, except 20 percent of the sign face area may have copy up to five inches. Map size is not restricted by this subsection. 
(x)  The portion of the sign containing letters two inches in height or less may be a mechanical readerboard. 
(k)  Additional Blade and Marquee signage for eligible locations. This section allows an increase in the number, height, and sign face area of blade signs and an increase in the height of sign face area for marquee signs (with signage on top of the fascia) for business occupants which meet all of the criteria below. For blade signs all other standards of TDC 38.225(1)(e) shall apply. For marquee signs all other standards of TDC 38.225(1)(h) shall apply. 
(i)  Criteria: This section applies only to business tenants which meet all of the following criteria (1) the building owned or leased by the business tenant is within a commercial development that is greater than 20 acres in size; (2) the total wall area owned or leased by the business tenant is greater than 1,000 square feet; (3) the building floor area owned or leased by the business tenant is greater than 15,000 square feet; and, (4) the building area owned or leased by the business tenant is not adjacent to the public right-of-way. 
(ii)  Blade Signs—Number: two signs on two owned or leased walls; one sign for all other owned or leased walls. 
(iii)  Blade Signs—Height of Sign Face: No higher than 16 feet. 
(iv)  Blade Signs—Sign Face Area: No more than 40 square feet. The area shall not be included in the area in TDC 38.225(1)(c)(v). 
(v)  Marquee Signs—Height of Sign Face Area: For marquees with signage on top of the fascia, no more than 36 inches. 
(2)  Signage in addition to (1) above is allowed. If used, the following standards apply. 
(a)  Banner Sign, Temporary. A temporary banner sign may be erected subject to the following standards and after first obtaining a sign permit. 
(i)  One per tax lot or lease space may be displayed by a tenant. 
(ii)  A banner shall be erected on a building wall and secured to prevent it from flapping in the wind. 
(iii)  A banner shall not be erected sooner than 30 calendar days prior to a new business opening. 
(iv)  A banner shall be displayed at least seven days and may be displayed up to 60 days, but the total number of days for all banners displayed on a tax lot or lease space shall not exceed 60 days in a calendar year. 
(v)  A banner shall be no greater than three feet in height from top to bottom and 42 square feet in area. 
(b)  Banner Signs, Special Event. Special event banner signs may be erected after first obtaining City Council approval. The City Council shall review and determine the size, number, location and other issues related to special event banner signs. Special event banners shall not cross rights-of-way. 
(c)  Construction and Public Utility Facility Construction Signs. A temporary sign in association with construction on private property or of public utility facilities may be erected subject to the following standards and after first obtaining a sign permit. 
(i)  No more than one construction sign and one public utility facility construction sign, a total of two, may be displayed at a time on a property. 
(ii)  They may be erected no earlier than the day after a building permit and public works construction permit have been applied for and the appropriate fee paid. 
(iii)  They may be displayed only during the period of the construction project and shall be removed no later than 15 days after the issuance of a final occupancy permit for a construction sign, or acceptance by the City of Tualatin or other public agency of the public facility for a public utility facility construction sign. 
(iv)  The sign height shall be no higher than nine feet and the sign face area no greater than 32 square feet. 
(d)  Home Occupation Signs. Home occupation signs may be erected subject to the following standards. A sign permit is not required. 
(i)  They shall be erected only on the inside of a window. 
(ii)  They are allowed in a dwelling unit. 
(iii)  Number: No more than one per dwelling unit. 
(iv)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(v)  Height of Sign: No higher than one foot. 
(vi)  Sign Face Area: No more than one square foot. 
(vii)  Illumination: Not permitted. 
(e)  Lawn Signs. Lawn signs may be erected subject to the following standards without first obtaining a sign permit. The purpose of lawns signs is to show that a property or building is for sale or rent, and to display political messages. 
(i)  For undeveloped land: 
(A)  They shall be temporary pole or monument signs. 
(B)  Number: On a property being offered for sale, one per public street frontage. An unlimited number of additional lawn signs may be erected during the period 60 days prior to and extending no more than 12 days after a general, primary or special election. 
(C)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(D)  Height of Sign: No higher than 12 feet. Additional lawn signs erected during the election period specified above shall be no higher than three feet. 
(E)  Sign Face Area: No greater than 64 square feet for properties fronting on arterial or collector streets, and no greater than 32 square feet for properties fronting on local streets. Additional lawn signs erected during the election period specified above shall be no more than four square feet. 
(F)  Illumination: Not permitted. 
(G)  Consent: They shall be erected with the documented consent of the property owner or authorized representative. 
(ii)  For developed land: 
(A)  They shall be temporary pole or monument signs. 
(B)  Number: On a property being offered for sale or lease, one per public street frontage. An unlimited number of additional lawn signs may be erected during the period 60 days prior to and extending no more than 12 days after a general, primary or special election. 
(C)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(D)  Height of Sign: No higher than nine feet. Additional lawn signs erected during the election period specified above shall be no higher than three feet. 
(E)  Sign Face Area: No greater than 32 square feet. Additional lawn signs erected during the election period specified above shall be no more than four square feet. 
(F)  Illumination: Not permitted. 
(G)  Consent: They shall be erected only with the documented consent of the property owner or authorized representative. 
(f)  Public Transit Shelter Signs. Public transit shelter signs may be erected subject to the following standards without obtaining a sign permit. 
(i)  They shall be window or wall signs. 
(ii)  Location on Building: On the wall or in the window of a public transit shelter. 
(iii)  Number: One per wall not to exceed two walls of a public transit shelter. 
(iv)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(v)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the top of the wall or window. 
(vi)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than two feet. 
(vii)  Area: No greater than two square feet. 
(viii)  Illumination: Not permitted. 
(g)  Service Station Signs. Service station signs may be erected subject to the following standards and after first obtaining a sign permit. Service station signs are allowed only in place of, and not in addition to, the signs allowed in TDC 38.225(1) above. 
(i)  Monument signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply. 
(A)  Type: Monument Sign. 
(B)  Location as Part of a Fence: The sign may be affixed to and made part of a masonry fence. 
(C)  Number: One for a single frontage lot. Two for a corner lot with two or more frontages, provided the signs are no less than 300 feet apart from each other. Two for a through lot with two or more frontages, provided only one sign is located on each frontage. 
(D)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(E)  Height Above Grade: No higher than eight feet. 
(F)  Area: No more than 55 square feet. Gas product price signs shall be included in the 55 square foot maximum. 
(G)  Illumination: Indirect or internal only. 
(H)  Letter, Symbol, Logo Size: Letters, symbols and logos shall be at least one foot high measured from the top of the letter to the bottom of the letter. Numbers may be less than one foot high. 
(ii)  Wall Signs Are Permitted. If used, the following standards apply. 
(A)  Type: Wall sign. 
(B)  Location on Building: On a building wall or canopy fascia or both. No wall sign shall be located on a wall or spanner panel under the canopy roof. 
(C)  Number: No more than one sign per building wall or canopy fascia, not to exceed three signs total. 
(D)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(E)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the height of the sign band. 
(F)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than four feet provided no letter or number (does not include logos) shall be more than two feet high and provided the sign face shall not extend above or below the sign band. 
(G)  Area: No more than 24 square feet. Gas product price signs shall be included in the 24 square foot maximum. 
(H)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(iii)  Signs are permitted on gas pumps, provided no more than two sides of each pump are used and the signs do not exceed five square feet on each side. 
(Ord. 1176-04, 11-22-04; Ord. 1194-05, §4, 8-22-05; Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 10, 6-22-20)  
TDC 38.230. - Signs Permitted in the Medical Center (MC) Planning District. 
(1)  The provisions of this Section apply to all permitted and conditional uses in the Medical Center Planning District. To the extent that this Section conflicts with another Section of the TDC, this Section controls. Only those signs permitted in this Section are permitted. All other signs are prohibited. The following signs are permitted in the MC Planning District: 
(a)  Monument Signs; and 
(b)  Wall Signs. 
(2)  Monument Sign standards in the MC Planning District. Monument signs must comply with the following: 
(a)  Height: No greater than fourteen feet high from the grade to the highest point of the sign, including the sign face, structure and any projection, decoration, or trim of the sign face or structure. 
(b)  Sign Face Area: 
(i)  Property Boundary: Property Boundary signs must comply with each of the following: 
(A)  No greater than four faces per sign and no greater than 95 square feet of total sign face. 
(B)  Use at least three of the following Sign Exterior Elements: 
(1)  Frame trim, cap, wing, grill, exposed bracketing or other decorative sign frame element(s); 
(2)  Variation in sign profile including use of asymmetrical and curvilinear shapes and planes, and irregular height of sign elements; 
(3)  Use of three or more exterior sign materials that are elements of the site's building architecture, including masonry, concrete, ceramic, glass (figured, block or tile), stucco, metal fabric, metal tubing and wood timber materials; 
(4)  Use three dimensional lettering and graphic; 
(5)  Use "halo," baffled, and shrouded indirect illumination sources, or internally-lighted "push thru" lettering and graphic; or 
(6)  Have no more than 20 percent of sign face feature illuminated with direct lighting (exposed incandescent bulb, neon tube, LED or LCD electronic bulbs) or internally-lighted panels (fluorescent tube or other light source behind a translucent panel). 
(C)  Use at least three of the following Sign Structure and Site Elements: 
(1)  Two or more individual pole, pylon or column supports separated by a minimum of 24 inches; 
(2)  Monument-style base occupying 75 percent or greater of the width of the sign face; 
(3)  Sign setback minimum of five feet from property lines, measured to the nearest feature of the sign structure; 
(4)  Minimum 36 inch pylon or column width or diameter; 
(5)  Landscape plantings, including shrubs and groundcover, or hardscape features, including decorative rock or masonry, located at the base of the sign. 
(ii)  Vehicle Entrance Sign: No greater than four faces per sign and no greater than 40 square feet of total sign face. 
(iii)  Internal Sign: No greater than four faces per sign and no greater than 40 square feet of total sign face. 
(c)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(d)  Location: 
(i)  Property Boundary Sign: Once sign is allowed at each property boundary corner. Signs must be located within 30 feet of any public right-of-way. 
(ii)  Vehicle Entrance Sign: One sign at each vehicle entrance. Signs must be located within 30 feet of any public right-of-way. 
(iii)  Internal Sign: Signs located more than 30 feet from public right-of-way may be located anywhere on campus and be of an unlimited number. 
(e)  Vision Clearance: All signs must comply with the vision clearance provisions in TDC 38.100. 
(3)  Wall Sign Standards in MC Planning District. Wall signs must comply with the following: 
(a)  Height: 
(i)  Main Sign: No greater than eight feet high from lowest point to the highest point of the sign face, including any projection, decoration, and individual letters, cabinet or trim of the sign face. All letters or numbers must be four feet high or less. Height above grade shall be no higher than the height of the sign band. 
(ii)  Tenant Sign: Sign face shall be no greater than two feet high from lowest point to the highest point of the sign face, including any projection, decoration, and individual letters, cabinet or trim of the sign face. Height above grade shall be no higher than the height of the sign band. 
(iii)  Canopy Sign: Sign face shall be no greater than two feet high from lowest point to the highest point of the sign face, including any projection, decoration, and individual letters, cabinet or trim of the sign face. Height above grade shall be no higher than the height of the sign band. 
(b)  Sign Face: Once sign face per sign and: 
(i)  Main Sign: No greater than 100 square feet. 
(ii)  Tenant Sign: No greater than 32 square feet. 
(iii)  Canopy Sign: No greater than 32 square feet. 
(c)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(d)  Location: Wall signs are prohibited on any wall of any building that faces public right-of-way and that is within 150 feet of that public right-of-way. 
(i)  Main Sign: One wall sign may be located on each building. 
(ii)  Tenant Sign: One tenant sign per wall, but not to exceed three walls on a building. 
(iii)  Canopy Sign. In addition to the Main Sign and Tenant Signs, one wall sign per entry may be mounted to the canopy of a building in one of three ways: 
(A)  Attached to the canopy fascia; 
(B)  Mounted to the top edge of the canopy; or 
(C)  Mounted to the underside of the canopy. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96; Ord. 1002-98 §5, 4-27-98; Ord. 1063-01 §2, 2-12-01; Ord. 1063-01, 2-12-01; Ord. 1390-16, 4-25-16)  
TDC 38.240. - Signs Permitted in the Light Manufacturing (ML), General Manufacturing (MG) and Manufacturing Park (MP) Planning Districts. 
(1)  No sign shall be permitted in the ML, MG or MP Planning Districts for permitted and conditional uses except the following: 
(a)  Monument signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Location on Site: No greater than 100 feet from the frontage property line along the public street right-of-way. 
(ii)  Number: One per frontage on a public street right-of-way with a maximum of two and no more than one on each frontage. 
(iii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iv)  Height Above Grade: No higher than ten feet. 
(v)  Area: No more than 40 square feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(vii)  For schools for kindergarten through 12 in a ML Planning District, one sign may be an internally illuminated mechanical readerboard provided it is on the frontage of an arterial or collector street designated in TDC Chapter 11, Figure 11-1 and the readerboard portion is no more than 75 percent of the allowed sign face area. 
(b)  Wall signs are permitted. If used, the following standards apply: 
(i)  Number: One on each owned or leased wall not to exceed two walls for each owned or leased space and not to exceed four elevations of each building. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the height of the sign band. 
(iv)  Height of Each Letter, Number, Symbol or Logo: No higher than four feet. 
(v)  Area: No more than five percent of the wall's elevation provided that an area of at least 32 square feet is permitted and the maximum is 150 square feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(vii)  In the MP District in place of one wall sign, one monument sign, in addition to the monument signs allowed in (a) above, is allowed, provided it is in the yard setback area abutting the wall where the wall sign would have been located, is within 100 feet of a primary public customer doorway in the wall where the wall sign would have been located and is at least 100 feet from any other monument sign. 
(2)  See TDC 38.110(5-17) for additional signage and if used, the standards of TDC 38.110(5-17) apply. 
(Ord. 590-83 §1, 4-11-83; Ord. 960-96 §5, 5-28-96; Ord. 1002-98 §6, 4-27-98; Ord. 1200-05, 10-24-05; Ord. 1354-13§7, 02-25-13)  
TDC 38.250. - Signs Permitted in the Institutional (IN) Planning District. 
(1)  No sign shall be permitted in the IN Planning District for permitted and conditional uses except the following: 
(a)  Monument signs, as set forth in TDC 38.110(1), are permitted, subject to the following standards: 
(i)  Number: One per motor vehicle access to a public street right-of-way and no more than one at each motor vehicle access. 
(ii)  Location: Monument signs shall be located no further than 75 feet from motor vehicle access. 
(iii)  Number of Sides: No more than two. 
(iv)  Height Above Grade: No higher than eight feet. 
(v)  Area: Each permitted monument sign shall be no more than 32 square feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Indirect or internal. 
(vii)  Electronic Message or Mechanical Readerboard is permitted in place of or as part of a permitted monument sign on the frontage of an arterial or collector street designated in TDC 11, Figure 11-1, provided that the readerboard portion is no more than 75 percent of the allowed sign face area. 
(b)  Wall signs within a sign band, where the sign band is no higher than 17 feet from the grade used to measure height of structure, are permitted, as set forth in TDC 38.110(3), subject to the following standards: 
(i)  Number: Each building on site is permitted one wall sign per habitable floor elevation, provided that the building has no less than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the height of the sign band. 
(iv)  Area: Each wall sign shall be no more than 75 square feet. 
(v)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than five feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Internal or indirect. 
(c)  Wall signs within a sign band, where the sign band is higher than 17 feet from the grade used to measure height of structure, are permitted, as set forth in TDC 38.110(3), subject to the following standards: 
(i)  Number: Each building on site is permitted one wall sign per habitable floor elevation, provided that the building has no less than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(ii)  Number of Sides: No more than one. 
(iii)  Height Above Grade: No higher than the height of the sign band. 
(iv)  Area: Each wall sign shall be no more than eight square feet. 
(v)  Height of Sign Face: No higher than three feet. 
(vi)  Illumination: Internal or indirect. 
(d)  See TDC 38.110(5-15) for additional signage and if used, the standards of TDC 38.110(5-15) apply. 
(Ord. 1216-06, 7-24-06; Ord. 1354-13 §8, 02-25-13)  
CHAPTER 39 - USE CATEGORIES 
In General 
Residential Use Categories 
Commercial Use Categories 
Industrial Use Categories 
Institutional Use Categories 
Infrastructure and Utilities Categories  
IN GENERAL 
 
TDC 39.100. - Use Classifications—General Principles. 
(1)  Purpose. Land uses are classified into use categories based on common functional, product or physical characteristics, including the type and intensity of activity typical of impact, type(s) of customers or residents, typical off-site impacts, and building type. The basis for allowing or prohibiting the use categories in the various zones is in the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  Organization and Guidelines. Each use category is organized into the following sections: 
(a)  Characteristics. A description of the qualities and attributes, essential features, nature of operation, and impacts generally associated with a specific use. 
(b)  Examples of Uses. An illustrative, not exhaustive, list of activities or land uses that possess the characteristics of the use category. 
(3)  Multiple Uses on a Site. Uses may be regulated differently depending on the nature of the use on a site, in accordance with this section. 
(a)  Multiple Primary Uses. When all primary uses on a site fall within one use category, then the development falls within that use category. When the primary uses on a site fall within different use categories, each primary use is classified in the applicable use category and is subject to the regulations for that use category. 
(b)  Limited Uses. Limited uses are uses or activities that are allowed and may be subject to additional regulations beyond those required of the primary use. 
(c)  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses are uses or activities that are subordinate and incidental to a primary use on a site. Accessory uses are allowed in all zones in conjunction with the primary use and subject to the same regulations as the primary use, unless stated otherwise in this Code. 
(4)  Considerations in Classifying Uses. The following items are used to determine the use category of a particular use or activity, and whether the activities constitute primary or accessory uses: 
(a)  The description of the activity(ies) in relationship to the characteristics of each use category; 
(b)  The relative amount of site or floor space and equipment devoted to the activity; 
(c)  Relative amount or type of sales from each activity; 
(d)  The customer type for each activity; 
(e)  The relative number of employees in each activity; 
(f)  Hours of operation; 
(g)  Building and site arrangement; 
(h)  Type of vehicle used with the activity; 
(i)  The relative number of vehicle trips generated by the activity; 
(j)  How the use advertises itself; and 
(k)  Whether the activity would be likely to be found independent of the other activities on the site.  
TDC 39.110. - Uses Not Specifically Addressed. 
Uses not specifically addressed in this Code may be classified into a use category through the process of a Code Interpretation application, pursuant to Section 31.070 (Interpretation of Code Provisions).  
TDC 39.115 - Use Definitions. 
The following words and phrases mean: 
Animal Hospital (Including Veterinary Clinic). Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the care, observation or treatment of domestic animals. 
Assembly. As used in the Manufacturing Planning districts, assembly means the putting together of a final product using parts and components that have been fabricated elsewhere and shipped in. See also Manufacturing. 
Automobile Service Station. A fueling facility for passenger or commercial vehicles, including a card-lock facility, which may or may not include a retail mart and/or vehicle repair shop. 
Call Center or Customer Service Center. An operation that serves as a location to initiate or receive communications for others—via telephone, email, or internet—for the purposes of: (1) promoting clients products or services; (2) taking orders for clients; (3) soliciting contributions for a client; and (4) providing information or assistance regarding a client's products or services. 
Drive-up Uses. Any establishment which by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services or obtain goods while remaining in their motor vehicles. Drive up uses do not include automobile service stations. 
Family Recreation Center. A business offering two or more forms of recreational activity such as boat rides, bowling, electronic games, go-cart tracks, miniature golf, skating, water slides, or similar commercial amusements. Restaurants, gift shops and other businesses may also be included if clearly incidental to the primary recreational activities. 
Health or Fitness Facility. A facility designed to accommodate indoor or outdoor activities such as racquetball courts, tennis courts, gymnasiums, weight lifting rooms and other exercise areas, swimming pools and similar uses. 
Home Improvement Materials and Supplies Retail Sales. Retail sale of home improvement materials and supplies including, but not limited to, electrical supplies; fencing materials; floor coverings such as hardwood, linoleum, vinyl, carpet and rugs; garden tractors and lawn mowers; hardware; building insulation; wall coverings, draperies, window shades, and blinds; lawn and garden supplies; lawn mowers; lighting fixtures; lumber; masonry supplies; painting supplies; plumbing supplies and fixtures; plywood and wood panel materials; siding; roofing; window materials; durable household goods (e.g. refrigerators, stoves and washing machines); and tools (handheld and table or stand mounted). 
Hospital. An institution providing health services, primarily for inpatients, and medical, psychiatric or surgical diagnosis and care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient facilities, long-term care facilities, training facilities, central service facilities, retail facilities for the needs of patients, staff and doctors' offices, and residential facilities for staff and patients. 
Manufacturing. As used in the Manufacturing Planning districts, manufacturing means the creation of basic parts of a manufactured product from raw materials. See also Assembly. 
Memorial Planning and Products Center. A facility providing cremation and burial planning assistance and associated products and services, including a crematory, sale of memorial products such as caskets and urns, comfort rooms and witnessed placement cremation services serving the immediate family of the deceased, and similar death-care related products and services, but not including mortuaries, cemeteries, funeral homes or similar facilities that hold memorial or funeral services which are open to the general public. 
Nonretail Cardlock Fueling Station. An unattended facility where gasoline and diesel fuels are dispensed through a card or key activated fuel dispensing device by nonretail customers. 
Outdoor Storage. The storage of materials or merchandise outside of a building. Except as otherwise provided in these standards, outdoor storage includes only materials or merchandise directly related to the primary permitted use on the site where the outdoor storage is proposed to be conducted. 
Pharmacy. A place where the sole function is to dispense prescription and non-prescription drugs. The terms "dispense," "dispensing," "drugs," "non-prescription drugs," "prescription," and "prescription drugs," has the meanings indicated in ORS 689.005 which meanings are hereby adopted by reference. 
Pet Day Care. A business providing pet care services for dogs and cats such as day care, sitting services, grooming, and retail sales of pet products. Pet Day Care is not allowed for animals other than dogs or cats including exotic animals or animals not considered ordinary household pets. Kennels for dog breeding and training are not allowed. 
Portable Construction Office. An enclosed structure used for a business office or storage of construction or residential, commercial or industrial structures by the owner, subdivider, contractor, or their authorized agents and representatives. 
Recycling-Collection Center. A permanent facility for the collection, storage, repair, processing or distribution of repairable or reusable household goods or materials, when housed in a fully enclosed building. In this context, "materials" is specifically intended to include empty bottles, jars, cans, boxes or similar containers, as well as newspaper, magazines and other printed matter. 
Restaurant, Drive-In. A restaurant in which patrons order from and are served food in their automobiles and which is designed for consumption of food to occur in the automobiles on the premises. Little or no inside customer seating is provided. 
Restaurant, Take-Out. An establishment where some of the meals are prepared and served to the public for consumption on the premises; others are prepared and packaged for customers to take off the premises for consumption. A take-out restaurant may or may not include a drive-up window where customers order through a speaker, drive around and pick up food, then leave premises for consumption. 
Shared Service Facility. An operation that serves as a data center for the purposes of storing, managing, processing and exchanging digital data and information, and physically housing large amounts of computer equipment such as servers (e.g., web servers, application servers, database servers), switchers, routers, data storage devices, load balancers, wire cages or closets, vaults, racks, etc. 
Telecommuting. The act of an employee working at home by the use of an electronic linkup with a central office.  
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
 
TDC 39.200. - Household Living. 
(1)  Characteristics. Household Living is the residential occupancy of an owner-occupied or rented dwelling unit by a family or household. Dwelling units must be self-contained, with cooking, sleeping and bathroom facilities. Occupancy is long-term, 30 days or more, and non-transient. 
(2)  Housing Types. Household Living uses can be accommodated in the following housing types. Housing types are subject to the regulations specific to each planning district or overlay district. 
• Single-Family Dwelling (detached) (as defined in TDC 31.060). 
• Accessory Dwelling Unit (as defined in TDC 31.060). 
• Manufactured Dwelling (as defined in TDC 31.060). 
• Manufactured Dwelling Park (as defined in the TDC 31.060). 
• Duplex (as defined in the TDC 31.060). 
• Townhouse (as defined in the TDC 31.060). 
• Multi-Family Structure (as defined in the TDC 31.060). 
• Retirement Housing Facility (as defined in TDC 31.060). 
• Residential Home (as defined in TDC 31.060). 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Bed and breakfast inns are classified as Commercial Lodging. 
• Rentals of less than 30 days are classified as Commercial Lodging.  
TDC 39.210. - Residential Accessory Uses. 
(1)  Characteristics. Residential Accessory Uses are small-scale commercial uses that can be operated within or on the same lot as a residential dwelling in a manner that is compatible with and minimizes impacts on other residential uses. Residential Accessory Uses are permitted only as accessory uses to a primary Household Living use and are limited to the examples of uses provided in TDC 39.210(2). 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Home Occupation (as defined in TDC 31.060). 
• Family Child Care Home (as defined in TDC 31.060). 
(3)  Exceptions. None.  
TDC 39.220. - Group Living. 
(1)  Characteristics. Group Living is the residential occupancy of a structure by a group of people who do not meet the definition of Household Living. The size of the group may be larger than the average size of a household. Persons in group living may, or may not, receive care, treatment, or training for which the State requires certification or licensure. Group Living uses may have common facilities for dining, socializing, recreation, laundry, or other activities. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Residential Facility (as defined in TDC 31.060). 
• Nursing Facility (as defined in TDC 31.060). 
• Congregate Care Facility (as defined in TDC 31.060). 
• Group living associated with a religious practice or religious affiliation per state law. 
• Dormitories, fraternities, and sororities. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Lodging where tenancy may be arranged for less than 30 days is classified as Commercial Lodging.  
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
 
TDC 39.300. - Agriculture. 
(1)  Characteristics. Agricultural uses are activities that raise, produce or keep plants or animals. The raising of animals in the City of Tualatin is limited to normal household pets and chickens, as otherwise allowed by the Tualatin Municipal Code. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Production of agricultural crops. 
• Horticulture. 
• Forest harvesting. 
• Orchards. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Processing of animal or plant products are classified as either Light Manufacturing or Heavy Manufacturing, depending on the nature of the use. 
• Plant nurseries that are oriented to retail sales are classified as Durable Goods Sales.  
TDC 39.305 - Commercial Lodging. 
(1)  Characteristics. Commercial Lodging is the operation of overnight accommodations where tenancy is typically arranged on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis, and includes lodging amenities. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Bed and breakfast inns. 
• Hotels and motels. 
• Extended stay hotels or suites. 
(3)  Exceptions. Landlord-tenant arrangements on a month-to-month basis are classified as Household Living or Group Living.  
TDC 39.310. - Commercial Recreation. 
(1)  Characteristics. Commercial Recreation uses are facilities used for a variety of health, recreational, entertainment, or social activities, usually operated by a for-profit business or membership organization, but may be conducted by a non-profit or public entity. Activities are primarily by and for participants; spectators are incidental and present on a non-recurring basis. Activities may be conducted within an enclosed building or in open facilities. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Amusement enterprise, including pool hall, bowling alley, dance hall or skating rink. 
• Boat dock, marina, or boat rental. 
• Family recreation center (as defined in TDC 39.115). 
• Health or fitness facility (as defined in TDC 39.115). 
• Private meeting hall, club or lodge hall, or fraternal organizations. 
• Public or private camping grounds, including recreational vehicle parking. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Uses which draw large numbers of people to periodic events are classified as Assembly Facilities. 
• Golf courses and country clubs associated with golf courses are classified as Parks and Open Areas.  
TDC 39.315 - Commercial Parking. 
(1)  Characteristics. Commercial Parking are facilities, in structures or on surface lots, and which provide public, customer, or employee parking independent of and not associated with a particular use. A fee may or may not be charged. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Fee parking garages and surface parking lots. 
• Commercial district shared parking lots. 
• Commercial shuttle parking. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Surface lots or parking garages accessory to a particular use, used by the public during occasional nearby events are not classified as Commercial Parking.  
TDC 39.320. - Durable Goods Sales. 
(1)  Characteristics. Durable Goods Sales are the sale, rental, or lease of new and used goods having extended utility. Durable Goods Sales may require extensive indoor and/or outdoor display areas. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Retail sale of home improvement materials and supplies, including but not limited to: interior/exterior building and construction materials, electrical supplies, plumbing supplies and fixtures, lawn and landscaping equipment, floor coverings, home décor, indoor/outdoor household appliances, paint and painting supplies, and tools and hardware. 
• Retail sale of furniture and large appliances. 
• New and used sales of motorcycles, boats, recreational vehicles, or trailers. 
• Retail nurseries or greenhouses. 
• Auto leasing office. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Sales of building and landscaping materials primarily sold to contractors is classified as Wholesale Sales. 
• Sales, leasing, or rental of industrial, farm, or construction equipment is classified as Wholesale Sales. 
• Sales of bicycles are classified as Retail Sales and Service. 
• Outdoor storage or sale of automobiles is not permitted in any zone.  
TDC 39.325 - Eating and Drinking Establishments. 
(1)  Characteristics. Eating and Drinking Establishments sell food and/or beverages to the general public for on-site consumption and/or take-away service. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Cafes, coffee shops, and delicatessens. 
• Restaurants with take-out facilities. 
• Restaurants without take-out facilities. 
• Taverns, cocktail lounges, brew pubs, bars, and night clubs. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Food service that is accessory to another use, (e.g., hotel, major entertainment venue), is regulated as part of the primary use. 
• Catering or food preparation without on-site consumption is classified as Retail Sales and Services.  
TDC 39.330. - Other Educational and Vocational Services. 
(1)  Characteristics. Other Educational and Vocational Services provide specialized training or instruction not regulated by the Higher Education Coordinating Commission (HECC) or state mandated. These services may be provided to children or adults. Training or instruction may be provided for fine arts, recreational or athletic activities, professional, or academic tutorial instruction. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Martial arts or gymnastics instruction. 
• Music or dance instruction. 
• Arts and crafts schools. 
• Tutoring services (freestanding, not provided within a residential dwelling). 
• Vocational training. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Trade schools where industrial vehicles and equipment are operated are classified as Light Manufacturing. 
• Public and private elementary, middle and high schools, with or without kindergartens, are classified as Schools. 
• College, Universities and Private Career Schools regulated under Oregon Higher Education Coordinating Commission (HECC) are classified under Colleges, Universities and Private Career Schools.  
TDC 39.335 - Marijuana Facilities. 
(1)  Characteristics. Marijuana Facilities are a commercial or public use or structure where marijuana is produced, processed, wholesaled, retailed, distributed, transferred, sold or consumed and registered with the Oregon Health Authority (OHA) or the Oregon Liquor Control Commission (OLCC). 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Marijuana retail sale facility. 
• Medical marijuana dispensary. 
• Marijuana production or processing facility. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• The production of marijuana extracts through the use of butane is prohibited.  
TDC 39.345 - Medical Office. 
(1)  Characteristics. Medical Offices are facilities operated by one or more physicians, dentists, chiropractors or other licensed practitioners of the healing arts for the examination and treatment of persons solely on an outpatient basis. Medical Offices typically receive many patients and visitors throughout the day. Laboratories designed for diagnostic testing and analysis for medical or dental purposes are also classified as Medical Office. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Medical, dental and allied health clinics and offices, and blood collection facilities. 
• Medical and dental laboratories. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Offices used for non-medical industries are classified as Office.  
TDC 39.346. - Office. 
(1)  Characteristics. Office uses are characterized by activities conducted in an office setting that focus on the provision of goods and services, usually by professionals. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Computer system design and programming. 
• Construction contracting offices without on-site storage of equipment or materials. 
• Data processing. 
• Engineering, architectural, planning, and similar services. 
• Graphic and industrial design. 
• Government offices. 
• Magazine or newspaper distribution agency. 
• Movie production facilities and recording studios. 
• Financial, legal, insurance, and real estate services. 
• Scientific and technical services. 
• Software and internet content development and publishing. 
• Telecommunication service providers. 
• Telemarketing or customer support center. 
• Television, video, radio, and internet studios and broadcasters. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Facilities operated by one or more physicians, dentists, chiropractors or other licensed practitioners of the healing arts for the examination and treatment of persons are classified as Medical Office. 
• Laboratories designed for diagnostic testing and analysis for medical or dental purposes are classified as Medical Office. 
• If construction equipment and materials are stored on site, contracting firms are classified as Light or Heavy Manufacturing.  
TDC 39.350. - Quick Vehicle Servicing. 
(1)  Characteristics. Quick Vehicle Servicing provides direct services for motor vehicles at a drive-through facility, which may include a mini-mart in certain zones, where the service is performed and where the driver generally waits for the service to be performed. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Automobile Service Station (as defined in TDC 39.115). 
• Non-Retail Cardlock Fueling Station (as defined in TDC 39.115). 
• Car washes. 
• Quick lubrication services. 
• Department of Environmental Quality vehicle emission test sites. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Refueling facilities for the vehicles that belong to a specific use (fleet vehicles) which are on the site where the vehicles are kept are accessory to the primary use. 
• Outdoor storage or sale of automobiles is not permitted in any zone.  
TDC 39.355 - Retail Sales and Services. 
(1)  Characteristics. Retail Sales and Services sell, lease, rent and/or repair new or used products or provide personal services. These products and services typically are provided directly to consumers, as opposed to wholesale products and services provided to industrial, institutional, or commercial customers. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Sales, leasing or rental of products and equipment including art and crafts supplies, clothing electronic equipment, flowers, groceries, hardware, jewelry, pets, pet food, pharmaceuticals, plants and garden supplies, scientific or professional instruments, sporting goods, and printed media. 
• Repair or servicing of consumer products or equipment generally performed on-site including communication and electronic devices, bicycles, clocks, watches, shoes, firearms, appliances and office equipment, locksmithing, or scientific or professional instruments. 
• Processing of consumer products or equipment, including photo processing, dry cleaning and alterations, and photocopy and blueprint services. 
• Personal services including Child Care Center (as defined in TDC 31.060), branch banks, laundromats, photographic studios, personal care services such as salons or barber shops, taxidermists, and animal-related services including Pet Day Care (as defined in TDC 31.060) and Animal Hospital or Veterinary Clinic (as defined in TDC 39.115). 
• Memorial Planning and Products Center (as defined in TDC 39.115), mortuaries and crematoria. 
• Catering or food preparation without on-site consumption. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Furniture, large appliance, and home improvement stores are classified as Durable Goods Sales. 
• Plant nurseries that are oriented to retail sales are classified as Durable Goods Sales. 
• Sales, leasing and/or rental of motorcycles, boats, recreational vehicles, or trailers are classified as Durable Goods Sales. 
• Sales, leasing and/or rental of industrial, farm or construction equipment are classified as Wholesale Sales. 
• Repair and service of automobiles, motorcycles and boats is classified as Vehicle Repair. 
• Service of industrial, construction, and farm vehicles and equipment is classified as Industrial Services. 
• In-home family day care that is licensed by the State is classified as Household Living. 
• Residential homes that are licensed and/or permitted by the State are classified as Group Living. 
• Residential facilities that are licensed and/or permitted by the State which provide care, treatment, training or foster care for six or more persons are classified as Group Living. 
• Medical clinics providing outpatient care and not located in a hospital, and medical or dental laboratories, are classified as Medical Office.  
TDC 39.360. - Self-Service Storage. 
(1)  Characteristics. Self-Service Storage uses provide freestanding indoor storage facilities for rent to individuals and businesses. These uses are designed to allow private access at all hours by the tenant for storing or removing personal or business property. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Mini-storages or mini-warehouses that are single-story or multi-story buildings with outside access to each unit or inside access from a common internal hallway. 
(3)  Exceptions. A transfer and storage business where there are no individual storage units or where business employees are the primary movers of the stored or transferred goods is classified as Warehouse and Freight Movement.  
TDC 39.365 - Vehicle Repair. 
(1)  Characteristics. Vehicle Repair provides vehicle repair and servicing to passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks, motorcycles, boats, recreational vehicles, and other consumer motor vehicles. Generally, the customer does not wait at the site while the service or repair is being performed. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Alignment shop. 
• Auto body and/or paint shop. 
• Auto detailing. 
• Auto upholstery shop. 
• Tire sales and mounting. 
• Transmission or muffler shop. 
• Vehicle repair. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Repair and service of industrial vehicles and equipment, and of heavy trucks; towing and vehicle storage are classified as Light Manufacturing. 
• Outdoor storage or sale of automobiles is not permitted in any zone.  
INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES 
All industrial uses must continually comply with the Environmental Regulations specified in TDC Chapter 63. 
 
TDC 39.400. - Light Manufacturing. 
(1)  Characteristics. Light Manufacturing is the assembly, fabrication, or processing of goods and materials using processes that ordinarily do not create noise, smoke, fumes, odors, glare, or health or safety hazards outside of the building or lot where such activity takes place, and where such processes are housed entirely within a building. Light Manufacturing also includes the repair and/or servicing of industrial, business, or consumer machinery, equipment, products or by-products, or in training or instruction of such repair or servicing. Products are generally not displayed or sold on site, but if so, sales and display are accessory to the primary use and subject to restrictions, such as size, set forth in the planning district in which the use will be located. All industrial uses must continually comply with the Environmental Regulations specified in TDC Chapter 63. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Building, heating, plumbing and electrical contractor's offices, with on-site storage of equipment or materials. 
• Food, beverage, and related product processing and packaging. 
• Laundry, dry cleaning, dyeing or rug cleaning plant (non-retail). 
• Machine shop, including automotive and truck machine shop. 
• Manufacture, packaging, processing or assembly of small instruments, equipment, devices, and components, such as audio, video, and computer equipment; hand tools; hearing aids; musical instruments; office equipment; optical goods; scientific instruments or equipment; and sporting goods. 
• Manufacture of cabinets, furniture, and mattresses. 
• Printing and publishing shops (non-retail). 
• Processing, assembly, packaging, and other treatment of small products manufactured from the following prepared or semi-finished materials: bone, hair, fur, leather, feathers, textiles, plastics, glass, wood, paper, cork, wire, rubber, and rubber compounds, precious or semi-precious stones, and similar small products composed of previously prepared or semi-finished materials. 
• Production of artwork, toys, novelties, pottery and ceramics (using only previously pulverized clay). 
• Production of textiles or apparel. 
• Research and development laboratories. 
• Trade or industrial schools where industrial vehicles and equipment are operated. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Certain manufacturing uses are classified exclusively as Heavy Manufacturing. 
• Structural-mechanical testing laboratories are classified as Heavy Manufacturing. 
• Manufacturing of goods to be sold primarily on-site and to the general public is classified as Retail Sales and Services. 
• Compost production and rendering plants are classified as Solid Waste Treatment and Recycling. 
• The following uses are prohibited in all zones: 
· Auto wrecking. 
· Creosote treatment of products. 
· Distillation of bones. 
· Distillation of oil, coal, wood or tar compounds. 
· Fat rendering. 
· Forge plants. 
· Storage, transfer, or processing of hazardous, toxic, or radioactive waste. 
· Junk or salvage yard. 
· Manufacturing of the following products: acid; ammonia; bleaching powder; celluloid pyroxylin; cement, lime, gypsum and plaster of paris; chlorine gas; creosote; disinfectant; dye stuffs; explosives; fertilizer; herbicides; insect poison; radioactive materials; soap; sodium compounds; tar roofing, water-proofing and other tar products. 
· Rolling mills or saw mills. 
· Rock crushing. 
· Slaughter of livestock or poultry. 
· Primary processing of organic materials such as tanning of leather.  
TDC 39.410. - Heavy Manufacturing. 
(1)  Characteristics. Heavy Manufacturing is the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominately from extracted or raw materials, or manufacturing processes and not a Light Manufacturing use. The use may involve outdoor operations. Heavy Manufacturing also includes the repair and/or servicing of industrial, business, or consumer machinery, equipment, products or by-products, or in training or instruction of such repair or servicing. Products are generally not displayed or sold on site, but if so, sales and display are accessory to the primary use and subject to restrictions, such as size, set forth in the zone in which the use will be located. All industrial uses must continually comply with Environmental Regulations specified in TDC Chapter 63. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Casting or fabrication of metals, including electroplating. 
• Concrete batching and asphalt mixing plants. 
• Manufacture, assembly, processing, or packaging of the following types of products: batteries; bicycles; boilers; bottles; brick, tile or terra cotta; cans; chainsaws; dryers; electric generators; electric motors; electric transformers; engines, larger gasoline or diesel; freezers; heating and cooling equipment; industrial gases, excluding chlorine; ladders; lawnmowers; manufactured dwellings; marine pleasure craft; motor vehicles; paint; pet food; prefabricated building or structural members for buildings; sashes and doors; signs and display structures; refrigerators; rototillers; vending machines; washing machines; and windows. 
• Planing mill. 
• Sandblasting. 
• Structural-mechanical testing laboratories. 
• Welding shop. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Manufacturing of goods to be sold primarily on-site and to the general public is classified as Retail Sales and Services. 
• Compost production and rendering plants are classified as Solid Waste Treatment and Recycling. 
• The following uses are prohibited in all zones: 
· Auto wrecking. 
· Creosote treatment of products. 
· Distillation of bones. 
· Distillation of oil, coal, wood or tar compounds. 
· Fat rendering. 
· Forge plants. 
· Storage, transfer, or processing of hazardous, toxic, or radioactive waste. 
· Junk or salvage yard. 
· Manufacturing of the following products: acid; ammonia; bleaching powder; celluloid pyroxylin; cement, lime, gypsum and plaster of paris; chlorine gas; creosote; disinfectant; dye stuffs; explosives; fertilizer; herbicides; insect poison; radioactive materials; soap; sodium compounds; tar roofing, waterproofing and other tar products. 
· Rolling mills or saw mills. 
· Rock crushing. 
· Slaughter of livestock or poultry.  
TDC 39.420. - Solid Waste Treatment and Recycling. 
(1)  Characteristics. Solid Waste Treatment and Recycling uses receive, process and/or recycle solid waste materials. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Energy recovery plants. 
• Portable toilet collection, storage and pumping. 
• Recycling-Collection Center (as defined in TDC 39.115). 
• Commercial waste composting and/or compost production. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• The following related uses are prohibited in all zones: vehicle and heavy machinery salvage and wrecking; hazardous-waste collection and processing; rendering plants; and junk or salvage yards 
• Uses listed above in the Examples of Uses are not allowed in the Special Commercial Setback 60.035 (1-3). 
• Community recycling or composting facilities at a community garden are classified as Community Services.  
TDC 39.430. - Vehicle Storage. 
(1)  Characteristics. Vehicle Storage are storage facilities for vehicles including automobiles, boats, buses, recreational vehicles, and trailers. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Vehicle impoundment yards. 
• Vehicle fleet storage and maintenance facilities. 
• Towing and vehicle storage operations. 
• School bus yards. 
• Recreational vehicle storage. 
• Transit vehicle storage and maintenance yards. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Auto wrecking yards are not permitted in any zones. 
• Automobile sales are not permitted in any zones.  
TDC 39.440. - Warehouse and Freight Movement. 
(1)  Characteristics. Warehouse and Freight Movement is the storage, repackaging, delivery and movement of products. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Cold storage plants, including frozen food lockers. 
• Wholesale distribution centers. 
• Parcel or postal distribution facilities. 
• Mail-order merchandise warehouses. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Uses that involve the transfer or storage of solid or liquid wastes are classified as Solid Waste Treatment and Recycling. 
• Storage facilities that provide individual units to the general public are classified as Self-Service Storage. 
• Storage, transfer, or processing of hazardous, toxic, or radioactive waste.  
TDC 39.450. - Wholesale Sales. 
(1)  Characteristics. Wholesale Sales are the sale, lease, and/or rental of products primarily to businesses. On-site sales to the general public are limited. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Wholesale sales of industrial hand tools and industrial supplies such as safety equipment and welding equipment. 
• Wholesale sales, service and rental of construction and industrial equipment, such as tractors, loaders, hoes, lifts, cranes, and utility trucks, to contractors and industrial firms. 
• Wholesale sales and service of machines and tools primarily for industrial and commercial firms including machine tools, fabrication, processing and packaging machinery, hoists, conveyors, racking systems and forklifts. 
• Wholesale sales of building materials and supplies, including, but not limited to, electrical supplies; fencing materials; building insulation; lumber; prefabricated trusses and structural frames; structural metal materials; masonry supplies; ceramic & stone tile and pavers; painting supplies; plumbing supplies; plywood and wood panel materials; roofing; siding; flooring; window materials; door materials; and tools (handheld and table or stand mounted). 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Companies that engage primarily in sales to the general public are classified as Retail Sales and Services. 
• Companies that engage in sales on a membership basis are classified as either Retail Sales and Services or Wholesale Sales, based on the characteristics of the use. 
• Companies that are primarily storing goods with little on-site business activity are classified as Warehouse and Freight Movement. 
• Storage, transfer, or processing of hazardous, toxic, or radioactive waste.  
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES 
 
TDC 39.500. - Assembly Facilities. 
(1)  Characteristics. Assembly Facilities are uses that attract a large number of people who participate as a group in a specific activity or event that may be religious, cultural, educational, social or recreational. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Churches, synagogues, mosques, temples, or other places of worship 
• Auditoriums, exhibition halls, or rooms for public assembly. 
• Theaters. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• An assembly area that is accessory to the primary use, such as a conference facility in a hotel or industrial campus or an auditorium in a school, is considered accessory to the primary use.  
TDC 39.510. - Colleges, Universities, and Private Career Schools. 
(1)  Characteristics. Colleges, Universities, and Private Career Schools are public or private colleges, universities, or institutions that offer courses of study leading to an associate, bachelor, and/or advanced degree or trades certification. Such institutions are certified by the Oregon Higher Education Coordinating Commission (HECC), a regulatory, licensing and authorizing state office that approves degree-granting institutions, private career schools and distance education providers. Without approval or explicit exemption from regulation from HECC, a school cannot legally operate in Oregon or offer valid degrees or certificates to Oregonians. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Community colleges. 
• Liberal arts colleges. 
• Religious colleges. 
• Universities. 
• Medical or nursing schools. 
• Private career schools. 
• Post-secondary and training establishments for veterans. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Trade schools where industrial vehicles and equipment are operated are classified as Light Manufacturing. 
• Educational and vocational services that do not offer a degree or trade certification and are not regulated by HECC are classified as Other Educational and Vocational Services. 
• Public and private elementary, middle and high schools, with or without kindergartens, are classified as Schools.  
TDC 39.520. - Community Services. 
(1)  Characteristics. Community Services are uses of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature generally providing continuous, on-site social, cultural, or recreational services provided to residents of the community. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Community centers, youth or senior centers, open to the general public. 
• Community aquatic centers, open to the general public. 
• Community recreation buildings or facilities. 
• Cultural centers. 
• Libraries, museums, and related cultural facilities. 
(3)  Exceptions. Private lodges, clubs, and private or commercial athletic or health clubs, are classified as Commercial Recreation.  
TDC 39.550. - Medical Centers. 
(1)  Characteristics. Medical Centers are a comprehensive, multi-disciplinary health care facility contained in several buildings providing a wide range of diagnostic, imaging and treatment services on an inpatient and outpatient basis to sick and injured persons; and providing training, administrative, maintenance and housing activities related to its health care mission; and providing limited supporting retail and service uses. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. Medical Centers may include any of the following uses as part of a campus facility: 
• Hospital (as defined in TDC 39.115). 
• Offices of physicians and dentists. 
• Offices and clinics of allied health care providers, including but not limited to nurse practitioners; midwives; dietitians; psychologists; opticians; physical and occupational therapists; occupational health/safety specialists; substance abuse counselors; chiropractors; and wellness centers including physical fitness facilities, nutritional counseling, health maintenance and rehabilitation services. 
• Durable medical goods sales and rentals. 
• Nursing school and other medical training facilities. 
• Medical and dental laboratories. 
• Medical and dental related research laboratories and testing facilities. 
• Medical and dental nonprofit educational, charitable and research organizations and facilities. 
• Congregate care facilities and residential facilities. 
• Nursing and convalescent homes. 
• Community meeting facilities. 
• Parking lot, parking structure, or underground parking. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Freestanding Residential Homes that are licensed and/or required to be permitted by the State which provide residential care to five or fewer individuals are classified as Household Living. 
• Freestanding Residential Facilities licensed and/or required to be permitted by the State which provide care, treatment, training or foster care for six or more persons are classified as Group Living. 
• Freestanding medical clinics or medical office buildings providing outpatient care and not located in Medical Center campus are classified as Medical Office.  
TDC 39.570. - Schools. 
(1)  Characteristics. School uses are public and private educational facilities providing state mandated basic education. Schools may serve any ages of students from kindergarten through 12th grade. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Public, private, and charter elementary, middle, and high schools, with or without kindergartens. 
• Pre-schools which are incorporated into the education continuum of state-mandated basic education within a public or private educational facility. 
• Boarding schools and military academies that have residential facilities for students. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Pre-schools which are standalone schools not associated with the grade levels of state-mandated basic education are classified as child day care under Retail Sales and Services. 
• Trade schools where industrial vehicles and equipment are operated are classified as Light Manufacturing. 
• Educational and vocational services that do not offer a degree or trade certification and are not regulated by HECC are classified under as Other Educational and Vocational Services. 
• Colleges, Universities and Private Career Schools regulated under Oregon Higher Education Coordinating Commission (HECC) are classified under Institutional Use Category: Colleges, Universities and Private Career Schools  
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES CATEGORIES 
 
TDC 39.600. - Greenways and Natural Areas. 
(1)  Characteristics. Greenways and Natural Areas are linear or naturally landscaped strip of land usually located adjacent to watercourses and roadways. This category includes multi-use and pedestrian paths (trails), as well as associated facilities. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Bicycle Path (as defined in TDC 31.060). 
• Greenway (as defined in TDC 1.020). 
• Multi-Use Path (as defined in TDC 31.060). 
• Outdoor Recreational Access Route (as defined in TDC 31.060). 
• Pedestrian Paths (as defined in TDC 31.060). 
• Associated facilities, including, but not limited to, trailhead amenities, parking areas, benches, information kiosks, restrooms, shelters, bicycle racks, picnic areas, and education facilities. 
(3)  Exceptions. None. 
(Ord. 1427-19 , § 18, 11-25-19)  
TDC 39.610. - Parks and Open Areas. 
(1)  Characteristics. Parks and Open Areas are generally publicly-owned or non-profit facilities featuring natural or cultivated landscaping; active and passive outdoor recreation. Lands tend to have few structures. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Athletic practice facility. 
• Botanical gardens. 
• Cemeteries. 
• Community gardens. 
• Golf courses or country clubs associated with golf courses. 
• Parks. 
• Playing fields. 
• Public squares and plazas. 
• Sport courts such as basketball or tennis. 
• Swimming pools. 
• Trails. 
(3)  Exceptions. Linear or naturally landscaped strips of land usually located adjacent to watercourses and roadways are classified as Greenways and Natural Areas.  
TDC 39.620. - Basic Utilities. 
(1)  Characteristics. Basic Utilities are local and regional infrastructure facilities that must be located in or near the area to which the infrastructure is provided. Utilities may be publicly or privately owned and operated. Most facilities have few or no on-site employees, although treatment plants may be staffed continuously. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Electrical substations. 
• High tension electrical power lines. 
• Sewage disposal and conveyance systems. 
• Telephone exchange equipment. 
• Water or sewage pump stations. 
• Water towers and reservoirs. 
• Water quality and flow control facilities. 
• Water or sewage treatment plants. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Utility offices where employees or customers are generally present are classified as Offices. 
• Public agency or private utility operations centers are classified as Public Safety Facilities. 
• Commercial radio or television broadcasting antennas are prohibited in all zones.  
TDC 39.630. - Public Safety and Utility Facilities. 
(1)  Characteristics. Public Safety Facilities provide police, fire, ambulance and emergency services and public utility services to the community. With the exception of ambulance services, these facilities are typically publicly owned and operated. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Emergency communications centers. 
• Police and fire stations. 
• Publicly- and privately-operated ambulance facilities. 
• Public agency or private utility operations centers. 
• Public works storage yard and shop. 
(3)  Exceptions. None.  
TDC 39.640. - Transportation Facilities. 
(1)  Characteristics. Transportation Facilities are any physical facility constructed for the movement of people or goods. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• The operation, maintenance, repair and preservation activities of existing facilities including but not limited to road, bicycle, pedestrian and rail facilities 
• Bus stops, shelters and other elements of the transit system (as defined in TDC 39.060). 
• The installation of improvements including but not limited to culverts, fencing, guardrails, landscaping, lighting, medians and pathways within the existing right-of-way. 
• Emergency transportation measures necessary for the safety and protection of people and property. 
• Acquisition of right-of-way for public roads, highways and other transportation improvements designated in the Transportation System Plan TDC Chapter 11. 
• Construction of a street or road as part of an approved subdivision, land partition, architectural review or other land use decision consistent with the TDC. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Electricity, sewage and water systems are classified as Basic Utilities. 
• School bus yards are classified as Vehicle Storage. 
• Transit vehicle storage and maintenance yards are classified as Vehicle Storage.  
TDC 39.650. - Wireless Communication Facilities. 
(1)  Characteristics. Wireless Communication Facilities are unstaffed facilities for the transmission or reception of radio frequency (RF) signals, usually consisting of an equipment shelter, cabinet or other enclosed structure containing electronic equipment, a support structure, antennas or other transmission and reception devices. 
(2)  Examples of Uses. 
• Wireless Communication Facility (as defined in TDC 31.060). 
• Wireless Communication Facility Attached (as defined in TDC 31.060). 
(3)  Exceptions. 
• Freestanding radio and television studios are classified as Offices. 
• Commercial radio or television broadcasting antennas are prohibited in all zones. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18)  
CHAPTER 40 - LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (RL) 
 
TDC 40.100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the Low Density Residential (RL) zone is to provide low density residential areas in the City that are appropriate for dwellings on individual lots, as well as other miscellaneous land uses compatible with a low density residential environment.  
TDC 40.200. - Use Categories. 
(1)  Use Categories. Table 40-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally Permitted (C) in the RL zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 40-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 40.210. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided in TDC 31.070. 
(2)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay zone Chapters for additional uses. 
Table 40-1 
Use Categories in the RL Zone 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND 
CODE REFERENCES 
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Household Living 	P/C 	Permitted housing types subject to TDC 40.220. 
Residential Accessory Uses 	P (L) 	Home Occupations permitted subject to TDC 34.010 to 34.030. 
Family Child Care Home permitted. Subject to ORS 329A.440. 
Group Living 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to Residential Facility. 
  
Conditional uses limited to Congregate Care Facility subject to TDC 34.400. 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Agriculture 	P/C (L) 	Subject to TDC 40.210(1). 
Durable Goods Sales 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to nurseries. 
Retail Sales and Service 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to Child Day Care Center. 
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES 
Assembly Facilities 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to places of religious worship. See TDC 34.800 Religious uses and ORS 227.500 pertaining to activities customarily associated with practices of religious activity. 
Community Services 	C 	
Medical Center 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to a hospital. 
Schools 	C 	— 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Basic Utilities 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to water or sewage pump stations and pressure reading stations. 
  
Conditional uses limited to water reservoirs, with a maximum height of 75 feet. 
Greenways and Natural Areas 	P 	— 
Parks and Open Areas 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to public park or playground. 
  
Conditional uses limited to golf course or country club with golf course. 
Public Safety Facilities 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to fire stations. 
Transportation Facilities 	P 	— 
Wireless Communication Facilities 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to a Wireless Communication Facility Attached, provided it is not mounted to a single-family dwelling or its accessory structures. 
  
Maximum height and minimum setbacks subject to TDC Chapter 73F. 
  
TDC 40.210. - Additional Limitations on Uses. 
(1)  Agricultural Uses. Agricultural uses may be permitted uses or conditional uses depending on the nature of the use. 
(a)  Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted outright: 
(i)  Agricultural uses of land such as gardening and horticulture. 
(ii)  Raising of chickens as allowed by the Tualatin Municipal Code. 
(b)  Conditional Uses. The following uses are conditional uses within areas designated on Map 9-6: 
(i)  Conditional Use of Agricultural Animals. Raising of agricultural animals, limited to cattle, horses and sheep. The City Council may limit the number of animals to be allowed on a specific parcel of property. 
(ii)  Agricultural structures such as barns, stables, sheds, but excluding feed lots. Feed lots are prohibited.  
TDC 40.220. - Housing Types. 
Table 40-2 lists housing types permitted in the RL zone. Housing types may be Permitted Outright (P), Conditionally Permitted (C), or Not Permitted (N). 
Table 40-2 
Housing Types in the RL Zone 
HOUSING TYPE 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
Single-Family Dwelling 	P/C 	Single-family dwellings in a small lot subdivision permitted with conditional use permit, subject to TDC 36.410 
  
All other single-family dwellings permitted outright. 
Accessory Dwelling Unit 	P 	Subject to TDC 34.600. 
Duplex 
Townhouse 	C 	See TDC definition in 31.060. 
Multi-Family Structure 	C 	See TDC definition in 31.060. 
Manufactured Dwelling 	P 	Subject to TDC 40.300(4) 
Manufactured Dwelling Park 	N 	
Retirement Housing Facility 	C 	Subject to TDC 34.400. 
Residential Home 	P 	See TDC definition in 31.060 
  
TDC 40.300. - Development Standards. 
Development standards in the RL zone are listed in Table 40-3. Additional standards may apply to some uses and situations, see TDC 40.310. The standards in Table 40-3 may be modified for small lot subdivision as provided in TDC 36.410 and for greenway and natural area dedications as provided in TDC 36.420. 
Table 40-3 
Development Standards in the RL Zone 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
MAXIMUM DENSITY 
Single-Family Dwelling 	6.4 units per acre 	
Retirement Housing or 
Congregate Care Facility 	10 units per acre 	
MINIMUM LOT SIZE 
Single-Family Dwelling 	Average of 6,500 square feet 	May be reduced for Small Lot Subdivisions, subject to TDC 36.410, or Greenway and Natural Area dedications, subject to TDC 36.420. 
Conditional Uses 	6,000 square feet 	
Infrastructure and Utilities Uses 	— 	As determined through the Subdivision, Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment process. 
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH 
Single-Family Dwelling 	50 feet 	May be reduced to 30 feet if on a cul-de-sac. 
  
Average minimum lot width is 30 feet. 
Conditional Uses 	50 feet 	May be reduced to 30 feet if on a cul-de-sac. 
  
Average minimum lot width is 30 feet. 
Flag Lots 	— 	Must be sufficient to comply with minimum access requirements of TDC 73C. 
MINIMUM SETBACKS 
Front 	15 feet 	May be reduced to 12 feet if to an unenclosed porch. 
Secondary Frontage on Corner Lot 	10 feet 	The secondary frontage is determined by the orientation of the structure, based on the location of the front door. 
Garage Door 	20 feet 	
Side 	5 feet 	
Rear 	15 feet 	
Conditional Uses 	— 	As determined through Architectural Review process. No minimum setback must be greater than 50 feet. Parking and vehicular circulation areas must be set back a minimum of ten feet from any public right-of-way or property line. 
Any Yard Area Adjacent to 
Basalt Creek Parkway 	50 feet 	
MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
All Uses 	35 feet 	May be increased to a maximum of 50 feet with a conditional use permit, if all setbacks are not less than 1½ times the height of the building. 
MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE 
Single Family Dwelling 	45% 	
Conditional Uses 	40% 	
  
TDC 40.310. - Projections Into Required Yards. 
The following architectural features may project into a required front or rear yard setback area not more than three feet, and into a required side yard not more than two feet: cornices, eaves, canopies, decks, sun-shades, gutters, chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, and other similar architectural features.  
TDC 40.320. - Additional Development Standards. 
(1)  Small Lot Subdivisions. The minimum lot size and other development standards for single-family dwellings in the RL zone may be reduced or modified for lots included as part of a small lot subdivision. See TDC 36.410. 
(2)  Greenway and Natural Area Dedications. The minimum lot size and other development standards for single-family dwellings in the RL zone may be reduced or modified if land is dedicated for a Greenway or Natural Area. See TDC 36.420. 
(3)  Manufactured Homes. Except for manufactured homes placed in manufactured dwelling parks, manufactured homes must meet the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum Size. The manufactured home must be multi-sectional and enclose a space of not less than 1,000 square feet. A manufactured home is not considered multi-sectional by having a tip-out section. 
(b)  Foundation Requirements. The manufactured home must be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the manufactured home is located not less than 1 foot above grade. However, a structural concrete foundation (such as that for a single-family dwelling) is not required. 
(c)  Roof Form and Materials. The manufactured home must have a pitched roof with a minimum slope of one foot in height for each four feet of width. The roof must be comprised of shingles, wood shakes, tiles, or other materials which create a similar appearance. Exposed flat, corrugated or ribbed sheet metal, fiberglass, or other materials similar in form or appearance cannot be used as roofing material but may be used for corner and edge flashing. 
(d)  Insulation Requirements. The manufactured home must be certified by the manufacturer to have exterior thermal envelope meeting performance standards which reduce heat loss to levels equivalent to the performance standards required of single family dwellings constructed under the State Building Code. 
(e)  Garage Requirement. The manufactured home must have an attached or detached two-car garage constructed of materials similar to the manufactured home.  
CHAPTER 41 - MEDIUM LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (RML) 
 
TDC 41.100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this zone is to provide areas of the City suitable for townhouses, condominiums, duplexes, triplexes and other multi-family dwellings, as well as areas for small-lot, small home subdivisions, and manufactured dwelling parks in designated areas.  
TDC 41.200. - Use Categories. 
(1)  Use Categories. Table 41-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally Permitted (C) in the RML zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 41-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 41.210. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided in TDC 31.070. 
(2)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay zone Chapters for additional uses. 
Table 41-1 
Use Categories in the RML Zone 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Household Living 	P/C 	Permitted housing types subject to TDC 41.220. 
Residential Accessory Uses 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to Family Child Care Home subject to ORS 329A.440. 
Group Living 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to 
 • Residential Facility; and, 
 • Nursing Facility. 
  
Conditional uses limited to Congregate Care Facility subject to TDC 34.020 and TDC 34.030. 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Agriculture 	C (L) 	Subject to TDC 41.210(1). 
Durable Goods Sales 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to nurseries. 
Retail Sales and Service 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to Child Day Care Center. 
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES 
Assembly Facilities 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to places of religious worship. See TDC 34.800 Religious uses and ORS 227.500 pertaining to activities customarily associated with the practices of religious activity. 
Community Services 	C 	
Medical Center 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to a hospital. 
Schools 	C 	— 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Basic Utilities 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to water or sewage pump stations and pressure reading stations. 
  
Conditional uses limited to water reservoirs, with a maximum height of 75 feet. 
Greenways and Natural Areas 	P 	— 
Parks and Open Areas 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to public park or playground. 
  
Conditional uses limited to golf course or country club with golf course. 
Public Safety Facilities 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to fire stations 
Transportation Facilities 	P 	— 
Wireless Communication Facilities 	P/C (L) 	Subject to TDC 41.210(2). 
Maximum height and minimum setbacks subject to TDC Chapter 73F. 
  
TDC 41.210. - Additional Limitations on Uses. 
(1)  Agricultural Uses. The following agricultural uses are allowed with a conditional use permit within areas designated on Map 9-6: 
(a)  Conditional Use of Agricultural Animals. Raising of agricultural animals, limited to cattle, horses and sheep. The City Council may limit the number of animals to be allowed on a specific parcel of property; and 
(b)  Agricultural structures such as barns, stables, sheds, but excluding feed lots. Feed lots are prohibited. 
(2)  Wireless Communication Facilities. Wireless Communication Facilities may be permitted uses or conditional uses, depending on the nature of the use. 
(a)  Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted outright: 
(i)  Wireless Communication Facility Attached, provided the facility is not mounted on a single-family dwelling or its accessory structures; and 
(ii)  Wireless Communication Facility, provided the facility is located within 300 feet of the centerline of Interstate 5. 
(b)  Conditional Uses. All other detached wireless communication facilities may be allowed with a conditional use permit. The facility must not be located within an approved small lot subdivision.  
TDC 41.220. - Housing Types. 
Table 41-2 lists Housing Types permitted in the RML zone. Housing types may be Permitted Outright (P), Conditionally Permitted (C), or Not Permitted (N) in the RML zone. 
Table 41-2 
Housing Types in the RML Zone 
HOUSING TYPE 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
Single-Family Dwelling 	C 	Limited to single-family dwellings in a small lot subdivision, with conditional use permit, subject to TDC 36.410. 
Accessory Dwelling Unit 	P 	Subject to TDC 34.600. 
Duplex 
Townhouse (or Rowhouse) 	P 	See TDC definition in 31.060. 
Multi-Family Structure 	P 	See TDC definition in 31.060. 
Manufacturing Dwelling 	N 	See TDC definition in 31.060. 
Manufactured Dwelling Park 	P 	Limited to locations designated by the Tualatin Community Plan Map and subject to TDC 34.190. 
Retirement Housing Facility 	C 	Subject to TDC 34.400. 
Residential Home 	P 	See TDC definition in 31.060.
Retirement Housing Facility, or Congregate Care Facility 	15 units per acre 	
Nursing Facility 	15 units per acre 	
Group Living Uses 	15 units per acre 	 
  
TDC 41.300. - Development Standards. 
Development standards in the RML zone are listed in Table 41-3. Additional standards may apply to some uses and situations, see TDC 41.310. The standards in Table 41-3 may be modified for greenway and natural area dedications as provided in TDC 36.420. The standards for lot size, lot width, building coverage, and setbacks that apply to single-family dwellings in small lot subdivisions are provided in TDC 36.410(2)(b). 
Table 41-3 
Development Standards in the RML Zone 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
MAXIMUM DENSITY 
Household Living Uses 	10 units per acre 	
Manufactured Dwelling Parks 	12 units per acre 	Limited to single-wide dwelling parks or any part of a single-wide dwelling park. 

MINIMUM LOT SIZE 
Townhouse 
(or Rowhouse) 	1,400 square feet 	
Multi-Family Structure and 
Duplex 		
 • Development on Less than One Acre 	10,000 square feet 	For up to two units, plus an additional 4,195 square feet for each unit exceeding two. 
 • Development on More than One Acre 	4,356 square feet per unit 	
Multi-Family Structure under Condominium Ownership 	20,000 square feet 	Limited to the primary condominium lot. 
All Other Permitted Uses 	10,000 square feet 	
Conditional Uses 	20,000 square feet 	
Infrastructure and Utilities Uses 	— 	As determined through the Subdivision, Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment process 
MINIMUM AVERAGE LOT WIDTH 
Townhouse(or Rowhouse) 	14 feet 	
Multi-Family Structure 	75 feet 	May be 40 feet on a cul-de-sac street. 
Multi-Family Structure under Condominium Ownership 	100 feet 	Limited to the primary condominium lot. Minimum lot width at street is 40 feet. 
All Other Permitted Uses 	75 feet 	
Conditional Uses 	100 feet 	Minimum lot width at street is 40 feet. 
Flag Lots 	— 	Must be sufficient to comply with minimum access requirements of TDC 73C. 
MINIMUM SETBACKS 
Front Setback 		Minimum setback to a garage door must be 20 feet. 
 • 1 story structure 	20 feet 	
 • 1.5 story structure 	25 feet 	
 • 2 story structure 	30 feet 	
 • 2.5 story structure 	35 feet 	
 • Townhouse (or Rowhouse) 	0-20 feet 	As determined through Architectural Review process. 
Side and Rear Setback 		Where living spaces face a side yard, the minimum setback must be ten feet 
 • 1 story structure 	5 feet 	
 • 1.5 story structure 	7 feet 	
 • 2 story structure 	10 feet 	
 • 2.5 story structure 	12 feet 	
Corner Lots 	— 	On corner lots, the setback is the same as the front yard setback on any side facing a street other than an alley. 
Minimum Distance Between Buildings within One 
Development 	10 feet 	For Townhouses, determined through the Architectural Review process 
Parking and Vehicle Circulation Areas 	10 feet 	For Townhouses, determined through the Architectural Review process 
Conditional Uses 	— 	As determined through Architectural Review process. No minimum setback must be greater than 50 feet 
Any Yard Area Adjacent to 
Basalt Creek Parkway 	50 feet 	
MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
All Uses 	35 feet 	May be increased to a maximum of 50 feet with a conditional use permit, if all setbacks are not less than 1½ times the height of the building. 
MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE 
Townhouse (or Rowhouse) 	90% 	
All Other Permitted Uses 	40% 	
Conditional Uses 	45% 	
  
TDC 41.310. - Projections Into Required Yards. 
The following architectural features may project into a required front or rear yard setback area not more than three feet, and into a required side yard not more than two feet: cornices, eaves, canopies, decks, sun-shades, gutters, chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, and other similar architectural features.  
TDC 41.320. - Density Bonus or Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural Areas. 
To preserve natural areas and habitat for fish and wildlife, the decision-making authority may provide a density bonus or setback reduction for developments that are adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas that dedicate land for conservation or public recreational purposes, in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Density Bonus. The lot(s) may be developed to the same number of dwelling units that would be permitted in the RML zone if none of the land area in the Greenway or Natural Area lots were in a conservation or protection area. 
(2)  Setback Reduction. All permitted uses may be allowed a reduction of up to 35 percent of the front, side or rear yard setbacks, as determined through the Architectural Review process, if as a result the buildings are farther away from fish and wildlife habitat areas. Single-Family Dwellings in Small Lot Subdivisions and setback areas that abut property lines in the RL zone are not eligible for the setback reduction. 
(3)  Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. A portion of the parcel must be located in one of the following conservation or protection areas: 
(a)  Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or 
(b)  Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor. 
(4)  Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural Area Lot must be one of the following: 
(a)  Dedicated to the City at the City's option; 
(b)  Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to a non-profit conservation organization; or 
(c)  Retained in private ownership. 
(5)  Ownership Considerations. The decision-making authority must consider, but not limited to, the following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway or Natural Area Lot: 
(a)  Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway, pedestrian or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other public facility; 
(b)  Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more significant trees; 
(c)  Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a unique or intrinsically valuable element; 
(d)  Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties; 
(e)  Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility; 
(f)  Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need; 
(g)  Does the lot contain environmental hazards; 
(h)  Geologic stability of the lot; and 
(i)  Future maintenance costs for the lot. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. 1427-19 , § 19, 11-25-19)  
CHAPTER 42 - MEDIUM HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (RMH) 
 
TDC 42.100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this zone is to provide areas of the City suitable for townhouses, garden apartments and condominiums.  
TDC 42.200. - Use Categories. 
(1)  Use Categories. Table 42-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally Permitted (C) in the RMH zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 42-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 42.210. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided in TDC 31.070. 
(2)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay zone Chapters for additional uses. 
Table 42-1 
Use Categories in the RMH Zone 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Household Living 	P/C 	Permitted housing types subject to TDC 42.220. 
Residential Accessory Uses 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to Family Child Care Home subject to ORS 329A.440. 
Group Living 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Residential Facility. 
 • Nursing Facility. 
  
Conditional uses limited to Congregate Care Facilities subject to TDC 34.400. 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Agriculture 	C (L) 	Subject to TDC 42.210(1). 
Durable Goods Sales 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to nurseries. 
Retail Sales and Service 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to Child Day Care Center. 
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES 
Assembly Facilities 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to places of religious worship. See TDC 34.800 Religious uses and ORS 227.500 pertaining to activities customarily associated with the practices of religious activity. 
Community Services 	C 	— 
Medical Center 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to a hospital. 
Schools 	C 	— 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Basic Utilities 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to water or sewage pump stations and pressure stations. 
  
Conditional uses limited to water reservoirs, with a maximum height of 75 feet. 
Greenways and Natural Areas 	P 	— 
Parks and Open Areas 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to public park or playground. 
  
Conditional uses limited to golf course or country club with golf course. 
Public Safety Facilities 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to fire stations. 
Transportation Facilities 	P 	— 
Wireless Communication 
Facilities 	P/C (L) 	Subject to TDC 42.210(2). 
  
Maximum height and minimum setbacks subject to TDC Chapter 73F. 
  
TDC 42.210. - Additional Limitations on Uses. 
(1)  Agricultural Uses. The following agricultural uses are allowed with a conditional use permit within areas designated on Map 9-6: 
(a)  Conditional Use of Agricultural Animals. Raising of agricultural animals, limited to cattle, horses and sheep. The City Council may limit the number of animals to be allowed on a specific parcel of property; and 
(b)  Agricultural structures such as barns, stables, sheds, but excluding feed lots. Feed lots are prohibited. 
(2)  Wireless Communication Facilities. Wireless Communication Facilities may be permitted uses or conditional uses, depending on the nature of the use. 
(a)  Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted outright: 
(i)  Wireless Communication Facility Attached, provided the facility is not mounted on a single-family dwelling or its accessory structures; and 
(ii)  Wireless Communication Facility, provided the facility is located within 300 feet of the centerline of Interstate 5. 
(b)  Conditional Uses. All other detached wireless communication facilities may be allowed with a conditional use permit.  
TDC 42.220. - Housing Types. 
Table 42-2 lists Housing Types permitted in the RMH zone. Housing types may be Permitted Outright (P), Conditionally Permitted (C), or Not Permitted (N) in the RMH zone. 
Table 42-2 
Housing Types in the RMH Zone 
HOUSING TYPE 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
Single-Family Dwelling 	N 	
Accessory Dwelling Unit 	N 	
Duplex 
Townhouse (or Rowhouse) 	P 	See TDC definition in 31.060. 
Multi-Family Structure 	P 	See TDC definition in 31.060. 
Manufactured Dwelling 	N 	
Manufactured Dwelling Park 	N 	
Retirement Housing Facility 	C 	Subject to TDC 34.400. 
Residential Home 	P 	See TDC definition in 31.060. 
Retirement Housing Facility, Congregate Care Facility, or Nursing Facility 	22.5 units per acre 	
Group Living Uses 	15 units per acre 	Does not apply to Congregate Care Facility. 
  
TDC 42.300. - Development Standards. 
Development standards in the RMH zone are listed in Table 42-3. Additional standards may apply to some uses and situations, see TDC 42.310. 
Table 42-3 
Development Standards in the RMH Zone 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
MAXIMUM DENSITY 
Household Living Uses 	15 units per acre 	

MINIMUM LOT SIZE 
Townhouse (or Rowhouse) 	1,400 square feet 	
Multi-Family Structure and 
Duplex 		
 • Development on Less than One Acre 	10,000 square feet 	For up to two units, plus an additional 2,581 square feet for each unit exceeding two. 
 • Development on More than One Acre 	2,904 square feet per unit 	
Multi-Family Structure under Condominium Ownership 	20,000 square feet 	Limited to the primary condominium lot. 
All Other Permitted Uses 	10,000 square feet 	
Conditional Uses 	20,000 square feet 	
Infrastructure and Utilities Uses 	— 	As determined through the Subdivision, Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment process. 
MINIMUM AVERAGE LOT WIDTH 
Townhouse (or Rowhouse) 	14 feet 	
Multi-Family Structure 	75 feet 	May be 40 feet on a cul-de-sac street. 
Multi-Family Structure under Condominium Ownership 	75 feet 	Limited to the primary condominium lot. Minimum lot width at street is 40 feet. 
All Other Permitted Uses 	75 feet 	
Conditional Uses 	100 feet 	Minimum lot width at street is 40 feet. 
Flag Lots 	— 	Must be sufficient to comply with minimum access requirements of TDC 73C. 
MINIMUM SETBACKS 
Front Setback 		Minimum setback to a garage door must be 20 feet. 
 • 1 story structure 	20 feet 	
 • 1.5 story structure 	25 feet 	
 • 2 story structure 	30 feet 	
 • 2.5 story structure 	35 feet 	
 • Townhouse (or Rowhouse) 	0-20 feet 	As determined through Architectural Review process. 
Side and Rear Setback 		Where living spaces face a side yard, the minimum setback must be 20 feet 
 • 1 story structure 	5 feet 	
 • 1.5 story structure 	7 feet 	
 • 2 story structure 	10 feet 	
 • 2.5 story structure 	12 feet 	
Corner Lots 	— 	On corner lots, the setback is the same as the front yard setback on any side facing a street other than an alley. 
Minimum Distance Between Buildings within One 
Development 	10 feet 	For Townhouses (or Rowhouse), determined through the Architectural Review process. 
Parking and Vehicle Circulation Areas 	10 feet 	For Townhouses (or Rowhouse), determined through the Architectural Review process. 
Conditional Uses 	— 	As determined through Architectural Review process. A minimum setback must not be greater than 50 feet. 
Any Yard Area Adjacent to 
Basalt Creek Parkway 	50 feet 	
MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
All Uses 	35 feet 	May be increased to a maximum of 50 feet with a conditional use permit, if all setbacks are not less than 1½ times the height of the building. 
MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE 
Townhouse (or Rowhouse) 	90% 	
All Other Permitted Uses 	40% 	
Conditional Uses 	45% 	
  
TDC 42.310. - Projections Into Required Yards. 
The following architectural features may project into a required front or rear yard setback area not more than three feet, and into a required side yard not more than two feet: cornices, eaves, canopies, decks, sun-shades, gutters, chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, and other similar architectural features.  
TDC 42.320. - Density Bonus or Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural Areas. 
To preserve natural areas and habitat for fish and wildlife, the decision-making authority may provide a density bonus or setback reduction for developments that are adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas that dedicate land for conservation or public recreational purposes, in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Density Bonus. The lot(s) may be developed to the same number of dwelling units that would be permitted in the RMH zone if none of the land area in the Greenway or Natural Area lots were in a conservation or protection area. 
(2)  Setback Reduction. All permitted uses may be allowed a reduction of up to 35% of the front, side or rear yard setbacks, as determined through the Architectural Review process, if as a result the buildings are farther away from fish and wildlife habitat areas. Setback areas that abut property lines in the RL zone are not eligible for the setback reduction. 
(3)  Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. A portion of the parcel must be located wholly in one of the following conservation or protection areas: 
(a)  Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or 
(b)  Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor. 
(4)  Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural Area Lot must be one of the following. 
(a)  Dedicated to the City at the City's option; 
(b)  Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to a non-profit conservation organization; or 
(c)  Retained in private ownership. 
(5)  Ownership Considerations. The decision-making authority must consider, but not limited to, the following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway or Natural Area Lot: 
(a)  Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway, pedestrian or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other public facility; 
(b)  Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more significant trees; 
(c)  Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a unique or intrinsically valuable element; 
(d)  Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties; 
(e)  Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility; 
(f)  Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need; 
(g)  Does the lot contain environmental hazards; 
(h)  Geologic stability of the lot; and 
(i)  Future maintenance costs for the lot. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. 1427-19 , § 20, 11-25-19)  
CHAPTER 43 - HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (RH) 
 
TDC 43.100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this zone is to provide areas of the City suitable for townhouses, high density garden apartment and condominium developments.  
TDC 43.200. - Use Categories. 
(1)  Uses Categories. Table 43-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally Permitted (C) in the RH zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 43-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 43.210. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City Manager to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided in TDC 31.070. 
(2)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay zone Chapters for additional uses. 
Table 43-1 
Use Categories in the RH Zone 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Household Living 	P/C 	Permitted housing types subject to TDC 43.220. 
Residential Accessory Uses 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to Family Day Care subject to ORS 329A.440. 
Group Living 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Residential Facility; 
 • Nursing Facility. 
  
Conditional uses limited to Congregate Care Facilities subject to TDC 34.400. 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Agriculture 	C (L) 	Subject to TDC 43.210(1). 
Durable Goods Sales 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to retail nurseries. 
Retail Sales and Service 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to Child Day Care Center. 
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES 
Assembly Facilities 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to places of religious worship. See TDC 34.800 Religious uses and ORS 227.500 pertaining to activities customarily associated with the practices of religious activity. 
Community Services 	C 	
Medical Center 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to a hospital. 
Schools 	C 	— 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Basic Utilities 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to water or sewage pump stations and pressure reading stations. 
  
Conditional uses limited to water reservoirs, with a maximum height of 75 feet. 
Greenways and Natural Areas 	P 	— 
Parks and Open Areas 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to public park or playground. 
  
Conditional uses limited to golf course or country club with golf course. 
Public Safety Facilities 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to fire stations. 
Transportation Facilities 	P 	— 
Wireless Communication 
Facilities 	P/C (L) 	Subject to TDC 43.210(2). 
  
Maximum height and minimum setbacks subject to TDC Chapter 73F. 
  
TDC 43.210. - Additional Limitations on Uses. 
(1)  Agricultural Uses. The following agricultural uses are allowed with a conditional use permit within areas designated on Map 9-6: 
(a)  Conditional Use of Agricultural Animals. Raising of agricultural animals, limited to cattle, horses and sheep. The City Council may limit the number of animals to be allowed on a specific parcel of property; and 
(b)  Agricultural structures such as barns, stables, sheds, but excluding feed lots. Feed lots are prohibited. 
(2)  Wireless Communication Facilities. Wireless Communication Facilities may be permitted uses or conditional uses, depending on the nature of the use. 
(a)  Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted outright: 
(i)  Wireless Communication Facility Attached, provided the facility is not mounted on a single-family dwelling or its accessory structures; and 
(ii)  Wireless Communication Facility, provided the facility is located within 300 feet of the centerline of Interstate 5. 
(b)  Conditional Uses. All other detached wireless communication facilities may be allowed with a conditional use permit.  
TDC 43.220. - Housing Types. 
Table 43-2 lists Housing Types permitted in the RH zone. Housing types may be Permitted Outright (P), Conditionally Permitted (C), or Not Permitted (N) in the RH zone. 
Table 43-2 
Housing Types in the RH Zone 
HOUSING TYPE 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
Single-Family Dwelling 	N 	
Accessory Dwelling Unit 	N 	
Duplex 
Townhouse (or Rowhouse) 	P 	See TDC definition in 31.060. 
Multi-Family Structure 	P 	See TDC definition in 31.060. 
Manufacturing Dwelling 	N 	
Manufactured Dwelling Park 	N 	
Retirement Housing Facility 	C 	Subject to TDC 34.400. 
Residential Home 	P 	See TDC definition in 31.060. 
Retirement Housing or 
Congregate Care Facility 	45 units per acre 	
Nursing Facility 	45 units per acre 	
Group Living Uses 	25 units per acre 	Does not apply to Nursing Facility or Congregate Care Facility. 
  
TDC 43.300. - Development Standards. 
Development standards in the RH zone are listed in Table 43-3. Additional standards may apply to some uses and situations, see TDC 43.310. 
Table 43-3 
Development Standards in the RH Zone 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
Maximum density 
Household Living Uses 	25 units per acre 	
MINIMUM LOT SIZE 
Townhouse, or Rowhouse 	1,400 square feet 	
Multi-Family Structure 		
 • Development on Less than One Acre 	10,000 square feet 	For up to two units, plus an additional 1,459 square feet for each unit exceeding two. 
 • Development on More than One Acre 	1,742 square feet per unit 	
Multi-Family Structure under Condominium Ownership 	20,000 square feet 	Limited to the primary condominium lot. 
All Other Permitted Uses 	10,000 square feet 	
Conditional Uses 	20,000 square feet 	
Infrastructure and Utilities Uses 	— 	As determined through the Subdivision, Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment process. 
MINIMUM AVERAGE LOT WIDTH 
Townhouses (or Rowhouses) 	14 feet 	
Multi-Family Structure 	75 feet 	May be 40 feet on a cul-de-sac street. 
Multi-Family Structure under Condominium Ownership 	75 feet 	Limited to the primary condominium lot. Minimum lot width at street is 40 feet. 
All Other Permitted Uses 	75 feet 	
Conditional Uses 	100 feet 	Minimum lot width at street is 40 feet. 
Flag Lots 	— 	Must be sufficient to comply with minimum access requirements of TDC 73C. 
MINIMUM SETBACKS 
Front Setback 		Minimum setback to a garage door must be 20 feet. 
 •1 story structure 	20 feet 	
 •1.5 story structure 	25 feet 	
 •2 story structure 	30 feet 	
 •2.5 story structure 	35 feet 	
 •Townhouse (or Rowhouses) 	0-20 feet 	As determined through Architectural Review process. 
Side and Rear Setback 		Where living spaces face a side yard, the minimum setback must be ten feet 
 •1 story structure 	5 feet 	
 •1.5 story structure 	7 feet 	
 •2 story structure 	10 feet 	
 •2.5 story structure 	12 feet 	
Corner Lots 	— 	On corner lots, the setback is the same as the front yard setback on any side facing a street other than an alley. 
Minimum Distance Between Buildings within One 
Development 	10 feet 	For Townhouses, determined through the Architectural Review process. 
Parking and Vehicle Circulation Areas 	10 feet 	For Townhouses, determined through the Architectural Review process. 
Conditional Uses 	— 	As determined through Architectural Review process. No minimum setback must be greater than 50 feet. 
Any Yard Area Adjacent to 
Basalt Creek Parkway 	50 feet 	
MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
All Uses 	35 feet 	May be increased to a maximum of 50 feet with a conditional use permit, if all setbacks are not less than 1½ times the height of the building. 
MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE 
Townhouse (or Rowhouse) 	90% 	
All Other Permitted Uses 	45% 	
Conditional Uses 	45% 	
  
TDC 43.310. - Projections into Required Yards. 
The following architectural features may project into a required front or rear yard setback area not more than three feet, and into a required side yard not more than two feet: cornices, eaves, canopies, decks, sun-shades, gutters, chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, and other similar architectural features.  
TDC 43.320. - Density Bonus or Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural Areas. 
To preserve natural areas and habitat for fish and wildlife, the decision-making authority may provide a density bonus or setback reduction for developments that are adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas that dedicate land for conservation or public recreational purposes, in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Density Bonus. The lot(s) may be developed to the same number of dwelling units that would be permitted in the RH zone if none of the land area in the Greenway or Natural Area lots were in a conservation or protection area. 
(2)  Setback Reduction. All permitted uses may be allowed a reduction of up to 35% of the front, side or rear yard setbacks, as determined through the Architectural Review process, if as a result the buildings are farther away from fish and wildlife habitat areas. Setback areas that abut property lines in the RL zone are not eligible for the setback reduction. 
(3)  Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. A portion of the parcel must be located wholly in one of the following conservation or protection areas: 
(a)  Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or 
(b)  Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor. 
(4)  Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural Area Lot must be one of the following. 
(a)  Dedicated to the City at the City's option; 
(b)  Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to a non-profit conservation organization; or 
(c)  Retained in private ownership. 
(5)  Ownership Considerations. The decision-making authority must consider, but not limited to, the following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway or Natural Area Lot: 
(a)  Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway, pedestrian or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other public facility; 
(b)  Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more significant trees; 
(c)  Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a unique or intrinsically valuable element; 
(d)  Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties; 
(e)  Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility; 
(f)  Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need; 
(g)  Does the lot contain environmental hazards; 
(h)  Geologic stability of the lot; and 
(i)  Future maintenance costs for the lot. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. 1427-19 , § 21, 11-25-19)  
CHAPTER 44 - HIGH DENSITY HIGH RISE ZONE (RH-HR) 
 
TDC 44.100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the High Density High Rise (RH-HR) zone is to provide areas of the City within the City's Central Urban Renewal area, an area west of the Central Urban Renewal area, north of the wetlands, and south of the Tualatin Country Club that are suitable for high density apartment or condominium towers.  
TDC 44.200. - Use Categories. 
(1)  Use Categories. Table 44-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally Permitted (C) in the RH-HR zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 44-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 44.210. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided in TDC 31.070. 
(2)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay zone Chapters for additional uses. 
Table 44-1 
Use Categories in the RH-HR Zone 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Household Living 	P/C 	Permitted housing types subject to TDC 44.220. 
Residential Accessory Uses 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to Family Day Care subject to ORS 329A.440. 
Group Living 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Residential Home; 
 • Residential Facility; and 
 • Nursing Facility 
  
Conditional uses limited to Congregate Care Facility subject to TDC 34.400. 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Agriculture 	C (L) 	Subject to TDC 44.210(1). 
Durable Goods Sales 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to retail nurseries. 
Retail Sales and Service 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to Child Day Care Center. 
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES 
Assembly Facilities 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to places of religious worship. See TDC 34.800 Religious uses and ORS 227.500 pertaining to activities customarily associated with the practices of religious activity. 
Community Services 	C 	
Medical Center 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to a hospital. 
Schools 	C 	— 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Basic Utilities 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to water or sewage pump stations and pressure reading stations. 
  
Conditional uses limited to water reservoirs, with a maximum height of 75 feet. 
Greenways and Natural Areas 	P 	— 
Parks and Open Areas 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to public park or playground. 
  
Conditional uses limited to golf course or country club with golf course. 
Public Safety Facilities 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to fire stations. 
Transportation Facilities 	P 	— 
Wireless Communication Facilities 	P/C (L) 	Subject to TDC 44.210(2). 
Maximum height and minimum setbacks subject to TDC Chapter 73F. 
  
TDC 44.210. - Additional Limitations on Uses. 
(1)  Agricultural Uses. The following agricultural uses are allowed with a conditional use permit within areas designated on Map 9-6: 
(a)  Conditional Use of Agricultural Animals. Raising of agricultural animals, limited to cattle, horses and sheep. The City Council may limit the number of animals to be allowed on a specific parcel of property; and 
(b)  Agricultural structures such as barns, stables, sheds, but excluding feed lots. Feed lots are prohibited. 
(2)  Wireless Communication Facilities. Wireless Communication Facilities may be permitted uses or conditional uses, depending on the nature of the use. 
(a)  Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted outright: 
(i)  Wireless Communication Facility Attached, provided the facility is not mounted on a single-family dwelling or its accessory structures; and 
(ii)  Wireless Communication Facility, provided the facility is located within 300 feet of the centerline of Interstate 5. 
(b)  Conditional Uses. All other detached wireless communication facilities may be allowed with a conditional use permit.  
TDC 44.220. - Housing Types. 
Table 44-2 lists Housing Types permitted in the RH-HR zone. Housing types may be Permitted Outright (P), Conditionally Permitted (C), or Not Permitted (N) in the RH-HR zone. 
Table 44-2 
Housing Types in the RH-HR Zone 
HOUSING TYPE 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
Single-Family Dwelling 	N 	
Accessory Dwelling Unit 	N 	
Duplex 
Townhouse (or Rowhouse) 	P 	See definition in TDC 31.060. 
Multi-Family Structure 	P 	See definition in TDC 31.060. 
Manufacturing Dwelling 	N 	
Manufactured Dwelling Park 	N 	
Retirement Housing Facility 	C 	Subject to TDC 34.400. 
Residential Home 	P 	See definition in TDC 31.060. 
  
TDC 44.300. - Development Standards. 
Development standards in the RH-HR zone are listed in Table 44-3. Additional standards may apply to some uses and situations, see TDC 44.310. 
Table 44-3 
Development Standards in the RH-HR Zone 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
MAXIMUM DENSITY 
Household Living Uses 	30 units per acre 	
Retirement Housing or 
Congregate Care Facility 	45 units per acre 	
Nursing Facility 	45 units per acre 	
Group Living Uses 	30 units per acre 	Does not apply to Nursing Facility or Congregate Care Facility. 
MINIMUM LOT SIZE 
Multi-Family Structure 		
 • Development on Less than One Acre 	10,000 square feet 	For up to two units, plus an additional 1,198 square feet for each unit exceeding two. 
 • Development on More than One Acre 	1,452 square feet per unit 	
Multi-Family Structure under Condominium Ownership 	20,000 square feet 	Limited to the primary condominium lot. 
All Other Permitted Uses 	10,000 square feet 	
Conditional Uses 	20,000 square feet 	
Infrastructure and Utilities Uses 	— 	As determined through the Subdivision, Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment process. 
MINIMUM AVERAGE LOT WIDTH 
Townhouses (Rowhouses) 	14 feet 	
Multi-Family Structure 	75 feet 	May be 40 feet on a cul-de-sac street. 
Multi-Family Structure under Condominium Ownership 	75 feet 	Limited to the primary condominium lot. Minimum lot width at street is 40 feet. 
All Other Permitted Uses 	75 feet 	
Conditional Uses 	100 feet 	Minimum lot width at street is 40 feet. 
Flag Lots 	— 	Must be sufficient to comply with minimum access requirements of TDC 73C. 
MINIMUM SETBACKS 
Front Setback 		Minimum setback to a garage door must be 20 feet. 
 • 1 story structure 	20 feet 	
 • 1.5 story structure 	25 feet 	
 • 2 story structure 	30 feet 	
 • 2.5 story structure 	35 feet 	
 • Over 2.5 story structure 	— 	As determined through Architectural Review process. No setback must be required which is greater than the height of the structure. 
Side and Rear Setback 		Where living spaces face a side yard, the minimum setback must be 10 feet. 
 • 1 story structure 	5 feet 	
 • 1.5 story structure 	7 feet 	
 • 2 story structure 	10 feet 	
 • 2.5 story structure 	12 feet 	
 • Over 2.5 story structure 	— 	As determined through Architectural Review process. No setback must be required which is greater than the height of the structure. 
Corner Lots 	— 	On corner lots, the setback is the same as the front yard setback on any side facing a street other than an alley. 
Minimum Distance Between Buildings within One Development 	10 feet 	
Parking and Vehicle Circulation Areas 	10 feet 	
Conditional Uses 	— 	As determined through Architectural Review process. No minimum setback must be greater than 50 feet. 
Any Yard Adjacent to a Wetland Protected Area 	100 feet 	As defined in TDC Chapter 71. 
Any Yard Area Adjacent to Basalt Creek Parkway 	50 feet 	
STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
Minimum Height, Multi-Family and Condominium 
Developments 	4 stories 	
Maximum Height 	64 feet 	If structure does not include underground parking, maximum height is 5 stories. If the first story includes underground parking, maximum height is 6 stories. Regardless of the number of stories, structure height must not exceed 64 feet. 
MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE 
All Uses 	45% 	
  
TDC 44.310. - Projections Into Required Yards. 
The following architectural features may project into a required front or rear yard setback area not more than three feet, and into a required side yard not more than two feet: cornices, eaves, canopies, decks, sun-shades, gutters, chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, and other similar architectural features.  
TDC 44.320. - Density Bonus or Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural Areas. 
To preserve natural areas and habitat for fish and wildlife, the decision-making authority may provide a density bonus or setback reduction for developments that are adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas that dedicate land for conservation or public recreational purposes, in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Density Bonus. The lot(s) may be developed to the same number of dwelling units that would be permitted in the RH-HR zone if none of the land area in the Greenway or Natural Area lots were in a conservation or protection area. 
(2)  Setback Reduction. All permitted uses may be allowed a reduction of up to 35 percent of the front, side or rear yard setbacks, as determined through the Architectural Review process, if as a result the buildings are farther away from fish and wildlife habitat areas. Setback areas that abut property lines in the RL zone are not eligible for the setback reduction. 
(3)  Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. A portion of the parcel must be located wholly in one of the following conservation or protection areas: 
(a)  Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or 
(b)  Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor. 
(4)  Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural Area Lot must be one of the following. 
(a)  Dedicated to the City at the City's option; 
(b)  Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to a non-profit conservation organization; or 
(c)  Retained in private ownership. 
(5)  Ownership Considerations. The decision-making authority must consider, but not limited to, the following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway or Natural Area Lot: 
(a)  Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway, pedestrian or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other public facility; 
(b)  Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more significant trees; 
(c)  Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a unique or intrinsically valuable element; 
(d)  Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties; 
(e)  Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility; 
(f)  Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need; 
(g)  Does the lot contain environmental hazards; 
(h)  Geologic stability of the lot; and 
(i)  Future maintenance costs for the lot. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. 1427-19 , § 22, 11-25-19)  
CHAPTER 49 - INSTITUTIONAL ZONE (IN) 
 
TDC 49.100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the Institutional (IN) Zone is to provide areas of the City that are suitable for public, educational, religious, recreational, and incidental support facilities to serve the community. The Zone is intended to: 
(1)  Be consistent with the Institutional land use designation in the Tualatin Community Plan; 
(2)  Support lands and facilities that are owned and operated by governmental or nonprofit entities and that serve and benefit the community; and 
(3)  Provide for location and development of permitted and conditionally permitted uses in a manner that is harmonious with adjacent and nearby residential, commercial, or manufacturing planning zones and uses; and protects the health, safety, and general welfare of adjacent residential, commercial, and manufacturing uses. 
(Ord. No. 1422-19 , § 1, 7-8-19)  
TDC 49.200. - Use Categories. 
(1)  Use Categories. Table 49-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally Permitted (C) in the IN zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 49-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 49.210. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided in TDC 31.070. 
(2)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay zone Chapters for additional uses. 
Table 49-1 
Use Categories in the IN Zone 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES 
Assembly Facilities 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to places of religious worship. 
Community Services 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to public recreation buildings and facilities: 
 • Community recreation building; 
 • Indoor community aquatic centers. 
  
Conditional uses limited to outdoor public community aquatic centers 
Schools 	P 	— 
Offices 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to government offices 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Public Safety and Utility 
Facilities 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to public works storage yard and shop 
Basic Utilities 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to water or sewage pump stations and pressure reading 
stations. 
  
Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Water reservoirs; 
 • Electrical substation; and 
 • Natural gas pumping station. 
Greenways and Natural 
Areas 	P 	— 
Parks and Open Space 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Government-owned parks; and 
 • Sports fields and tennis courts. 
Transportation Facilities 	P 	— 
Wireless Communication 
Facility 	P (L) 	Subject to maximum height and minimum setback standards in TDC Chapter 73F. 
 
(Ord. No. 1422-19 , § 1, 7-8-19)  
TDC 49.210. - Additional Limitations on Uses. 
(1)  Accessory Uses Conditionally Permitted. The following uses may be permitted as a conditional use when incidental and subordinate to a permitted or conditionally permitted primary use: 
(a)  Child day care center; 
(b)  Exterior lighting, if the height of the fixture or standard is greater than the tallest permitted building on the site; and 
(c)  Outdoor public address or audio amplification system. 
(Ord. No. 1422-19 , § 1, 7-8-19)  
TDC 49.300. - Development Standards. 
Development standards in the IN zone are listed in Table 49-2. Additional standards may apply to some uses and situations, see TDC 49.310. 
Table 49-2 
Development Standards in the IN Zone 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE
REFERENCES 
Institutional Zone MINIMUM LOT SIZE 
All Uses 	1.5 acres 	
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH 
Minimum Average Lot Width 	100 feet 	When lot has frontage on public street, minimum lot width is 40 feet. 
Infrastructure and Utilities Uses 	— 	As determined through the Subdivision, Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment process 
Flag Lots 	— 	Must be sufficient to comply with minimum access requirements of TDC 73C. 
MINIMUM SETBACKS 
Front 	25 feet 	
Side 	0—25 feet 	As determined through the Architectural Review process 
Rear 	25 feet 	
Parking and Vehicle Circulation Areas 	5 feet 	
	10 feet 	
	30 feet 	
Fences 	5 feet from public right-of-way 	
Conditional Uses 	— 	As determined through Conditional Use Permit and Architectural Review process. No minimum setback must be greater than 50 feet. 
MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
All Uses 	50 feet 	
 
(Ord. No. 1422-19 , § 1, 7-8-19)  
TDC 49.310. - Projections into Required Yards. 
The following architectural features may project into a required front or rear yard setback area not more than three feet, and into a required side yard not more than two feet: cornices, eaves, canopies, decks, sun-shades, gutters, chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, and other similar architectural features.  
TDC 49.320. - Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural Areas. 
To preserve natural areas and habitat for fish and wildlife, the decision-making authority may provide a setback reduction for developments that are adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas that dedicate land for conservation or public recreational purposes, in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Setback Reduction. All permitted uses may be allowed a reduction of up to 35 percent of the front, side or rear yard setbacks, as determined through the Architectural Review process, if as a result the buildings are farther away from fish and wildlife habitat areas. Setback areas that abut property lines in the RL zone are not eligible for the setback reduction. 
(2)  Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. Each lot must be located wholly in one of the following conservation or protection areas: 
(a)  Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or 
(b)  Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor. 
(3)  Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural Area Lot must be one of the following: 
(a)  Dedicated to the City at the City's option; 
(b)  Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to a non-profit conservation organization; or 
(c)  Retained in private ownership. 
(4)  Ownership Considerations. The decision-making authority must consider, but not limited to, the following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway or Natural Area Lot: 
(a)  Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway, pedestrian or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other public facility; 
(b)  Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more significant trees; 
(c)  Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a unique or intrinsically valuable element; 
(d)  Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties; 
(e)  Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility; 
(f)  Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need; 
(g)  Does the lot contain environmental hazards; 
(h)  Geologic stability of the lot; and 
(i)  Future maintenance costs for the lot. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. 1427-19 , § 23, 11-25-19)  
CHAPTER 50 - OFFICE COMMERCIAL ZONE (CO) 
 
TDC 50.100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this zone is to provide areas for professional offices in locations adjacent to or across the street from residential areas. The zone is intended to provide for office development ranging in size from small buildings with one or two tenants to large complexes housing business headquarters. Development design in this zone is intended to be sensitive to the preservation of significant natural resources and to provide extensive perimeter landscaping, especially adjacent to residential areas and streets.  
TDC 50.200. - Use Categories. 
(1)  Use Categories. Table 50-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally Permitted (C) in the CO zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 50-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 50.210. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided in TDC 31.070. 
(2)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay zone Chapters for additional uses. 
Table 50-1 
Use Categories in the CO Zone 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Residential Accessory Uses 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to Family Child Care Home subject to ORS 329A.440. 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Commercial Parking 	P 	— 
Commercial Recreation 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to health or fitness facilities as defined by TDC 39.115, with indoor operation only. 
Eating and Drinking 
Establishments 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to restaurants as a limited use, subject to TDC 50.210(1). 
Medical Office 	P 	— 
Office 	P 	— 
Retail Sales and Services 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to child day care centers. 
  
Conditional uses limited to pharmacies, subject to TDC 50.210(3). 
INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Light Manufacturing 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to product assembly, subject to TDC 50.210(4). 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Basic Utilities 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to sewer and water pump stations and pressure reading stations. 
  
Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Electrical substation; 
 • Natural gas pumping station; and 
 • Water reservoir. 
Greenways and Natural 
Areas 	P 	— 
Parks and Open Space 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to an athletic practice facility. 
Transportation Facilities 	P 	— 
Wireless Communication 
Facility 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Wireless Communication Facility, if located within 300 feet of the centerline of Interstate 5; and 
 • Wireless Communication Facility Attached. 
  
Conditional uses limited to Wireless Communication Facility. 
  
Subject to maximum height and minimum setback standards defined by TDC Chapter 73F. 
  
TDC 50.210. - Additional Limitations on Uses. 
(1)  Size Limitation on Retail Uses. If located on land designated Employment Area, Corridor or Industrial Area on Map 9-4, the following uses must not be greater than 60,000 square feet of gross floor area per building or business: 
(a)  Eating and Drinking Establishment; and 
(b)  Retail Sales and Services. 
(2)  Restaurants. Restaurants are allowed with a conditional use permit when designed as an integral part of a major office complex exceeding 250,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(3)  Pharmacies. Pharmacies (as defined by TDC 31.060) are allowed with a conditional use permit when designed as an integral part of a medical office building, clinic or complex containing at least 30,000 square feet of gross floor area and meeting the following criteria: 
(a)  Maximum Floor Area. The pharmacy contains no more than 600 square feet of floor area. Additional floor area may be allowed for other, non-dispensing uses if approved as part of the conditional use request. In no event must the total floor area of the pharmacy and any related uses exceed 1200 square feet. 
(b)  Operations. The sole function of the pharmacy must be oriented toward dispensing activities associated with prescription drugs and the sale of non-prescription drugs. 
(c)  Oriented to Patient Traffic. The pharmacy is designed so as to be oriented toward patient traffic within the building, clinic, or complex, rather than toward passing vehicular traffic. 
(d)  No Drive-In Windows. Pharmacies allowed in this zone must not include drive-in window service. 
(4)  Product Assembly. Assembly of products is allowed with conditional use permit, in conjunction with office and/or research and development activities, meeting the following criteria: 
(a)  Review of Operations. All phases of the assembly process are subject to review and approval by the City Manager or designee prior to issuance of a building permit, in the case of a business locating in a new building, or prior to issuance of an occupancy certificate, in the case of a business moving into an existing building. 
(b)  Associated with Research and Development. The assembled products are the result of the research and product development of the firm engaged in the assembly process. 
(c)  Size of Products. The products are characteristically light and small, such as electronic components, cosmetics, or pharmaceuticals. 
(d)  Traffic Impacts. The assembly operation does not require rail service, nor does it generate truck traffic that, through volume and/or turning movements, hamper the efficient flow of traffic on adjacent streets, as determined by the City Engineer in measuring levels of service. 
(e)  Office Environment. The assembly process is accomplished in an office type environment rather than an industrial or manufacturing type environment. 
(f)  Visual Appearance. The site development and architectural design required for the activity has the visual appearance of an office campus including low buildings, wood or masonry facades, and extensive landscaping, as opposed to an industrial or warehouse development. 
(g)  Size of Site. The site being considered is at least 30 acres in size, however, a 30 or more acre site can be subdivided into lots of no less than one acre, with assembly operations allowed on each lot, if prior to any division of the property an overall master site development plan is reviewed and approved by the City Council as part of the conditional use process. Each lot created will include deed restrictions requiring the owner and users of the lots to abide by all provisions of the approved plan. Such deed restrictions will be approved as to form and content by the City Attorney prior to recording the subdivision.  
TDC 50.300. - Development Standards. 
Development standards in the CO zone are listed in Table 50-2. Additional standards may apply to some uses and situations, see TDC 50.310. 
Table 50-2 
Development Standards in the CO Zone 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
MINIMUM LOT SIZE 
All Uses 	10,000 square feet. 	
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH 
Minimum Average Lot Width 	80 feet 	When lot has frontage on public street, minimum lot width is 40 feet. 
Infrastructure and Utilities Uses 	— 	As determined through the Subdivision, Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment process. 
Flag Lots 	— 	Must be sufficient to comply with minimum access requirements of TDC 73C. 
MINIMUM SETBACKS 
Front 	20 feet 	
Side and Rear 	0—15 feet 	As determined through Architectural Review Process, except for structures greater than 35 feet in height, which have the following minimum side and rear setbacks: 
 • 30 feet when the yard abuts a lot in the RL Zone; or 
 • Zero to 15 feet, as determined through the Architectural Review process, when the yard abuts a lot in a multifamily zone. 
Corner Lots 	0—20 feet along each frontage 	Must be a sufficient distance to provide adequate sight distance for vehicular and pedestrian traffic at an intersection, as determined through the Architectural Review process. 
Parking and Vehicle 
Circulation Areas 	5 feet 	Except as approved through Architectural Review process. 
Fences 	5 feet 	From public right-of-way. 
MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
All Uses 	45 feet 	Flagpoles may extend up to 100 feet. 
  
TDC 50.310. - Additional Development Standards. 
(1)  Outdoor Uses. All uses must be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except off-street parking and loading, Basic Utilities, Wireless Communication Facilities and outdoor play areas of child day care centers as required by state day care certification standards. 
(2)  Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural Areas. To preserve natural areas and habitat for fish and wildlife, the decision-making authority may provide a front yard setback reduction for developments that are adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas that dedicate land for conservation or public recreational purposes, in accordance with the following standards. 
(a)  Setback Reduction. All permitted uses may be allowed a reduction of up to 35 percent of the front yard setbacks, as determined through the Architectural Review process, if as a result the buildings are farther away from fish and wildlife habitat areas. 
(b)  Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. A portion of the parcel must be located in one of the following conservation or protection areas: 
(i)  Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or 
(ii)  Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor. 
(c)  Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural Area Lot must be one of the following: 
(i)  Dedicated to the City at the City's option; 
(ii)  Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to a non-profit conservation organization; or 
(iii)  Retained in private ownership. 
(d)  Ownership Considerations. The decision-making authority must consider, but is not limited to, the following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway or Natural Area Lot: 
(i)  Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway, pedestrian or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other public facility; 
(ii)  Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more significant trees; 
(iii)  Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a unique or intrinsically valuable element; 
(iv)  Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties; 
(v)  Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility; 
(vi)  Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need; 
(vii)  Does the lot contain environmental hazards; 
(viii)  Geologic stability of the lot; and 
(ix)  Future maintenance costs for the lot. 
(Ord. 1427-19 , § 24, 11-25-19)  
CHAPTER 51 - NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE (CN) 
 
TDC 51.100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this district is to provide locations for commercial uses within close proximity to residential areas, to provide opportunities to serve the needs of residents for convenience shopping and services. The primary uses are intended to include professional offices, services, and retail oriented to the day-to-day needs of adjacent neighborhoods. Neighborhood commercial uses are intended to be pedestrian oriented and should serve to reduce automobile trips and energy consumption. The purpose is also to assure that development is of a scale and design that is compatible with the residential environment and is an enhancement to neighborhood areas. It is not the purpose of this district to allow for large scale commercial facilities, such as large grocery or department stores, which are more appropriately located within the downtown area.  
TDC 51.110. - District Location Standards. 
(1)  District Location. The boundaries of a CN district must be separated from school property by not less than 300 feet. The boundaries of a CN District must be separated from all other CN, CC, and CG districts by at least 1,320 feet. 
(2)  Street Frontage. At least one-fourth of the total street frontage of the CN District area must be on an Arterial or Major Collector street. 
(Ord. No. 1418-19, § 4, 4-22-19)  
TDC 51.200. - Use Categories. 
(1)  Use Categories. Table 51-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally Permitted (C) in the CN zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 51-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 51.210. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided in TDC 31.070. 
(2)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay zone Chapters for additional uses. 
Table 51-1 
Use Categories in the CN Zone 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Household Living 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to one (1) dwelling unit for each business located on the lot. 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Retail Sales and Services 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
General merchandise or variety stores; 
 • Food stores, subject to TDC 51.210(1); 
 • Drug store and pharmacy; 
 • Laundry and dry cleaning, subject to TDC 51.210(2); 
 • Beauty and barber shops; 
Shoe repair; and 
 • Child day care center, subject to TDC 34.100. 
All commercial uses subject to floor area limitation, see TDC 51.210(3). 
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES 
Community Services 	P(L) 	Permitted uses limited to a community center, community recreation facility, or community aquatic center, when open to the general public and operated by a non-profit community organization. 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Greenways and Natural 
Areas 	P 	— 
Transportation Facilities 	P 	— 
  
TDC 51.210. - Additional Limitations on Uses. 
(1)  Food Stores. Food stores must not exceed 4,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(2)  Laundry and Dry Cleaning. Laundry and dry cleaning establishments must be exclusively for the cleaning of clothing and materials of the resident population and must not involve laundry or cleaning of commercial, industrial, or institutional clothing and materials. 
(3)  Commercial Floor Area Limit. A nonresidential occupant must not occupy more than 10,000 square feet of any building or combination of buildings within a single CN District area.  
TDC 51.300. - Development Standards. 
Development standards in the CN zone are listed in Table 51-2. Additional standards may apply to some uses and situations, see TDC 51.310. 
Table 51-2 
Development Standards in the CN Zone 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
MINIMUM LOT SIZE 
All Uses 	20,000 square feet 	— 
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH 
Minimum Average Lot Width 	100 feet 	When lot has frontage on public street, minimum lot width is 100 feet. 
Minimum Lot Width at the Building Line 	100 feet 	— 
Infrastructure and 
Utilities Uses 	— 	As determined through the Subdivision, Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment process 
MINIMUM SETBACKS 
Front 	20 feet 	
Side and Rear 	0— 15 feet 	As determined through Architectural Review Process. 
Corner Lots 	0—10 feet along each frontage 	Must be a sufficient distance to provide adequate sight distance for vehicular and pedestrian traffic at an intersection, as determined through the Architectural Review process. 
Parking and Vehicle 
Circulation Areas 	5 feet 	Except as approved through Architectural Review process. 
Fences 	5 feet 	From public right-of-way. 
MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE 
All Uses 	75 percent 	Includes both building and parking areas. All land not covered by buildings or parking must be landscaped. 
MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
All Uses 	25 feet 	In addition to meeting the maximum height limit, where a property line or alley separates CN land from land in a residential district, a building must not be greater than 20 feet in height at the setback line; and a building or structure must not extend above a plane beginning at 20 feet in height above that setback line and extending inward and upward at a slope of 45 degrees. 
  
TDC 51.310. - Additional Development Standards. 
(1)  Building and Driveway Orientation. All commercial uses in CN District must be oriented and have primary driveway access to an Arterial or Major Collector street. No more than one driveway may access Minor Collector, Local Residential, or Cul-De-Sac street. 
(2)  Building Design. All commercial buildings must be of a general residential character, including the following design elements: 
(a)  Facade Design. All building facades must be of wood or brick and, if painted, must be in muted, earth tone colors. 
(b)  Roof Forms. All roofs must be compatible with the surrounding residential area as determined through the Architectural Review process. 
(3)  Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural Areas. To preserve natural areas and habitat for fish and wildlife, the decision-making authority may provide a front yard setback reduction for developments that are adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas that dedicate land for conservation or public recreational purposes, in accordance with the following standards. 
(a)  Setback Reduction. All permitted uses may be allowed a reduction of up to 35 percent of the front yard setbacks, as determined through the Architectural Review process, if as a result the buildings are farther away from fish and wildlife habitat areas. 
(b)  Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. A portion of the parcel must be located in one of the following conservation or protection areas: 
(i)  Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or 
(ii)  Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor. 
(c)  Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural Area Lot must be one of the following: 
(i)  Dedicated to the City at the City's option; 
(ii)  Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to a non-profit conservation organization; or 
(iii)  Retained in private ownership. 
(d)  Ownership Considerations. The decision-making authority must consider, but not limited to, the following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway or Natural Area Lot: 
(i)  Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway, pedestrian or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other public facility; 
(ii)  Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more significant trees; 
(iii)  Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a unique or intrinsically valuable element; 
(iv)  Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties; 
(v)  Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility; 
(vi)  Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need; 
(vii)  Does the lot contain environmental hazards; 
(viii)  Geologic stability of the lot; and 
(ix)  Future maintenance costs for the lot. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. 1427-19 , § 25, 11-25-19)  
CHAPTER 52 - RECREATIONAL COMMERCIAL ZONE (CR) 
 
TDC 52.100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this district is to recognize the unique and valuable physical, scenic, cultural, and historic character of the Roamer's Rest area located between the Tualatin River and Pacific Highway (99-W) north of the highway's intersection with Tualatin Road. It is intended to preserve that area by allowing and encouraging commercial and related uses that are oriented to the traveler on the highway or that are oriented toward and relate well with the river.  
TDC 52.200. - Use Categories. 
(1)  Use Categories. Table 52-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally Permitted (C) in the CR zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 52-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 52.210. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided in TDC 31.070. 
(2)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay zone Chapters for additional uses. 
Table 52-1 
Use Categories in the CR Zone 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Household Living 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Multi-Family Structures; 
 • Manufactured Dwelling Parks. 
Residential Accessory Uses 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to Family Child Care Home, subject to ORS 329A.440. 
Group Living 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to residential facilities. 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Commercial Lodging 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to motels. 
Commercial Recreation 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 

 • Boat dock, marina and boat rental; 
 • Public or private camping or picnic grounds, including recreational vehicle parking; 
 • Private meeting, club or lodge hall; and 
 • Dance hall. 
  
Conditional uses limited to family recreation center. 
Durable Goods Sales 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to nursery or greenhouse with retail sales, subject to TDC 52.120(3) 
Eating and Drinking 
Establishments 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 

 • Restaurant, without drive-in service; 
 • Restaurant, take-out; 
 • Tavern or cocktail lounge. 
  
Conditional uses limited to restaurant with drive-in service. 
Quick Vehicle Servicing 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to Automobile Service Station, subject to TDC 52.210(1). 
Retail Sales and Services 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 

 • Bakery, for retail sale on the premises only; 
 • Marine supply store; and 
 • Food stores, subject to TDC 52.210(2). 
  
All uses are subject to TDC 52.120(3). 
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES 
Community Services 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to community centers, youth or senior centers, open to the general public. 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Basic Utilities 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to sewer and water pump stations and pressure reading stations. 
  
Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Electrical substation; 
 • Natural gas pumping station; and 
 • Water reservoir. 
Greenways and Natural 
Areas 	P 	— 
Parks and Open Areas 	P 	— 
Transportation Facilities 	P 	— 
Wireless Communications 
Facilities 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to Wireless 
Communication Facility Attached. 
  
Conditional uses limited to Wireless 
Communication Facility. 
  
Subject to maximum height and minimum setback standards defined by TDC Chapter 73F. 
  
TDC 52.210. - Additional Limitations on Uses. 
(1)  Automobile Service Stations. The following development standards apply to all automobile service stations in the CR planning district: 
(a)  The minimum street frontage on each street on a corner lot is 120 feet. 
(b)  The minimum street frontage on an interior lot is 150 feet; 
(c)  The minimum building setback from any street right-of-way is 40 feet; 
(d)  The minimum pump island setback from any lot line is 15 feet; 
(e)  Only two access points are allowed for an interior lot. A corner lot and a through lot are allowed only one access per street frontage; 
(f)  The storage and display of merchandise such as tires and batteries offered for sale must be conducted in the station building. However, small items such as oil and windshield wiper blades may be displayed outside the building; 
(g)  Outside storage or sale of any vehicles is not permitted; 
(h)  All exterior walls and pump islands must be a minimum distance of 400 feet from the exterior walls and outdoor play areas of any child day care center or family day care provider, irrespective of any structures in between; and 
(i)  There must be no major repair or service activity, other than the dispensing of fuel products, outside the building. 
(2)  Food Stores. Food stores must not exceed 4,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(3)  Size Limitation on Retail Uses. If located on land designated Employment Area, Corridor or Industrial Area on Map 9-4, uses in the following categories must not be greater than 60,000 square feet of gross floor area per building or business: 
(a)  Retail Sales and Services; and 
(b)  Durable Goods Sales.  
TDC 52.300. - Development Standards. 
Development standards in the CR zone are listed in Table 52-2. Additional standards may apply to some uses and situations, see TDC 52.310. 
Table 52-2 
Development Standards in the CR Zone 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE
REFERENCES 
MAXIMUM DENSITY 
Multi-Family Structures and 
Manufactured Dwelling Parks 	10 units per acre 	— 
MINIMUM LOT SIZE 
All Uses 	10,000 square feet 	
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH 
Minimum Average Lot Width 	75 feet 	When lot has frontage on public street, minimum lot width is 40 feet. 
Infrastructure and Utilities Uses 	— 	As determined through the Subdivision, Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment process 
Flag Lots 	— 	Must be sufficient to comply with minimum access requirements of TDC 73C. 
MINIMUM SETBACKS 
Front 	20 feet 	
Side and Rear 	0 - 15 feet 	As determined through Architectural Review Process. 
Corner Lots 	0 - 20 feet along each frontage 	Must be a sufficient distance to provide adequate sight distance for vehicular and pedestrian traffic at an intersection, as determined through the Architectural Review process. 
Parking and Vehicle Circulation Areas 	5 feet 	From public right-of-way or property line, except as approved through Architectural Review process. 
Fences 	5 feet 	From public right-of-way. 
MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
All Uses 	35 feet 	Flagpoles may extend up to 100 feet. 
  
TDC 52.310. - Additional Development Standards. 
(1)  Access Management. Wherever possible, as determined by the City Manager or designee, driveway access will be shared by adjacent properties so that there is no more than one driveway for every two properties. In any event, no more than one two-way driveway or two one-way driveways may serve each lot. 
(2)  Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural Areas. To preserve natural areas and habitat for fish and wildlife, the decision-making authority may provide a front yard setback reduction for developments that are adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas that dedicate land for conservation or public recreational purposes, in accordance with the following standards. 
(a)  Setback Reduction. All permitted uses may be allowed a reduction of up to 35 percent of the front yard setbacks, as determined through the Architectural Review process, if as a result the buildings are farther away from fish and wildlife habitat areas. 
(b)  Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. A portion of the parcel must be located in one of the following conservation or protection areas: 
(i)  Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or 
(ii)  Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor. 
(c)  Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural Area Lot must be one of the following: 
(i)  Dedicated to the City at the City's option; 
(ii)  Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to a non-profit conservation organization; or 
(iii)  Retained in private ownership. 
(d)  Ownership Considerations. The decision-making authority must consider, but not limited to, the following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway or Natural Area Lot: 
(i)  Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway, pedestrian or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other public facility; 
(ii)  Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more significant trees; 
(iii)  Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a unique or intrinsically valuable element; 
(iv)  Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties; 
(v)  Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility; 
(vi)  Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need; 
(vii)  Does the lot contain environmental hazards; 
(viii)  Geologic stability of the lot; and 
(ix)  Future maintenance costs for the lot. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. 1427-19 , § 26, 11-25-19)  
CHAPTER 53 - CENTRAL COMMERCIAL ZONE (CC) 
 
TDC 53.100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this district is to provide areas of the City that are suitable for a full range of retail, professional and service uses of the kind usually found in downtown areas patronized by pedestrians. The district also provides areas suitable for civic, social and cultural functions serving the general community.  
TDC 53.200. - Use Categories. 
(1)  Use Categories. Table 53-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally Permitted (C) in the CC zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 53-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 53.210. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided in TDC 31.070. 
(2)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay zone Chapters for additional uses. 
Table 53-1 
Use Categories in the CC Zone 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Residential Accessory Uses 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to Family Child Care Home subject to ORS 329A.440. 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Commercial Lodging 	P 	— 
Commercial Recreation 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Amusement enterprise, including pool hall, bowling alley, dance hall or skating rink; 
 • Private meeting hall, club or lodge hall, or fraternal organizations; and 
 • Health studio. 
Commercial Parking 	P 	— 
Durable Goods Sales 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 

 • Furniture store, including antiques and second-hand furniture; and 
 • Appliance store, subject to TDC 53.210(2). 
Eating and Drinking 
Establishments 	P 	Some restrictions in the Central Tualatin Overlay Zone see TDC Chapter 58. 
Medical Office 	P 	— 
Office 	P 	— 
Retail Sales and Services 	P/C 	Conditional use permit required for veterinary clinic. 
Memorial Planning and Products Center (as defined in TDC 39.115) not permitted. 
All other uses permitted outright. 
All uses subject to TDC 53.210(4). 
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES 
Assembly Facilities 	C 	— 
Colleges, Universities and 
Private Career Schools 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to business college. 
All other use are conditional uses. 
Community Services 	P 	— 
Schools 	C 	— 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Basic Utilities 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to sewer and water pump stations and pressure reading stations. 
  
Conditional uses limited to utility substations. 
Greenways and Natural 
Areas 	P 	— 
Parks and Open Space 	P 	— 
Public Safety Facilities 	P/C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to publicly- and privately-operated ambulance facilities. 
  
All other uses permitted outright. 
Transportation Facilities 	P 	— 
Wireless Communication 
Facilities 	P(L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Wireless Communication Facility Attached; and 
 • Wireless Communication Facility, located within 300 feet of the centerline of I-5. 
  
TDC 53.210. - Additional Limitations on Uses. 
(1)  Appliance Stores. Incidental repair of appliances is permitted as an accessory use. 
(2)  Veterinary Clinic. Veterinary clinics may be permitted as a conditional use if treatment is limited to small animals. 
(3)  Outdoor Uses. All uses must be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except off-street parking and loading, Basic Utilities, Wireless Communication Facilities, outdoor play areas of child day care centers, as required by state day care certification standards, and as provided in (a)—(c), below. 
(a)  Outside storage or sales requires a conditional use permit. 
(b)  Outdoor sales, as defined in TDC 31.060 and as provided for in TDC 34.011, are permitted as a temporary use. 
(c)  Portable collection facilities as an accessory use require a conditional use permit, and are subject to the following standards: 
(i)  The facility must be sited such that it is either adjacent to existing vegetation or in a location where vegetation can be installed to enhance the appearance of the facility; 
(ii)  If vegetation is not already in place, landscaping, as approved through the Architectural Review process, must be installed adjacent to the location of the portable collection facility; 
(iii)  Items must not be stored outside the facility, except for temporary storage of oversized goods; 
(iv)  Oversized goods stored outside must be collected daily and removed from the premises or stored inside the portable collection facility; and 
(v)  Adequate receptacle must be provided for items dropped off during times the facility is not attended.  
TDC 53.300. - Development Standards. 
Development standards in the CC zone are listed in Table 53-2. Additional standards may apply to some uses and situations, see TDC 53.310. 
Table 53-2 
Development Standards in the CC Zone 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
MINIMUM LOT SIZE 
All Uses 	10,000 square feet 	
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH 
Minimum Average Lot Width 	75 feet 	When lot has frontage on public street or is located on a cul-de-sac street, minimum lot width at the street must be 40 feet. 
Infrastructure and Utilities Uses 	— 	As determined through the Subdivision, Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment process 
Flag Lots 	— 	Must be sufficient to comply with minimum access requirements of TDC 73C. 
MINIMUM SETBACKS 
Front 	0—20 feet 	Determined through Architectural Review Process. 
Buildings over 45 feet in height are subject to TDC 53.410(1). 
Residential garage doors facing public street must be set back 20 feet from public right-of-way. 
Side and Rear 	0 - 20 feet 	Determined through Architectural Review Process. 
Rear 	0 - 15 feet 	Determined through Architectural Review Process. 
Corner Lots 	0 - 20 feet along each frontage 	Must be a sufficient distance to provide adequate sight distance for vehicular and pedestrian traffic at an intersection, as determined through the Architectural Review process. 
Parking and Vehicle Circulation Areas 	5 feet 	Except as approved through Architectural Review process. 
Fences 	5 feet 	From public right-of-way. 
MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
All Uses 	45 feet 	Flagpoles may extend up to 100 feet. 
  
Height bonus available in limited locations, see TDC 53.410(1). 
  
TDC 53.310. - Additional Development Standards. 
(1)  Height Bonus. In the CC zone, north of SW Boones Ferry Road and south of the Tualatin River, the maximum height for a structure is 125 feet, when approved with a conditional use permit and subject to the following setback requirements: 
(a)  Front yard. Any structure south of Hedges Creek must comply with the CC District setbacks and any structure north of Hedges Creek must comply with the TDC Chapter 72 setbacks for Hedges Creek. 
(b)  Side yard. The minimum side yard setback is: 
(i)  For structures 45 feet or less in height, zero to 15 feet as determined through the Architectural Review process; 
(ii)  For structures greater than 45 feet, but less than 84 feet, the side yard setback must be 30 feet for that portion of the structure greater than 45 feet and less than 84 feet in height; and 
(iii)  For structures greater than 84 feet but less than or equal to 125 feet in height, the side yard setback must be 45 feet for that portion of the building greater than 84 feet in height. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18)  
CHAPTER 54 - GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE (CG) 
 
TDC 54.100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this district is to provide areas in the City that are suitable for the widest range of commercial uses and retail businesses. This district is particularly suitable for automobile-related businesses and businesses needing direct freeway access. 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 11, 6-22-20)  
TDC 54.200. - Use Categories. 
(1)  Use Categories. Table 54-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally Permitted (C) in the CG zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 54-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 54.210. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided in TDC 31.070. 
(2)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay zone Chapters for additional uses. 
Table 54-1 
Use Categories in the CG District 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Residential Accessory Uses 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to Family Child Care Home, subject to ORS 329A.440. 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Commercial Lodging 	P 	— 
Commercial Recreation 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
  
Amusement enterprise, including pool hall, bowling alley, dance hall or skating rink; and 
Health studio. 
  
Conditional uses limited to: 
  
Family recreation center, as defined in TDC 31.060; and 
  
Private meeting hall, club or lodge hall, or fraternal organizations. 
Commercial Parking 	P 	— 
Durable Goods Sales 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Furniture store, including antiques and second-hand furniture; 
 • Appliance store, subject to TDC 54.210(2); 
 • Home improvement store, subject to TDC 53.210(3) and TDC 54.220(3); 
 • Auto leasing office, subject to TDC 54.210(4) and TDC 54.220(3); and 
 • Boat, boat motor and boat trailer sales subject to TDC 54.210(5) and TDC 54.220(3). 
All uses subject to TDC 54.210(1). 
Eating and Drinking 
Establishments 	P 	— 
Medical Office 	P 	— 
Office 	P 	— 
Other Educational and 
Vocational Services 	P 	— 
Quick Vehicle Servicing 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to Automobile 
Service Stations subject to TDC 54.210(6). 
Retail Sales and Services 	P/C (L) 	Conditional use permit required for outdoor pet activity area associated with Pet Day Care, subject to subject to TDC 54.220(3). 
Pet Day Care without outdoor activity area is permitted outright. 
Mortuary not permitted. 
All other retail sales and service uses permitted outright. 
All uses subject to TDC 54.210(1). 
Vehicle Repair 	P 	— 
INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Light Manufacturing 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
Optical lens grinder; and 
  
Testing laboratory. 
Vehicle Storage 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to automobile towing company office and dispatch office, subject to TDC 54.220(3). 
Warehouse and Freight 
Movement 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to frozen food locker. 
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES 
Assembly Facilities 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Auditoriums, exhibition halls, or rooms for public assembly; 
 • Churches, synagogues, mosques, temples or other places of worship; and 
 • Theaters. 
Colleges, Universities, and 
Private Career Schools 	P/C 	Permitted uses limited to a private career school. 
All other uses require conditional use permit. 
Community Services 	P 	— 
Schools 	C 	— 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Basic Utilities 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to sewer and water pump stations, pressure reading stations. 
Conditional uses limited to utility substations. 
Greenways and Natural 
Areas 	P 	— 
Parks and Open Space 	P (L) 	Golf courses and country clubs prohibited. All other uses permitted outright. 
Public Safety Facilities 	P/C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Fire stations; and 
 • Publicly- and privately-operated ambulance facilities. 
All other uses permitted outright. 
Transportation Facilities 	P 	— 
Wireless Communication 
Facility 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Wireless Communication Facility, if located within 300 feet of the centerline of Interstate 5; and 
 • Wireless Communication Facility Attached. 
  
Conditional uses limited to Wireless Communication Facility. 
Subject to maximum height and minimum setback standards defined by TDC Chapter 73F. 
  
TDC 54.210. - Additional Limitations on Uses. 
(1)  Size Limitation on Retail Uses. If located on land designated Employment Area, Corridor or Industrial Area on Map 9-4, uses in the following categories must not be greater than 60,000 square feet of gross floor area per building or business: 
(a)  Eating and Drinking Establishments; 
(b)  Retail Sales and Services; and 
(c)  Durable Goods Sales. 
(2)  Appliance Stores. Incidental repair of appliances is permitted as an accessory use. 
(3)  Home Improvement Stores. 
(a)  Garden tractors sold on-site must not exceed 25 horsepower. 
(b)  Outdoor storage, display, and sale areas require a conditional use permit and are subject to additional standards, see TDC 54.220. 
(4)  Auto Leasing Office. No more than five (5) vehicles may be stored on site. 
(5)  Boat, Boat Motor and Boat Trailer Sales. 
(a)  Maintenance, service and repair of boats, motors and trailers is not permitted. 
(b)  The scale of products sold on-site is limited as follows: 
(i)  Boats must not exceed 18 feet in length; 
(ii)  Boat motors must not exceed 40 horsepower; and 
(iii)  Boat trailers are limited to single axle. 
(c)  Outdoor storage, display, and sale areas require a conditional use permit and are subject to additional standards, see TDC 54.220. 
(6)  Automobile Service Station. 
(a)  The minimum street frontage on each street on a corner lot is 120 feet. 
(b)  The minimum street frontage on an interior lot is 150 feet. 
(c)  The minimum building setback from any street right-of-way is 40 feet. 
(d)  The minimum pump island set-back from any lot line is 15 feet. 
(e)  Only two access points are allowed for an interior lot. A corner lot and a through lot are allowed only one access per street frontage. 
(f)  The storage and display of merchandise such as tires and batteries offered for sale must be conducted in the station building. However, small items such as oil and windshield wiper blades may be displayed outside the building. 
(g)  Outside storage or sale of any vehicles is not permitted. 
(h)  Must comply with TDC Chapter 34.200.  
TDC 54.220. - Outdoor Uses. 
All uses must be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except as provided by this section. 
(1)  Permitted Uses. Off-street parking and loading, outdoor play areas of child day care centers as required by state day care certification standards, Basic Utilities, Wireless Communication Facilities, and nursery or greenhouse uses are permitted outright as outdoor uses. 
(2)  Temporary Uses. Temporary outdoor sales, as defined in TDC 31.060, are permitted as a temporary use subject to TDC 33.090. 
(3)  Conditional Uses. Any outdoor storage, display, and sales use requires a conditional use permit. The following specific outdoor uses are subject to additional standards. 
(a)  Home Improvement Stores. 
(i)  The store's gross floor area must be 50,000 square feet or more. 
(ii)  The outdoor area must not exceed ten percent of the store's gross floor area or 15,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
(iii)  Not less than 50 percent of the outdoor area must be covered by a permanent roof. 
(iv)  The outdoor area must abut a wall of the store. 
(v)  All sides of the outdoor area not abutting a wall of the store must be screened with a sight obscuring fence, wall, berm, or dense evergreen landscaping not less than six feet in height. 
(vi)  Stored materials must not exceed the height of the sight obscuring barrier when viewed from street level. 
(b)  Boat, Motor Boat, and Boat Trailer Sales. 
(i)  Boats, motors, and trailers are allowed, but only if boats, motors, and trailers are not the primary products sold by the store. 
(ii)  The outdoor area must abut a wall of the store. 
(iii)  The outdoor area must not exceed ten percent of the store's gross floor area or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
(iv)  Not less than 25 percent of the outdoor area must be covered by a permanent roof. 
(v)  All sides of the outdoor area not abutting a wall of the store must be screened with a sight obscuring fence, wall, berm, or dense evergreen landscaping not less than six feet in height. 
(vi)  Stored materials must not exceed the height of the sight obscuring barrier when viewed from street level. 
(c)  Portable Collection Facilities. Portable collection facilities that are an accessory use are subject to the following standards: 
(i)  The facility must be sited such that it is either adjacent to existing vegetation or in a location where vegetation can be installed to enhance the appearance of the facility; 
(ii)  If vegetation is not already in place, landscaping, as approved through the Architectural Review process, must be installed adjacent to the location of the portable collection facility; 
(iii)  Items must not be stored outside the facility, except for temporary storage of oversized goods; 
(iv)  Oversized goods stored outside must be collected daily and removed from the premises or stored inside the portable collection facility; and 
(v)  Adequate receptacle must be provided for items dropped off during times the facility is not attended. 
(d)  Automobile Towing Company Office and Dispatch Office. Outdoor storage of towed vehicles requires a conditional use permit and is subject to the following standards: 
(i)  Vehicle storage must be screened with a solid sight-obscuring wall or fence not less than six feet in height; 
(ii)  A perimeter landscaped area at least five feet in width must be provided on the outside of the storage area wall or fence as approved through the Architectural Review process. The perimeter landscaped area must be planted with evergreen plant materials which will reach the height of the wall or fence within three years from the time of planting; and 
(iii)  The storage area must be paved with asphalt or concrete. 
(e)  Outdoor Pet Activity Area Associated with Pet Day Care. Use of an outdoor pet activity area requires a conditional use permit, which must include a noise, odor and animal waste material mitigation plan for the design and management of the outdoor pet day care facility, showing how impacts on neighboring properties and businesses will be eliminated or minimized. Outdoor pet activity areas are subject to the following standards: 
(i)  The subject lot is not within 500 feet of a residential planning district and is not in Blocks 11, 28, and 29 of the Central Urban Renewal District (CURD). 
(ii)  The outdoor pet activity area must: 
(A)  Be completely enclosed with a minimum 8-foot-tall sight-obscuring fence. Slatted chain link fencing is not an appropriate screening measure; 
(B)  Be a continuously paved impervious surface; and 
(C)  Have a drainage system that contains all animal waste material for discharge to the sanitary sewer system; 
(iii)  Outdoor pet day care activities including exercise and training must not occur between the hours of 8:00 pm and 7:00 am.  
TDC 54.300. - Development Standards. 
Development standards in the CG zone are listed in Table 54-2. Additional standards may apply to some uses and situations, see TDC 54.310. 
Table 54-2 
Development Standards in the CG District 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE
REFERENCES 
MINIMUM LOT SIZE 
All Uses 	10,000 square feet 	
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH 
Minimum Average Lot Width 	75 feet 	When lot has frontage on public street or is located on a cul-de-sac street, minimum lot width at the street must be 40 feet. 
Infrastructure and Utilities Uses 	— 	As determined through the Subdivision, Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment process 
Flag Lots 	— 	Must be sufficient to comply with minimum access requirements of TDC 73C. 
MINIMUM SETBACKS 
Front 	5—20 feet 	Determined through Architectural Review Process. 
Side and Rear 	0—15 feet 	Determined through Architectural Review Process. 
Rear 	0—15 feet 	Determined through Architectural Review Process. 
Corner Lots 	0—20 feet along each frontage 	Must be a sufficient distance to provide adequate sight distance for vehicular and pedestrian traffic at an intersection, as determined through the Architectural Review process. 
Parking and Vehicle Circulation Areas 	5 feet 	Except as approved through Architectural Review process. 
Fences 	5 feet 	From public right-of-way. 
MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
All Uses 	45 feet 	Flagpoles may extend up to 100 feet. 
Gateway tower elements are subject to TDC 54.310(1). 
Maximum height within the Leveton Tax Increment District is 60 feet. 
  
TDC 54.310. - Additional Development Standards. 
(1)  Gateway Tower Elements. Gateway Tower Elements are permitted in the CG Planning District, subject to the following restrictions. 
(a)  Location. The Gateway Tower element must be located within a 3.0 acre or larger commercial center development that is in a CG Planning District and within a 1,000 foot radius of: 
(i)  The intersection of the centerline of SW Nyberg Street with the centerline of Interstate I-5; and 
(ii)  The intersection of the centerline of SW Lower Boones Ferry Road with the centerline of Interstate I-5. 
(b)  Number. A maximum of two (2) Gateway Tower Elements are permitted within a commercial center development, with a minimum separation of 200 feet. 
(c)  Height. Gateway Tower Element feature must not exceed a structure height of 60 feet. 
(d)  Width and Depth. Gateway Tower Element must not have exterior width, depth, or diameter dimensions greater than 20 feet nor less than six feet. 
(e)  Design. 
(i)  Gateway Tower Elements must incorporate architectural details including, but not limited to, fenestrations; eaves; window openings; and variations in roofline, volume, massing, and exterior materials. Architectural materials and details must be of a high quality and must relate to the design elements used on other structures in the development site. 
(ii)  Gateway Tower Elements must include a gable, hip, dome or pitched roof form without a spire or pinnacle above. The roof material must be opaque and not transparent or translucent. 
(iii)  Clocks, bells and similar features are prohibited. 
(f)  Lighting. A Gateway Tower Element may be illuminated by indirect illumination. Direct illumination or internal illumination other than light emitted from approved windows or fenestrations is prohibited. 
(g)  Signage. Signs are prohibited on a Gateway Tower Element structure. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 12, 6-22-20)  
CHAPTER 55 - MID-RISE/OFFICE COMMERCIAL ZONE (CO/MR) 
 
TDC 55.100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this district is to provide areas for professional, Class A, mid-rise offices.  
TDC 55.200. - Use Categories. 
(1)  Use Categories. Table 55-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally Permitted (C) in the CO/MR zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 55-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 55.210. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided in TDC 31.070. 
(2)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay zone Chapters for additional uses. 
Table 55-1 
Use Categories in the CO/MR Zone 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Commercial Parking 	P 	— 
Commercial Recreation 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to health or fitness facilities as defined by TDC 31.060 and subject to TDC 55.210(2). 
All uses are subject to TDC 55.210(1). 
Eating and Drinking 
Establishments 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to restaurants, subject to TDC 55.210(3). 
All uses are subject to TDC 55.210(1). 
Medical Office 	P 	— 
Office 	P 	— 
Retail Sales and Services 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to child day care centers. 
  
Conditional uses limited to pharmacies, subject to TDC 55.210(4). 
All uses are subject to TDC 55.210(1). 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Basic Utilities 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to sewer and water pump stations and pressure reading stations. 
  
Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Electrical substation; 
 • Natural gas pumping station; and 
 • Water reservoir. 
Greenways and Natural 
Areas 	P 	— 
Transportation Facilities 	P 	— 
Wireless Communication 
Facility 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Wireless Communication Facility, if located within 300 feet of the centerline of Interstate 5; and 
 • Wireless Communication Facility Attached. 
Conditional uses limited to Wireless Communication Facility. 
Subject to maximum height and minimum setback standards defined by TDC Chapter 73F. 
Subject to TDC 55.310(3). 
  
TDC 55.210. - Additional Limitations on Uses. 
(1)  Size Limitation on Retail Uses. If located on land designated Employment Area, Corridor or Industrial Area on Map 9-4, uses in the following categories must not be greater than 60,000 square feet of gross floor area per building or business: 
(a)  Commercial Recreation; 
(b)  Eating and Drinking Establishments; or 
(c)  Retail Sales and Services. 
(2)  Health and Fitness Facilities. Health and fitness facilities must not exceed 25,000 square feet of gross floor area and must be limited to indoor operation. 
(3)  Restaurants. Restaurants are allowed with a conditional use permit when designed as an integral part of a major office complex exceeding 250,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(4)  Pharmacies. Pharmacies (as defined by TDC 31.060) are allowed with a conditional use permit when designed as an integral part of a medical office building, clinic or complex containing at least 30,000 square feet of gross floor area and meeting the following criteria: 
(a)  Maximum Floor Area. The pharmacy contains no more than 600 square feet of floor area. Additional floor area may be allowed for other, non-dispensing uses if approved as part of the conditional use request. The total floor area of the pharmacy and any related uses must not exceed 1200 square feet. 
(b)  Operations. The sole function of the pharmacy must be oriented toward dispensing activities associated with prescription drugs and the sale of non-prescription drugs. 
(c)  Oriented to Patient Traffic. The pharmacy is designed so as to be oriented toward patient traffic within the building, clinic, or complex, rather than toward passing vehicular traffic. 
(d)  No Drive-In Windows. Drive-in window service is not allowed for pharmacies in this zone.  
TDC 55.300. - Development Standards. 
Development standards in the CO/MR zone are listed in Table 55-2. Additional standards may apply to some uses and situations, see TDC 55.310. 
Table 55-2 
Development Standards in the CO/MR Zone 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
CO/MR Zone MINIMUM LOT SIZE 
All Uses 	3 acres 	— 
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH 
Minimum Average Lot Width 	200 feet 	When lot has frontage on public street, minimum lot width at the street is 100 feet. 
When lot has frontage on a cul-de-sac street, minimum lot width at the street is 50 feet. 
Infrastructure and Utilities Uses 	— 	As determined through the Subdivision, Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment process 
Flag Lots 	— 	Must be sufficient to comply with minimum access requirements of TDC 73C. 
MINIMUM SETBACKS 
Front 	30 feet 	— 
Side and Rear 	30 feet 	— 
Corner Lots 	30 feet 	Must be a sufficient distance to provide adequate sight distance for vehicular and pedestrian traffic at an intersection, as determined through the Architectural Review process. 
Parking and Vehicle Circulation Areas 	5 feet 	Except as approved through Architectural Review process. 
Fences 	5 feet 	From public right-of-way. 
MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
All Uses 	75 feet 	Flagpoles may extend up to 100 feet. 
  
TDC 55.310. - Additional Development Standards. 
(1)  Outdoor Uses. All uses must be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except off-street parking and loading, Basic Utilities, Wireless Communication Facilities and outdoor play areas of child day care centers as required by state day care certification standards. 
(2)  Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural Areas. To preserve natural areas and habitat for fish and wildlife, the decision-making authority may provide a front, side, or rear yard setback reduction for developments that are adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas that dedicate land for conservation or public recreational purposes, in accordance with the following standards. 
(a)  Setback Reduction. All permitted uses may be allowed a reduction of up to 35 percent of the front, side, or rear yard setbacks, as determined through the Architectural Review process, if as a result the buildings are farther away from fish and wildlife habitat areas. 
(b)  Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. Each lot must be located wholly in one of the following conservation or protection areas: 
(i)  Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or 
(ii)  Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor. 
(c)  Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural Area Lot must be one of the following: 
(i)  Dedicated to the City at the City's option; 
(ii)  Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to a non-profit conservation organization; or 
(iii)  Retained in private ownership. 
(d)  Ownership Considerations. The decision-making authority must consider, but is not limited to, the following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway or Natural Area Lot: 
(i)  Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway, pedestrian or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other public facility; 
(ii)  Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more significant trees; 
(iii)  Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a unique or intrinsically valuable element; 
(iv)  Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties; 
(v)  Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility; 
(vi)  Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need; 
(vii)  Does the lot contain environmental hazards; 
(viii)  Geologic stability of the lot; and 
(ix)  Future maintenance costs for the lot. 
(3)  Wireless Communication Facilities. The maximum structure height for a wireless communication support structure and antennas located within 300 feet of the centerline of I-5 is 120 feet. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. 1427-19 , § 27, 11-25-19)  
CHAPTER 56 - MEDICAL CENTER ZONE (MC) 
 
TDC 56.100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Medical Center (MC) Zone is to provide care facilities, allied health care uses and limited supporting retail and service uses for the convenience of patients, patient visitors and staff.  
TDC 56.200. - Use Categories. 
(1)  Use Categories. Table 56-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally Permitted (C) in the MC zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 56-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 56.210. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided in TDC 31.070. 
(2)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay zone Chapters for additional uses. 
Table 56-1 
Use Categories in the MC Zone 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Group Living 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Congregate Care Facilities, subject to TDC 56.210(3); 
 • Residential Facilities, subject to TDC 56.210(3); and 
 • Nursing Facilities. 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Eating and Drinking 
Establishments 	P (L) 	Subject to TDC 56.210(2). 
Medical Office 	P 	— 
Retail Sales and Services 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Branch bank/automatic teller; 
 • Barber/beauty shop; 
 • Child day care center; 
 • Durable medical goods sales and rentals; 
 • Fitness center; and 
 • Pharmacy. 
All uses subject to TDC 56.210(2): 
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES 
Medical Centers 	P/C 	Establishment of a helipad as an accessory use requires a conditional use permit. 
Colleges, Universities and 
Private Career Schools 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to nursing schools and other medical training facilities. 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Basic Utilities 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to sewer and water pump stations and pressure reading stations. 
Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Electrical substation; 
 • Natural gas pumping station; and 
 • Water reservoir. 
Transportation Facilities 	P 	— 
Wireless Communication 
Facility 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Wireless Communication Facility Attached. 
Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Wireless Communication Facility. 
Subject to maximum height and minimum setback standards defined by TDC Chapter 73F. 
  
TDC 56.210. - Additional Limitations on Uses. 
(1)  Size Limitation on Retail Uses. If located on land designated Employment Area, Corridor or Industrial Area on Map 9-4, Retail Sales and Service uses must not be greater than 60,000 square feet of gross floor area per building or business. 
(2)  Additional Limitations on Retail Sales and Service and Eating and Drinking Establishments. Supporting retail and services and eating and drinking establishments are limited uses for the convenience of patients, patient visitors, and on-site employees, and are subject to the following standards and limitations: 
(a)  Maximum Size. Retail and service uses and eating and drinking establishments uses are subject to the following limitations on gross floor area: 
(i)  Bank branch/automatic teller machine must not be greater than 1,000 square feet of gross floor area; 
(ii)  Barber/beauty shop must not be greater than 750 square feet of gross floor area; 
(iii)  Child day care center must not be greater than 4,000 square feet of gross floor area; 
(iv)  Credit union must not be greater than 1,000 square feet of gross floor area; 
(v)  Fitness center must not be greater than 15,000 square feet of gross floor area; 
(vi)  Florist/gift shop must not be greater than 750 square feet of gross floor area; 
(vii)  Pharmacy must not be greater than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area; 
(viii)  Restaurant/delicatessen/coffee shop must not be greater than 1500 square feet of gross floor area; and 
(ix)  The floor area of one use, or a combination of uses, listed above in any one building must not exceed ten percent of the gross floor area of the building. 
(b)  Outdoor Eating Areas. A restaurant, delicatessen, or coffee shop may include an outdoor eating area, provided the outdoor area consists on an all-weather surface not greater than 900 square feet in gross floor area and screened from public rights-of-way and residential planning districts by a completely sight-obscuring evergreen hedge and/or fence as determined through the Architectural Review process. 
(c)  Drive-up and Drive-Through Service. Drive-up windows and drive-through services are not be permitted. Loading and unloading at the vehicle entrance to the emergency room is not a drive-through service. 
(d)  Interior Building Access Only. The use must have interior building access through an interior hall or lobby of the building only. Emergency access required by the Oregon Uniform Building Code and secondary access to outdoor eating areas are allowed. 
(3)  Congregate Care, Assisted Living, and Residential Facilities. 
(a)  Building Design. The building must be designed or renovated specifically for use as a congregate care, assisted living or residential facility. All State required licenses must be obtained. 
(b)  Living Quarters. The facilities must consist of living units with shared areas in accordance with State requirements. 
(c)  Pedestrian Walkways. Outdoor walkways must be paved and lighted and must comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act ADAAG requirements. 
(d)  Noise and Lighting. Noise and lighting must be buffered and screened. 
(e)  Residential Density. The residential density in the development area must be no less than 16 and no more than 25 living units per acre.  
TDC 56.300. - Development Standards. 
Development standards in the MC zone are listed in Table 56-2. Additional standards may apply to some uses and situations, see TDC 56.310. 
Table 56-2 
Development Standards in the MC Zone 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
MINIMUM SETBACKS 
Front 	— 	Determined through the Architectural Review process. 
Side 	50 feet 	Abutting an MC District Boundary: no less than 50 feet. This standard also applies to flagpoles. 
Not abutting an MC District Boundary: determined through the Architectural Review process. 
Rear 		
Parking and Circulation Areas 	5-10 feet 	Abutting an MC District Boundary or public right-of-way: ten feet 
Not abutting an MC District Boundary: five feet, except as determined through the Architectural Review process. 
Fences 	5 feet 	From public right-of-way. 
STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
Maximum Height 	25-95 feet 	Maximum height limits are based on distance from a property line abutting a MC District Boundary: 
 • 50.01 to 100 feet from a property line abutting a MC District Boundary: 25 feet 
 • 100.01 to 300 feet from a property line abutting a MC District Boundary: 45 feet 
 • Greater than 300 feet from a property line abutting a MC District Boundary: 95 feet 
Flagpoles may extend 100 feet above-grade, except they are prohibited within 50 feet of a property line abutting a MC District Boundary. 
  
TDC 56.310. - Additional Development Standards. 
(1)  Outdoor Uses. Except outdoor eating, all uses must be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except off-street parking and loading, Basic Utilities, Wireless Communication Facilities and outdoor play areas of child day care centers as required by state day care certification standards. 
(2)  Lot Size and Width Standards. Lot sizes for all uses are determined through the Architectural Review process. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18)  
CHAPTER 57 - MIXED USE COMMERCIAL ZONE (MUC)[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1438-20 , §§ 13, 14, adopted June 22, 2020, repealed ch. 57, §§ 57.005—57.900 and enacted a new ch. 57 as set out herein. Former ch. 57 pertained to mixed use commercial overlay district and derived from Ord. 1062.00, § 9, adopted December 11, 2000; Ord. 1062-00, adopted January 3, 2001; Ord. 1103-02, adopted March 25, 2002; Ord. 1246-07, § 1, adopted September 10, 2007; Ord. 1247-07, adopted October 22, 2007; and Ord. 1427-19 , § 28, adopted November 25, 2019. 
 
TDC 57.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this district is to provide areas of the City that are suitable for a mix of office, retail commercial, and high-density housing. Retail uses should be located on the ground floor to encourage an interesting and active streetscape. Buildings should be oriented toward the street with clearly marked entrances. The use of alternative modes of transportation such as transit, pedestrian, and bicycle activity are to be promoted within the district. 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 14, 6-22-20)  
TDC 57.200. - Use Categories. 
(1)  Use Categories. Table 57-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally Permitted (C) in the MUC. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 57-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 57.210. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided in TDC 31.070. 
Table 57-1 
Use Categories in the MUC 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE 
REFERENCES 
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Household Living 	P/C 	Permitted housing types subject to TDC 57.220 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Commercial Lodging 	P 	— 
Commercial Recreation 	P 	— 
Commercial Parking 	P 	— 
Durable Goods Sales 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 

 • Retail sale of furniture and large appliances, pursuant to TDC 57.210 
  
Conditional uses limited to: 

 • Outdoor sales subject to TDC 57.210. 
Eating and Drinking Establishments 	P 	P 
Medical Office 	P (L) 	Accessory research and development square footage must be less than the primary office use square footage. 
Office 	P (L) 	Accessory research and development square footage must be less than the primary office use square footage. 
Other Educational and Vocational Servicing 	P 	— 
Quick Vehicle Servicing 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to: 
• Automobile service station subject to TDC 57.210. 
		
Retail Sales and Services 	P/C (L) 	Pet day care without outdoor activity area is permitted outright. 
  
Mortuary not permitted. 
  
Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Outdoor sales subject to TDC 57.210. 
All other retail sales and service uses permitted outright. 
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES 
Assembly Facilities 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Religious institutions or major event entertainment. 
Colleges, Universities, and Private Career Schools 	C 	— 
Community Services 	P 	— 
Medical Centers 	C 	— 
Schools 	C 	— 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES CATEGORIES 
Basic Utilities 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Sewer and water pump stations; 
  
 • Pressure reading stations. 
Greenways and Natural Areas 	P 	P 
Parks and Open Space 	P (L) 	Golf courses and country clubs prohibited. 
  
All other uses permitted outright. 
Public Safety Facilities 	P/C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Fire stations; and publicly- and privately-operated ambulance facilities. 
  
All other uses permitted outright. 
Transportation Facilities 	P 	— 
Wireless Communication Facility 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Wireless communication facility attached. 
 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 14, 6-22-20)  
TDC 57.210. - Additional Limitations on Uses. 
(1)  Durable Goods Sales. Uses limited to retail sale of furniture and large appliances subject to the following standards: 
(a)  The building footprint is less than 60,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(b)  Incidental repair of appliances is permitted as an accessory use. 
(2)  Outdoor uses. All uses must be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except off-street parking and loading, Basic Utilities, Wireless Communication Facilities, outdoor play areas of child day care centers, as required by state day care certification standards, and as provided in (a), (b) below. 
(a)  Temporary Uses. Temporary outdoor sales, as defined in TDC 31.060, are permitted as a temporary use subject to TDC 33.090. 
(b)  Conditional Uses. Any outdoor storage, display, and sales use requires a conditional use permit and is subject to the following standards: 
(i)  The outdoor area must not exceed ten percent of the store's gross floor area or 15,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
(ii)  Not less than 50 percent of the outdoor area must be covered by a permanent roof. 
(iii)  The outdoor area must abut a wall of the store. 
(iv)  All sides of the outdoor area not abutting a wall of the store must be screened with a sight obscuring fence, wall, berm, or dense evergreen landscaping not less than six feet in height. 
(v)  Stored materials must not exceed the height of the sight obscuring barrier when viewed from street level. 
(3)  Major event entertainment. Requires a conditional use permit and are subject to the following standards: 
(a)  Excludes outdoor entertainment. 
(4)  Automobile Service Station. Requires a conditional use permit and are subject to the following standards: 
(a)  The minimum street frontage on each street on a corner lot is 120 feet. 
(b)  The minimum street frontage on an interior lot is 150 feet. 
(c)  The minimum building setback from any street right-of-way is 40 feet. 
(d)  The minimum pump island set-back from any lot line is 15 feet. 
(e)  Only two access points are allowed for an interior lot. A corner lot and a through lot are allowed only one access per street frontage. 
(f)  The storage and display of merchandise such as tires and batteries offered for sale must be conducted in the station building. However, small items such as oil and windshield wiper blades may be displayed outside the building. 
(g)  Outside storage or sale of any vehicles is not permitted. 
(h)  Must comply with TDC Chapter 34.200. 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 14, 6-22-20)  
TDC 57.220. - Housing Types. 
Table 57-2 lists housing types permitted in the Mixed-Use Commercial District. Housing types may be Permitted Outright (P), Conditionally Permitted (C), or Not Permitted (N). 
Table 57-2 
Housing Types in the MUC 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE
REFERENCES 
Single-Family Dwelling 	N 	
Accessory Dwelling Unit 	N 	
Duplex; Townhouse (or Rowhouse) 	P 	
Multi-Family Structure 	P 	
Manufactured Dwelling 	N 	
Manufactured Dwelling Park 	N 	
Retirement Housing Facility 	C 	Subject to TDC 34.400 
Residential Home 	N 	
 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 14, 6-22-20)  
TDC 57.300. - Development Standards. 
Development standards in the MUC zone are listed in Table 57-3. Additional standards may apply to some uses and situations, see TDC 57.400. 
Table 57-3 
Development Standards in the MUC District 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
MINIMUM LOT SIZE 
All Uses 	None 	
MINIMUM SETBACKS 
Front 	None 	
Interior Side and Rear 	0-20 feet 	Setbacks are 20 feet where the site abuts a residential district. 
Corner 	None 	
MAXIMUM SETBACKS 
Commercial Uses 
Front/Corner 	10 feet 	
Residential Uses 
Front/Corner 	20 feet 	
MINIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
All uses 	20 feet 	Except for theaters and cinemas which can be one story 
MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
All uses 	70 feet 	Refer to Figure 57-1 
MINIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO 
All uses 	0.5 	Floor Area Ration does not apply to residential-only projects. 
DENSITY 
All uses with a residential component 	25-50 units per acre 	
MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE 
All uses 	90% 	
 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 14, 6-22-20)  
CHAPTER 58 - CENTRAL TUALATIN OVERLAY ZONE 
 
TDC 58.100 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this district is to implement the goals and objectives for Central Urban Renewal Plan. The overall goal of the Central Urban Renewal Plan is to strengthen the social and economic development of central Tualatin by stabilizing and improving property values, eliminating existing blight, and preventing future blight; and to encourage and facilitate land uses, private and public, that result in activity during all business hours, evenings, nights, and weekends; and to encourage indoor and outdoor uses. The overlay zone regulations are intended to ensure development contributes towards these goals. The Central Urban Renewal District is no longer an active Urban Renewal Area; however, the regulations of this chapter remain important to the future development of the Central Tualatin area.  
TDC 58.110 - Zone Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the Central Tualatin Overlay Zone are identical to the Central Urban Renewal Area. The zone boundaries are depicted in Map 9-3 and delineated in a legal description that is incorporated to this chapter as Exhibit 58-1.  
TDC 58.200 - Use Categories in the CC Zone. 
(1)  Modifications to Base Zone Use Regulations. Some of the uses permitted in the CC zone are modified in the Central Tualatin Overlay zone. Table 58-1 lists use categories that are modified in the overlay zone as Permitted Outright (P), Conditionally Permitted (C), or Prohibited (N). Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 58-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 58.210. Use categories not listed in Table 58-1 are regulated as specified in the CC zone see TDC Chapter 53. 
(2)  Sub-Districts. Modifications to use regulations may vary by the sub-district within the overlay zone. There are three sub-districts within the CC zone in the Central Tualatin Overlay Zone. These sub-districts are defined by the block numbers listed below, except as otherwise noted. Block numbers are shown on Map 9-3. 
(a)  Residential Sub-District. Blocks 2, 3, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22 and 23. 
(b)  Commercial Sub-District. Block 30. 
(c)  Central Design District. Central Design District shown on Figure 73-4 and Map 8 of the Central Urban Renewal Plan. 
Table 58-1 
Modifications to Use Regulations in the CC Zone 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Household Living 	P (L) 	Residential Sub-District: Permitted housing types limited to: 
• Townhouse; 
• Multi-Family Structure and duplex; 
• Retirement Housing Facility, subject to Subject to TDC 58.210(1); and 
•  Residential Homes. 
Group Living 	P (L) 	Residential Sub-District: Permitted uses limited to: 
•  Residential Facilities; and 
• Congregate Care Facility, subject to 58.210(1) 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
All uses permitted in the CG zone 	P (L) 	Commercial Sub-District: All uses permitted in the CG zone, pursuant to TDC 54.200, are permitted. 
Eating and Drinking Establishments 	N 	Central Design District: Take-out restaurant drive-up uses are prohibited. 
Retail Sales and Service 	C/N 	Central Design District: 
• Photo service drive-up uses are prohibited. 
• Bank drive-up uses and other drive-up uses are permitted as a conditional use. 
  
TDC 58.210 - Additional Standards in the CC Zone. 
(1)  Retirement Housing. Retirement housing permitted in the Residential Sub-District is subject to the following additional standards: 
(a)  The building, or dwelling units in a mixed-use building, must be designed or renovated specifically for retirement housing; 
(b)  A retirement housing building, or retirement housing areas of a mixed-use building, must not be occupied without first obtaining a valid State license. A valid State license must be maintained at all times as a condition of occupancy; 
(c)  Public facilities must have capacity to serve the proposed development; 
(d)  The housing may be provided as congregate care or as separate units in a retirement housing facility or any combination thereof; and 
(e)  Occupancy of retirement housing is limited to persons 55 years of age and older. In the case of couples, one member of the couple must be 55 years of age or older. This restrictive condition must be recorded in the County deed records. 
(2)  Architectural Focal Elements. Architectural focal elements are permitted on Blocks 14, 17, 18 and 20 of the Central Tualatin Overlay Zone.  
TDC 58.300 - Use Categories in the CG Zone. 
(1)  Modifications to Base Zone Use Regulations. Some of the uses permitted in the CG zone are modified in the Central Tualatin Overlay zone. Table 58-3 lists use categories that are modified in the overlay zone as Permitted Outright (P), Conditionally Permitted (C), or Prohibited (N). Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 58-3. Use categories not listed in Table 58-3 are regulated as specified in the CG zone see TDC Chapter 54. 
(2)  Sub-Districts. Block 11 is the only sub-district in the overlay zone. The modifications to use regulations in Table 58-3 apply exclusively Block 11. Block numbers are shown on Map 9-3. 
Table 58-3 
Modifications to Use Regulations in the CG Zone (Block 11) 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Retail Sales and Service 	N 	Pet Day Care prohibited. 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Wireless Communication Facilities 	N 	All wireless communication facilities prohibited. 
  
TDC 58.400 - Use Categories in the CO Zone. 
(1)  Modifications to Base Zone Use Regulations. Some of the uses permitted in the CO zone are modified in the Central Tualatin Overlay zone. Table 58-4 lists use categories that are modified in the overlay zone as Permitted Outright (P), Conditionally Permitted (C), or Prohibited (N). Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 58-4. Use categories not listed in Table 58-4 are regulated as specified in the CO zone see TDC Chapter 50. 
(2)  Sub-Districts. Block 1 is the only sub-district in the overlay zone. The modifications to use regulations in Table 58-4 apply exclusively Block 1. Block numbers are shown on Map 9-3. 
Table 58-4 
Modifications to Use Regulations in the CO Zone (Block 1) 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Household Living 	P (L) 	Permitted housing types limited to: 
• Townhouse; and 
• Multi-Family Structure and duplex Residential Home. 
Residential Accessory Uses 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to Family Day Care subject to ORS 329A.440. 
Group Living 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
•  Residential Facility. 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Commercial Lodging 	C 	— 
Commercial Recreation 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to: 
• Amusement enterprise, including pool hall, bowling alley, dance hall or skating rink; and 
• Private meeting hall, club or lodge hall, or fraternal organizations. 
Durable Goods Sales 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to: 
•  Furniture store, including antiques and second-hand furniture; 
•  Appliance store, subject to TDC 53.210(2). 
Eating and Drinking Establishments 	C 	— 
Retail Sales and Services 	C/N 	Memorial Planning and Products Center (as defined in TDC 39.115) not permitted. 
  
All other uses permitted as conditional uses. 
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES 
Colleges, Universities and Private Career Schools 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to business college. 
Community Services 	C 	— 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Parks and Open Areas 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to public park or playground. 
Public Safety Facilities 	C 	— 
Wireless Communication Facilities 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to: 
• Wireless Communication Facility Attached; and 
• Wireless Communication Facility, located within 300 feet of the centerline of I-5. 
Maximum height and minimum setbacks subject to TDC Chapter 73F. 
  
TDC 58.500 - Use Categories in the ML Zone. 
(1)  Modifications to Base Zone Use Regulations. Some of the uses permitted in the ML zone are modified in the Central Tualatin Overlay zone. Table 58-6 lists use categories that are modified in the overlay zone as Permitted Outright (P), Conditionally Permitted (C), or Prohibited (N). Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 58-6. Use categories not listed in Table 58-6 are regulated as specified in the ML zone see TDC Chapter 60. 
(2)  Sub-Districts. Blocks 28 and 29 are the only sub-districts in the overlay zone. The modifications to use regulations in Table 58-6 apply exclusively Blocks 28 and 29. Block numbers are shown on Map 9-3. 
Table 58-6 
Modifications to Use Regulations in the ML Zone (Blocks 28 and 29) 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Commercial Recreation 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to health or fitness facility. 
Durable Goods Sales 	P (L) 	Some uses subject to limitations, see TDC 58.510(1). 
Eating and Drinking Establishments 	P (L) 	All uses subject to TDC 58.510(2). 
Medical Office 	P 	— 
Office 	P 	— 
Other Educational and Vocational Services 	P 	— 
Quick Vehicle Servicing 	N 	Retail automobile service stations (gas stations) and nonretail cardlock stations (cardlock gas stations) are prohibited. 
Retail Sales and Services 	P 	— 
Vehicle Repair 	P 	— 
Vehicle Storage 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to automobile towing company office and dispatch office with no outdoor storage of towed vehicles. 
INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Light Manufacturing 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
• Assembly, packaging, and treatment of beer and other alcohol products, with or without a tasting or tap room; 
• Optical lens grinder; and 
• Testing laboratory. 
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES 
Colleges, Universities and Private Career Schools 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to business college. 
  
TDC 58.510 - Additional Standards in the ML Zone. 
(1)  Durable Goods Sales. Additional limitations apply to Durable Goods Sales uses, as specified by this section: 
(a)  Home Improvement Stores. Garden tractors sold on-site must not exceed 25 horsepower. 
(b)  Auto Leasing Office. No more than five (5) vehicles may be stored on site. 
(c)  Boat, Boat Motor and Boat Trailer Sales. 
(i)  Maintenance, service and repair of boats, motors and trailers is not permitted. 
(ii)  The scale of products sold on-site is limited as follows: 
(A)  Boats must not exceed 18 feet in length; and 
(B)  Boat motors must not exceed 40 horsepower. 
(2)  Eating and Drinking Establishments. Eating and Drinking Establishments are subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Drive-throughs are prohibited; and 
(b)  Take-out restaurants must be smaller than 1,500 square feet, seat no more than 50 people, and be located at least 200 feet away from a public street right-of-way, unless the right-of-way is separated from the restaurant by railroad right-of-way, in which case the restaurant must be at least 100 feet away from a public street right-of-way. 
(3)  Outdoor Uses. All additional uses permitted in the ML Plan District pursuant to this section must be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, except the following: 
(a)  Home Improvement Stores. Building and home improvement materials and supplies retail sales store's that have a gross floor exceeding 50,000 square feet may have an outdoor storage, display, and sales area subject to the following provisions: 
(i)  The outdoor area must abut a wall of the store; 
(ii)  The outdoor area must not exceed 15,000 square feet; 
(iii)  No less than 50 percent of the outdoor area must be covered by a permanent roof; 
(iv)  All sides of the outdoor area not abutting a wall of the store must be screened with a sight obscuring fence, wall, berm, or dense evergreen landscaping not less than 6 feet in height as approved through the Architectural Review process; and 
(v)  Stored materials must not exceed the height of the sight obscuring barrier when viewed from street level. 
(b)  Boat, Boat Motor and Boat Trailer Sales. Retail sales of boats, motors, and trailers may have an outdoor storage, display, and sales area subject to the following provisions: 
(i)  The sales of boats, motors, and trailers must not be the primary products sold by the store; 
(ii)  The outdoor area must abut a wall of the store; 
(iii)  The outdoor area must not exceed 5,000 square feet; 
(iv)  No less than 25 percent of the outdoor area must be covered by a permanent roof; 
(v)  All sides of the outdoor area not abutting a wall of the store must be screened with a sight obscuring fence, wall, berm, or dense evergreen landscaping not less than six feet in height as approved through the Architectural Review process; and 
(vi)  Stored materials must not exceed the height of the sight obscuring barrier when viewed from street level; 
(4)  Size Limitation. All additional uses, or combination of additional uses, permitted in the ML Plan District pursuant to this section cannot exceed 60,000 square foot per parcel.  
TDC 58.600 - Use Categories in the RH Zone. 
(1)  Modifications to Base Zone Use Regulations. Within the Central Tualatin Overlay Zone, the uses permitted in the RH zone may be mixed with the uses permitted in the CC zone. Development standards for sites within the RH zone in the Central Tualatin Overlay are subject to TDC 58.800. 
(2)  Sub-Districts. Blocks 25 and 4 are the only sub-districts in the overlay zone. Block numbers are shown on Map 9-3.  
TDC 58.700 - Use Categories in the RH-HR Zone. 
Within the Central Tualatin Overlay Zone, the uses permitted in the RH-HR zone are not modified. The RH-HR zone allows for high-density development in the Central Tualatin Overlay Zone. Some development standards, including density and minimum lot size, for sites within the RH-HR zone in the Central Tualatin Overlay are subject to TDC 58.800.  
TDC 58.800 - Central Tualatin Overlay Development Standards. 
Development standards in the Central Tualatin Overlay zone are listed in Table 58-7 by zone and by block (as shown on Map 9-3). Where no standard is listed, the standards of the base zone apply. 
Table 58-7 
Development Standards in the Central Tualatin Overlay District 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
CENTRAL COMMERCIAL (CC) 
Density within the Residential Sub-District 	16-25 dwelling units per acre 	
Minimum Lot Size within Core Area Parking District 	5,000 square feet 	For mixed use developments, and common-wall dwellings on separate lots, lot areas, widths and frontages are determined through the Architectural Review Process. 
Minimum Lot Size outside Core Area Parking District 	25,000 square feet 	
Minimum Lot Width 	40 feet 	
Minimum Lot Width at the Street 	40 feet 	
Minimum Lot Width at the Street on a Cul-De-Sac Street 	35 feet 	
GENERAL COMMERCIAL (CG) 
Minimum Lot Size 	25,000 square feet 	— 
Minimum Lot Width 	100 feet 	— 
Minimum Lot Width at the Street 	40 feet 	— 
Minimum Lot Width at the Street on a Cul-De-Sac Street 	40 feet 	— 
COMMERCIAL OFFICE (CO) 
Density 	16-25 dwelling unit per acre 	
Minimum Lot Size 	25,000 square feet 	Lot sizes for townhouses must conform to the lot size standards of the RH District. 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING (ML) 
Minimum Lot Size, Block 28 	20,000 square feet 	— 
Minimum Lot Size, Block 29 	25,000 square feet 	— 
GENERAL MANUFACTURING (MG) 
Minimum Lot Size, Block 24 	25,000 square feet 	
RESIDENTIAL HIGH DENSITY (RH) 
Density 	16—25 dwelling units per acre 	
Minimum Lot Size, Block 25 	40,000 square feet 	When permitted uses are mixed with the uses permitted in the CC zone, lot sizes are determined through the Architectural Review Process. 
Minimum Setbacks, Block 25 	— 	When permitted uses are mixed with the uses permitted in the CC zone, setbacks are determined through the Architectural Review Process. 
Maximum Structure Height 	45 feet 	When permitted uses are mixed with the uses permitted in the CC zone. 
RESIDENTIAL HIGH DENSITY HIGH RISE (RH/HR) 
Density 	26-30 dwelling units per acre 	
Minimum Lot Size, Blocks 31 and 33 	40,000 square feet 	— 
Minimum Lot Size, Block 26 	25,000 square feet 	— 
  
TDC 58.810 - Additional Development Standards. 
(1)  Lot Size for Infrastructure and Utilities Uses. Lot Size for Infrastructure and Utilities Uses must be established through the Subdivision, Partition or Lot Line Adjustment process. 
(2)  Minimum Lot Width for Flag Lots. For flag lots, the minimum lot width at the street must be sufficient to comply with at least the minimum access requirements in TDC 73C.  
CHAPTER 60. - LIGHT MANUFACTURING ZONE (ML) 
 
TDC 60.100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this zone is to provide areas of the City that are suitable for industrial uses and compatible with adjacent commercial and residential uses. The zone serves to buffer heavy manufacturing uses from commercial and residential areas. Industrial uses that are environmentally adverse or pose a hazard to life and safety are prohibited. The zone is suitable for warehousing, wholesaling, and light manufacturing processes that are not hazardous and do not create undue amounts of noise, dust, odor, vibration, or smoke. The purpose is also to allow a limited amount of commercial uses and services and other support uses, including office uses in limited locations in close proximity to the Commercial Office (CO) district. Commercial uses are not permitted in the Limited Commercial Setback.  
TDC 60.200. - Use Categories. 
(1)  Use Categories. Table 60-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally Permitted (C) in the ML zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 60-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 60.210. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided in TDC 31.070. 
(2)  Use Categories in the Limited Commercial Setback. Commercial uses may be further restricted within the Limited Commercial Setback, see TDC 60.210(4). 
(3)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay zone Chapters for additional uses. 
Table 60-1 
Use Categories in the ML Zone 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Household Living 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to caretaker residence, accessory to a permitted industrial use. 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Commercial Parking 	P (L) 	Must be located within 60 feet of the CO zone and subject to TDC 60.210(5). 
Commercial Recreation 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to health or fitness facility if within 60 feet of the CO district and subject to TDC 60.210(5), or as a limited use in all other locations, subject to TDC 60.210(2). 
Durable Goods Sales and 
Service 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Sale of goods produced on-site subject to TDC 60.210(1); and 
 • Retail sale of landscape materials subject to TDC 60.210(3); 
  
Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Sale or service of manufactured dwellings; 
 • Boat sales or rental; rental or leasing of autos and light trucks with incidental sale of vehicles; and 
 • Sale of home improvement materials and supplies. 
Eating and Drinking 
Establishments 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Sale of goods produced on-site subject to TDC 60.210(1); and 
 • Restaurant or deli as a secondary use subject to TDC 60.210(2). 
Marijuana Facilities 	P (L) 	Subject to TDC Chapter 80. 
Office 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Offices for executive, administrative, and professional uses related to the sale or service of industrial products; 
 • Office uses if within 60 feet of the CO zone and subject to TDC 60.210(5); and 
 • Office uses including business and commercial offices, general offices, and real estate offices, but not governmental offices, are a limited use in all other locations, subject to TDC 60.210(2). 
Other Educational and 
Vocational Services 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Correspondence, trade, or vocational school as a secondary use subject to TDC 60.210(2); and 
 • Trade or industrial school and subject to TDC 60.210(3). 
Retail Sales and Services 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Sale of goods produced on-site subject to TDC 60.210(1); 
 • Food or convenience store, mailing operations, reproduction or photocopying services, bank, and medical services as secondary uses subject to TDC 60.210(2); and 
 • Child day care center if within 60 feet of the CO zone and subject to TDC 60.210(5) or if located within a building that is a permitted industrial use. 
Quick Vehicle Service 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Automobile Service Stations, subject to TDC 60.210(6); and 
 • Non-Retail Cardlock Fueling Station, subject to TDC 60.210(6). 
  
No outside storage or sale of any vehicles is permitted. 
Vehicle Repair 	C (L) 	Subject to TDC 60.210(3). 
INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Heavy Manufacturing 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to electroplating. 
  
Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Manufacture of the following types of products: bicycles; small electric generators; small electric motors; motorized boats; sashes and doors; vending machines. 
 • Production or fabrication of metals or metal products including enameling and galvanizing 
Light Manufacturing 	P/C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Machine shop over 7,500 square feet; 
 • Building, heating, plumbing and electrical contractor's offices, with on-site storage of equipment or materials; 
 • Casting or fabrication of metals. 
All other uses permitted outright. 
Solid Waste Treatment and Recycling 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to recycling collection center. 
Vehicle Storage 	P (L) 	Vehicle storage not permitted within the Limited Commercial Setback. 
  
Vehicles sales not permitted. 
  
All other uses permitted outright in other locations. 
Warehouse and Freight 
Movement 	P/C 	Conditional use permit required for cold storage plants. 
  
All other uses permitted outright. 
Wholesale Sales 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Sales of industrial hand tools, industrial supplies such as safety equipment and welding equipment, that are products primarily sold wholesale to other industrial firms or industrial workers; and 
 • Sale, service and rental of construction and industrial equipment to contractors and industrial firms only. 
  
Conditional use required for wholesale sales of building materials and supplies 
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES 
Schools 	C 	— 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Basic Utilities 	P 	— 
Greenways and Natural 
Areas 	P 	— 
Public Safety Facilities 	P (L)/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to public works storage yard and shop. 
  
Conditional uses limited to fire station. 
Transportation Facilities 	P 	— 
Wireless Communication 
Facility 	P (L) 	Subject to maximum height and minimum setback standards defined by TDC Chapter 73F. 
  
TDC 60.210. - Additional Limitations on Uses. 
(1)  Sale of Goods Produced On-Site. The retail sale of goods produced on-site is permitted, provided that the retail sale area, including the showroom area, is no greater than five percent of the gross floor area of the building and does not exceed 1,500 square feet. 
(2)  Limited Commercial Uses. Commercial uses permitted as limited uses, as specified in Table 60-1, must be located on the same site as a permitted industrial use. The site must be used substantially for industrial purposes and the commercial use is subject to the following limitations. The office, retail, and service uses may be located in a standalone building or combined in a building with other permitted uses. 
(a)  Offices. Office uses must not exceed 25 percent of the total gross floor area of all buildings on the site. 
(b)  Retail Sales and Services, Eating and Drinking Establishments, or Other Educational and Vocational Services. Permitted uses in these categories, as specified in Table 60-1, are subject to the following additional standards. 
(i)  Maximum Size. The use must not exceed 5,000 square feet for any individual use or a total of 20,000 square feet of all retail or service uses on the site. 
(ii)  Spacing Standard. Uses must not be located within 80 feet from any Residential Planning District and from the right-of-way of SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road. 
(iii)  Access Standard. If located in a standalone building, the uses must not have direct access onto any arterial or collector street. 
(3)  Size Limitation on Commercial Uses. Commercial uses permitted outright or as a Conditional Use as the primary use of a site, as specified in Table 60-1, are subject to the following size limitations. 
(a)  Employment Areas or Corridors. Commercial uses on land designated as an Employment Area (EA) or Corridor (CO) Design Type on Map 9-4 must not exceed 60,000 square feet of gross floor area per building or business. 
(b)  Industrial Areas. Commercial uses on land designated as an Industrial Area Design Type on Map 9-4 must not exceed 5,000 square feet for any individual use or a total of 20,000 square feet of all commercial uses on the site. Commercial uses permitted in the Limited Commercial Setback are exempt from this requirement. 
(4)  Limited Commercial Setback. The purpose of the Limited Commercial Setback is to restrict commercial uses from locating within 300 feet from the centerline of SW Tualatin Sherwood Road and SW 124th Avenue and 350 feet from the centerline of SW Pacific Highway 99W west of Cipole Road, as depicted in Map 9-5. 
(a)  Restriction on Commercial Uses. No commercial uses, including parking or outdoor storage and display areas, are permitted outright in the Limited Commercial Setback. 
(b)  Conditional Uses. Quick Vehicle Service uses and the sale and service of manufactured dwellings are permitted as Conditional Uses in the Limited Commercial Setback. 
(5)  Additional Commercial Office Uses. As specified in Table 60-1, uses permitted in the CO district are permitted in ML if any portion of the lot is within 60 feet of the CO district boundary, subject to the following: 
(a)  Development Standards. Uses must comply with the CO district development standards. 
(b)  Trip Generation Limit. The gross floor area of the use is limited based on vehicle trip generation. The limitation is determined through the Architectural Review process using the following formula: (A x 24) / ITE= MTGSF, where: 
(i)  A = Developable area (in acres); 
(ii)  24 = Vehicle trip generation cap for P.M. peak hour trips per acre of land (constant determined by city); 
(iii)  ITE = Average vehicle trips per 1000 square feet gross floor area on a weekday P.M. peak hour of the adjacent street as determined using the latest edition of the ITE Trip Generation Manual, or actual trip rate figures based on a traffic analysis approved by the City Engineer; and 
(iv)  MTGSF = Maximum thousand gross square feet of floor area allowed on the developable area. 
(c)  Continuity Requirement. If CO use is located on a parcel in the ML district it must abut the CO district. 
(6)  Automobile Service Stations. Automobile Service Station uses are subject to the following additional standards. 
(a)  Spacing Requirements. Automobile Service Station uses must not be located within the specified distance of the following uses: 
(i)  Existing Automobile Service Stations. No closer than 3,000 feet to another operating Quick Vehicle Service use, measured from the closest lot line of the two lots; 
(ii)  Arterial Streets. No closer than 300 feet from centerline of SW 124th Avenue and 350 feet from the centerline of SW Pacific Highway (99W); and 
(iii)  Day Care Centers. All exterior walls and pump islands must be a minimum distance of 400 feet from the exterior walls and outdoor play areas of any day care center or family day care provider, irrespective of any structures in between. 
(b)  Development Standards. Quick Vehicle Service Uses are subject to the following additional development standards. 
(i)  The minimum street frontage is 120 feet on corner lot and 150 feet on interior lot; 
(ii)  The minimum building setback from any street right-of-way is 40 feet; and 
(iii)  The minimum pump island setback from any lot line is 15 feet. 
(c)  Access Standards. In addition to access standards of TDC Chapter 75, only two access points are allowed for an interior lot and one access point per street frontage for a corner lot or through lot. 
(d)  Accessory Uses. A minimart is permitted as an accessory use, except for at a cardlock station, provided the minimart does not exceed 3,500 square feet of gross floor area and no seating is provided. 
(e)  Outdoor Storage and Display. The outdoor storage and display of merchandise or vehicles is not permitted. 
(f)  Non-Conforming Uses or Structures. Those uses in operation or with a conditional use permit as of March 25, 2002 that do not meet the spacing or setback standards do not become non-conforming uses solely because of failure to meet spacing or setback standards. 
(7)  Spacing Requirement for Conditional Uses. A conditional use must not be located closer than 300 feet to any residential planning district boundary. This requirement does not apply to schools or transportation facilities and improvements. 
(a)  Measurement. The spacing standard is measured from the closest point on the building to the residential planning district boundary and does not include setbacks, parking areas, circulation areas and landscaping. 
(b)  Modification of Existing Uses. New buildings, expansions, or additions to existing buildings, except for office uses related to on-site operations, must be sited in the following locations, in order of priority, as site conditions permit: 
(i)  Must be greater than 300 feet from any residential district; 
(ii)  Must be the opposite side of existing buildings from any residential district; and 
(iii)  Must not be closer than existing buildings to any residential district. 
(c)  Definition of Existing Uses. For purposes of this section, buildings approved through the Architectural Review process as of September 24, 1990, in accordance with Ordinance 812-90, are considered existing buildings.  
TDC 60.300. - Development Standards. 
Development standards in the ML zone are listed in Table 60-2. Additional standards may apply to some uses and situations, see TDC 60.310. 
Table 60-2 
Development Standards in the ML Zone 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
LOT SIZE 
Minimum Lot Size 	20,000 square feet 	— 
LOT DIMENSIONS 
Minimum Lot Width 	100 feet 	When lot has frontage on public street, minimum lot width at the street is 100 feet. 
When lot has frontage on cul-de-sac street, minimum lot width at the street is 50 feet. 
Infrastructure and Utilities Uses 	— 	As determined through the Subdivision, Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment process 
Flag Lots 	— 	Must be sufficient to comply with minimum access requirements of TDC 73C. 
MINIMUM SETBACKS 
Front 	30 feet 	
Front Setback Adjacent to 
Residential or Manufacturing Park District 	50 feet 	
Side 	0-50 feet 	Determined through Architectural Review Process. No minimum setback if adjacent to railroad right-of-way or spur track. 
Side Setback Adjacent to 
Residential or Manufacturing Park district 	50 feet 	
Rear 	0-50 feet 	Determined through Architectural Review Process. No minimum setback if adjacent to railroad right-of-way or spur track. 
Rear Setback Adjacent to 
Residential or Manufacturing Park district 	50 feet 	
Parking and Circulation Areas 	5 feet 	No minimum setback required adjacent to joint access approach in accordance with TDC 73C. 
Parking and Circulation Areas Adjacent to Residential or 
Manufacturing Park (MP) 
District 	10 feet 	
Fences 	10 feet 	From public right-of-way. 
STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
Maximum Height 	50 feet 	May be increased to 85 feet if yards adjacent to structure are not less than a distance equal to one and one-half times the height of the structure. 
  
Measured at the 50-foot setback line, includes flagpoles. The building height may extend above 28 feet on a plane beginning at the 50-foot setback line at a slope of 45 degrees extending away from the 50-foot setback line. 
  
Flagpoles may extend to 100 feet. 
Maximum Height Adjacent to Residential District 	28 feet 	
  
TDC 60.310. - Additional Development Standards. 
(1)  Outdoor Uses. All uses must be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except off-street parking and loading, Basic Utilities, Wireless Communication Facilities and outdoor play areas of child day care centers as required by state day care certification standards. 
(2)  Spur Rail Tracks. Spur rail tracks are not permitted within 200 feet of an adjacent residential district. 
(3)  Sound Barrier Construction. Sound barrier construction is required to mitigate the impact of noise associated with overhead doors and building mechanical equipment, including but not limited to heating, cooling and ventilation equipment, compressors, waste evacuation systems, electrical transformers, and other motorized or powered machinery located on the exterior of a building. Sound barrier construction must conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Applicability. New construction, including additions or changes to existing facilities, must comply with the provisions of this section. When additions or changes to existing facilities are proposed, existing structures on the property may be required to comply with the provisions of this section, as determined through the Architectural Review process. Where buildings or outdoor use areas located on more than one parcel are all part of a single use as determined through the Architectural Review process, all of the parcels may be required to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Distance from Residential Use. Sound barriers must be used to intercept all straight-line (a direct line between two points) lateral paths of 450 feet or less between a residential property within a residential planning district and: 
(i)  Any side edge of an overhead door or other doorway larger than 64 square feet, at a minimum height of eight feet above the floor elevation of the doorway; or 
(ii)  Any building mechanical device at a minimum height equal to the height of the mechanical object to be screened. 
(c)  Exemption for Existing Structures. Where existing structures (on or off site) are located such that they will reflect sound away from residential areas and will function as a sound barrier, on-site sound barrier construction is not required, except that at the time such structures are removed, sound barrier construction is required. 
(d)  Design. Sound barriers must consist of masonry walls or earth berms located so as to reflect sound away from, rather than toward, noise sensitive properties. This may include masonry "wing walls" attached to a building, detached masonry walls (such as at the perimeter of the site), earth berms, or combinations of the three. Wing walls must be at least as tall as the tallest overhead door they are designed to screen at the point where they meet the building. The height of the wall may be reduced along a maximum incline formed by a horizontal distance twice the vertical change in height, or 26.5 degrees from horizontal. 
(e)  Definitions. "Wing wall" mean a wall that is attached to a building on one side and meets the screening requirements of (1) and (2) of this section. 
(4)  Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural Areas. To preserve natural areas and habitat for fish and wildlife, the decision-making authority may provide a front, side, or rear yard setback reduction for developments that are adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas that dedicate land for conservation or public recreational purposes, in accordance with the following standards: 
(a)  Setback Reduction. All permitted uses may be allowed a reduction of up to 35 percent of the front, side, or rear yard setbacks, as determined through the Architectural Review process, if as a result the buildings are farther away from fish and wildlife habitat areas. 
(b)  Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. A portion of the parcel must be located in one of the following conservation or protection areas: 
(i)  Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or 
(ii)  Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor. 
(c)  Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural Area Lot must be one of the following: 
(i)  Dedicated to the City at the City's option; 
(ii)  Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to a non-profit conservation organization; or 
(iii)  Retained in private ownership. 
(d)  Ownership Considerations. The decision-making authority must consider, but is not limited to, the following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway or Natural Area Lot: 
(i)  Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway, pedestrian or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other public facility; 
(ii)  Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more significant trees; 
(iii)  Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a unique or intrinsically valuable element; 
(iv)  Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties; 
(v)  Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility; 
(vi)  Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need; 
(vii)  Does the lot contain environmental hazards; 
(viii)  Geologic stability of the lot; and 
(ix)  Future maintenance costs for the lot. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. 1427-19 , § 29, 11-25-19)  
CHAPTER 61 - GENERAL MANUFACTURING ZONE (MG) 
 
TDC 61.100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this zone is to provide areas of the City that are suitable for a wide range of heavier manufacturing and processing activities, including those of a more intense nature and impact than the uses allowed in the Light Manufacturing (ML) Planning Zone. Industrial uses that are environmentally adverse or pose a hazard to life and safety are prohibited. A limited amount of commercial service and other support uses are permitted as regulated by the Commercial Services Overlay zone and the Limited Commercial Setback.  
TDC 61.200. - Use Categories. 
(1)  Use Categories. Table 61-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally Permitted (C) in the MG zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 61-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 61.210. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided in TDC 31.070. 
(2)  Use Categories in the Limited Commercial Setback. Commercial uses may be further restricted within the Limited Commercial Setback, see TDC 60.210(4). 
(3)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay zone Chapters for additional uses. 
Table 61-1 
Use Categories in the MG Zone 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Household Living 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to one (1) caretaker residence per site. 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Agriculture 	P(L) 	Permitted uses limited to production of agricultural crops. 
Commercial Recreation 	P(L) 	Limited use in all locations, subject to TDC 61.210(2). 
Durable Goods Sales 
and Service 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Sale of goods produced on-site subject to TDC 61.210(1); 
 • Retail sale of landscape materials subject to TDC 61.210(3); and 
 • Additional uses permitted within the Commercial Services Overlay, subject to TDC 61.210(5). 
  
Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Sale or service of manufactured dwellings; 
 • Boat sales or rental; rental or leasing of autos and light trucks with incidental sale of vehicles; and 
 • Sale of home improvement materials and supplies. 
Eating and Drinking 
Establishments 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Sale of goods produced on-site subject to TDC 61.210(1); and 
 • Restaurant or deli as a limited use subject to TDC 61.210(2). 
Marijuana Facilities 	P (L) 	Subject to TDC Chapter 80. 
Office 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Offices for executive, administrative, and professional uses related to the sale or service of industrial products; and 
 • Office uses including business and commercial offices, general offices, real estate offices, but not governmental offices, and are a limited use subject to TDC 61.210(2). 
Other Educational and 
Vocational Services 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Correspondence, trade, or vocational school as a limited use subject to TDC 61.210(2); and 
 • Trade or industrial school and subject to TDC 61.210(3). 
Retail Sales and Services 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Sale of goods produced on-site subject to TDC 61.210(1); 
 • Food or convenience store, health or fitness facility, mailing operations, reproduction or photocopying services, bank, and medical services as limited uses subject to TDC 61.210(2); and 
 • Within the Commercial Services Overlay, additional uses subject to TDC 61.210(5). 
Quick Vehicle Service 	C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to Automobile Service Stations subject to TDC 61.210(6); 
  
No outside storage or sale of any vehicles is permitted. 
Vehicle Repair 	P/C (L) 	Permitted outright within the Commercial Services Overlay. 
  
Conditional use required in other locations subject to TDC 61.210(3). 
INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Heavy Manufacturing 	P (L) 	Concrete batch plants are not permitted in the Leveton Tax Increment District. 
All other uses permitted outright. 
Light Manufacturing 	P 	— 
Solid Waste Treatment and Recycling 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Recycling collection center; 
 • Waste transfer station; and 
 • Resource recovery facility. 
Recycling collection center or waste transfer station are not permitted within the Limited Commercial Setback. 
Vehicle Storage 	P/C (L) 	Conditional use required for bus maintenance and storage facility. 
  
Vehicle storage not permitted within the Limited Commercial Setback. 
  
Vehicles sales are not permitted. 
  
All other uses permitted outright in other locations. 
Warehouse and Freight 
Movement 	P/C 	Conditional use required for warehousing of building materials and supplies. 
  
All other uses permitted outright. 
Wholesale Sales 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Sales of industrial hand tools, industrial supplies such as safety equipment and welding equipment, that are products primarily sold wholesale to other industrial firms or industrial workers; and 
 • Sale, service and rental of construction and industrial equipment to contractors and industrial firms only. 
  
Conditional use permit required for wholesale sales of building materials and supplies. 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Basic Utilities 	P 	— 
Greenways and Natural 
Areas 	P 	— 
Public Safety Facilities 	P(L)/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to public works storage yard and shop 
  
Conditional uses limited to fire station. 
Wireless Communication 
Facility 	P (L) 	Commercial radio or TV broadcasting antennas not permitted. 
  
All other uses permitted outright. 
  
Subject to maximum height and minimum setback standards defined by TDC Chapter 73F. 
  
TDC 61.210. - Additional Limitations on Uses. 
(1)  Sale of Goods Produced On-Site. The retail sale of goods produced on-site is permitted, provided that the retail sale area, including the showroom area, is no greater than five percent of the gross floor area of the building and does not exceed 1,500 square feet. 
(2)  Limited Commercial Uses. Commercial uses permitted as limited uses, as specified in Table 61-1, must be located on the same lot or parcel as a permitted industrial use. The lot or parcel must be used substantially for industrial purposes and the commercial use is subject to the following standards: 
(a)  Office Uses. Office uses must not exceed 25 percent of the total gross floor area of all buildings on the lot or parcel. 
(b)  Retail Sales and Services, Eating and Drinking Establishments, or Other Educational and Vocational Services. Permitted uses in these categories, as specified in Table 61-1, are subject to the following additional standards: 
(i)  Maximum Size. The use must not exceed 5,000 square feet for any individual use or a total of 20,000 square feet of all retail or service uses on the lot or parcel. 
(ii)  Spacing Standard. Uses must not be located within 80 feet of a Residential Zone. Uses must not be located within 80 feet of SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road right-of-way. 
(iii)  Access Standard. If located in a stand-alone building, the uses must not have direct access onto any arterial or collector street. 
(3)  Size Limitation for Commercial Uses. Commercial uses permitted outright or as a conditional use, as specified in Table 61-1, are subject to the following size limitations: 
(a)  Employment Areas or Corridors. Commercial uses must not exceed 60,000 square feet of gross floor area per building or business on land designated Employment Area (EA) or Corridor (CO) Design Type on Map 9-4. 
(b)  Industrial Areas. Commercial uses on land designated Industrial Area Design Type on Map 9-4 must not exceed 5,000 square feet for any individual use or a total of 20,000 square feet of all commercial uses on the site. Commercial uses permitted in the Limited Commercial Setback are exempt from this requirement. 
(4)  Limited Commercial Setback. The purpose of the Limited Commercial Setback is to restrict commercial uses from locating within 300 feet from the centerline of SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road and SW 124th Avenue and 350 feet from the centerline of SW Pacific Highway (99W) west of Cipole Road, as depicted in Map 9-5. 
(a)  Restriction on Commercial Uses. No commercial uses, including parking or outdoor storage and display areas, are permitted outright in the Limited Commercial Setback. 
(b)  Conditional Uses. Automobile Service Stations uses and the sale and service of manufactured dwellings are permitted as Conditional Uses in the Limited Commercial Setback. 
(5)  Commercial Services Overlay. The purpose of the Commercial Services Overlay is to provide for specific commercial services for area businesses and employees. The area of the overlay is depicted in Map 9-5. Permitted uses are specified in Table 61-1. If a property is within the Commercial Services Overlay and the Limited Commercial Setback, the regulations of the Commercial Services Overlay apply. 
(a)  Permitted Uses. The following additional uses are permitted in the Commercial Services Overlay on properties shown in the specific areas illustrated on Map 9-5 and only when conducted within an enclosed building: 
(i)  Vehicle Repair; 
(ii)  Retail Sales and Service are permitted uses limited to automobile accessory sales and auto parts retailing and wholesaling; tool and equipment rental; and 
(iii)  Durable Goods Sales are permitted uses are limited to truck-mounted camper sales with all sales and storage conducted entirely within an enclosed building and not to exceed 10,000 square feet of building floor area. 
(6)  Automobile Service Stations. Automobile Service Stations are subject to the following additional standards: 
(a)  Spacing Requirements. Automobile Service Stations must not be located within the specified distance of the following uses: 
(i)  Existing Automobile Service Stations Uses. No closer than 3,000 feet to another operating Automobile Service Stations use, measured from the closest lot line of the two lots; 
(ii)  124th Avenue. No closer than 300 feet from centerline of SW 124th Avenue; 
(iii)  SW Pacific Highway (99W). No closer than 350 feet from the centerline of SW Pacific Highway (99W); and 
(iv)  Day Care Centers. All exterior walls and pump islands must be no closer than 400 feet from the exterior walls and outdoor play areas of any day care center or family day care provider, irrespective of any intermediate structures. 
(b)  Development Standards. Automobile Service Stations are subject to the following additional development standards: 
(i)  The minimum street frontage is 120 feet on corner lot, 150 feet on interior lot; 
(ii)  The minimum building setback from any street right-of-way is 40 feet; and 
(iii)  The minimum pump island setback from any lot line is 15 feet. 
(c)  Access Standards. In addition to access standards of TDC Chapter 75, only two access points are allowed for an interior lot and one access point per street frontage for a corner lot or through lot. 
(d)  Minimart as Accessory Uses. A minimart is permitted as an accessory use, provided: 
(i)  The minimart is not located at a cardlock station; 
(ii)  The minimart does not exceed 3,500 square feet of gross floor area; and 
(iii)  No seating is provided. 
(e)  Outdoor Storage and Display. The outdoor storage and display of merchandise or vehicles is not permitted. 
(f)  Non-Conforming Uses or Structures. Those uses in operation or with a conditional use permit as of March 25, 2002 that do not meet the spacing or setback standards do not become nonconforming uses solely because of failure to meet spacing or setback standards.  
TDC 61.300. - Development Standards. 
Development standards in the MG zone are listed in Table 61-2. Additional standards may apply to some uses and situations, see TDC 61.310. 
Table 61-2 
Development Standards in the MG Zone 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE
REFERENCES 
LOT SIZE 
Minimum Lot Size 	20,000 square feet 	— 
LOT DIMENSIONS 
Minimum Lot Width 	100 feet 	When lot has frontage on public street, minimum lot width at the street is 100 feet. 
  
When lot has frontage on cul-de-sac street, minimum lot width at the street is 50 feet. 
Infrastructure and 
Utilities Uses 	— 	As determined through the Subdivision, Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment process 
Flag Lots 	— 	Must be sufficient to comply with minimum access requirements of TDC 73C. 
MINIMUM SETBACKS 
Front 	30 feet 	
Front Setback Adjacent to Residential or Manufacturing Park Zone 	50 feet 	
Side 	0-50 feet 	Determined through Architectural Review process. No minimum setback if adjacent to railroad right-of-way or spur track. 
Side Setback Adjacent to Residential or Manufacturing Park Zone 	50 feet 	
Rear 	0-50 feet 	Determined through Architectural Review process. No minimum setback if adjacent to railroad right-of-way or spur track. 
Rear setback adjacent to Residential or Manufacturing Park Zone 	50 feet 	
Parking and Circulation Areas 	5 feet 	No minimum setback required adjacent to joint access approach in accordance with TDC 73C. 
Parking and Circulation Areas 
Adjacent to Residential or 
Manufacturing Park Zone 	10 feet 	
Fences 	10 feet 	From public right-of-way. 
STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
Maximum Height 	60 feet 	May be increased to 100 feet if yards adjacent to structure are not less than a distance equal to the height of the structure. 
  
Measured at the 50-foot setback line, includes flagpoles. The building height may extend above 28 feet on a plane beginning at the 50-foot setback line at a slope of 45 degrees extending away from the 50-foot setback line. 
  
Flagpoles may extend to 100 feet. 
Maximum Height Adjacent to Residential Zone 	28 feet 	
  
TDC 61.310. - Additional Development Standards. 
(1)  Outdoor Uses. All uses must be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except off-street parking and loading, Basic Utilities, Wireless Communication Facilities and outdoor play areas of child day care centers as required by state day care certification standards. 
(2)  Sound Barrier Construction. Sound barrier construction is required to mitigate the impact of noise associated with overhead doors and building mechanical equipment, including but not limited to heating, cooling and ventilation equipment, compressors, waste evacuation systems, electrical transformers, and other motorized or powered machinery located on the exterior of a building. Sound barrier construction must conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Applicability. New construction, including additions or changes to existing facilities, must comply with the provisions of this section. When additions or changes to existing facilities are proposed, existing structures on the property may be required to comply with the provisions of this section, as determined through the Architectural Review process. Where buildings or outdoor use areas located on more than one parcel are all part of a single use as determined through the Architectural Review process, all of the parcels may be required to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Distance from Residential Use. Sound barriers must be used to intercept all straight-line lateral (direct line between two points) paths of 450 feet or less between a residential property within a residential planning district and: 
(i)  Any side edge of an overhead door or other doorway larger than 64 square feet, at a minimum height of eight feet above the floor elevation of the doorway; or 
(ii)  Any building mechanical device at a minimum height equal to the height of the mechanical object to be screened. 
(c)  Exemption for Existing Structures. Where existing structures (on or off site) are located such that they will reflect sound away from residential areas and will function as a sound barrier, on-site sound barrier construction is not required, except that at the time such structures are removed, sound barrier construction is required. 
(d)  Design. Sound barriers must consist of masonry walls or earth berms located so as to reflect sound away from, rather than toward, noise sensitive properties. This may include masonry "wing walls" attached to a building, detached masonry walls (such as at the perimeter of the site), earth berms, or combinations of the three. Wing walls must be at least as tall as the tallest overhead door they are designed to screen at the point where they meet the building. The height of the wall may be reduced along a maximum incline formed by a horizontal distance twice the vertical change in height, or 26.5 degrees from horizontal. 
(i)  "Wing wall" means a wall that is attached to a building on one side and meets the screening requirements of (1) and (2) of this section." 
(3)  Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural Areas. To preserve natural areas and habitat for fish and wildlife, the decision-making authority may provide a front, side, or rear yard setback reduction for developments that are adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas that dedicate land for conservation or public recreational purposes, in accordance with the following standards. 
(a)  Setback Reduction. All permitted uses may be allowed a reduction of up to 35 percent of the front, side, or rear yard setbacks, as determined through the Architectural Review process, if as a result the buildings are farther away from fish and wildlife habitat areas. 
(b)  Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. A portion of the parcel must be located in one of the following conservation or protection areas: 
(i)  Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or 
(ii)  Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor. 
(c)  Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural Area Lot must be one of the following: 
(i)  Dedicated to the City at the City's option; 
(ii)  Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to a non-profit conservation organization; or 
(iii)  Retained in private ownership. 
(d)  Ownership Considerations. The decision-making authority must consider, but is not limited to, the following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway or Natural Area Lot: 
(i)  Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway, pedestrian or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other public facility; 
(ii)  Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more significant trees; 
(iii)  Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a unique or intrinsically valuable element; 
(iv)  Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties; 
(v)  Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility; 
(vi)  Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need; 
(vii)  Does the lot contain environmental hazards; 
(viii)  Geologic stability of the lot; and 
(ix)  Future maintenance costs for the lot. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. 1427-19 , § 30, 11-25-19)  
CHAPTER 62 - MANUFACTURING PARK ZONE (MP) 
 
TDC 62.100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this district is to provide an environment exclusively for and conducive to the development and protection of modern, large-scale specialized manufacturing and related uses and research facilities. Such permitted uses must not cause objectionable noise, smoke, odor, dust, noxious gases, vibration, glare, heat, fire hazard or other wastes emanating from the property. The district is to provide for an aesthetically attractive working environment with park or campus like grounds, attractive buildings, ample employee parking and other amenities appropriate to an employee oriented activity. The purpose is also to protect existing and future sites for such uses by maintaining large lot configurations or a cohesive planned development design and limiting uses to those that are of a nature so as to not conflict with other industrial uses or surrounding residential areas. The purpose is also to allow a limited amount of commercial uses and services and other support uses.  
TDC 62.200. - Use Categories. 
(1)  Use Categories. Table 62-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally Permitted (C) in the MP zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 62-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 62.210. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided in TDC 31.070. 
(2)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay zone Chapters for additional uses. 
Table 62-1 
Use Categories in the MP Zone 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Household Living 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to a caretaker residence when necessary for security purposes. 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Commercial Parking 	P 	— 
Commercial Recreation 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to a health or fitness facility as a limited use subject to TDC 62.210(4). 
Eating and Drinking 
Establishments 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to a restaurant or deli as a limited use and subject to TDC 62.210(4). 
Marijuana Facilities 	P (L) 	Subject to TDC Chapter 80. 
Office 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited, see TDC 62.210(2). 
Other Educational and 
Vocational Services 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Correspondence, trade, or vocational school as a limited use subject to TDC 62.210(4); 
 • Job training or related services as a limited use subject to TDC 62.210(4). 
Retail Sales and Services 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Sale of goods produced on-site subject to TDC 62.210(1); 
 • Child day care center, subject to TDC 34.200; 
 • Food or convenience store, mailing operations, reproduction or photocopying services, bank, and medical services as limited uses subject to TDC 62.210(2). 
INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Light Manufacturing 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Manufacture or assembly of electronic or optical instruments, equipment, devices; musical instruments; toys; and sporting goods. 
 • Production of textiles or apparel; 
 • Printing, publishing, and lithography shops; and 
 • Research and development laboratories. 
Primary processing of organic materials, such as tanning of leather, is prohibited. 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Basic Utilities 	P 	— 
Greenways and Natural 
Areas 	P 	— 
Public Safety Facilities 	C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to a fire station. 
Transportation Facilities 	P 	— 
Wireless Communication 
Facility 	P (L) 	Subject to maximum height and minimum setback standards defined by TDC Chapter 73F. 
  
TDC 62.210. - Additional Limitations on Uses. 
(1)  Sale of Goods Produced On-Site. The retail sale of goods produced on-site is permitted, provided that the retail sale area, including the showroom area, is no greater than five percent of the gross floor area of the building and does not exceed 1,500 square feet. 
(2)  Offices. Office uses are a permitted as specified below. 
(a)  Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses: 
(i)  Offices for chemical and physical sciences, engineering, cartography, or other research functions; 
(ii)  Shared service facilities (as defined by TDC 31.060); and 
(iii)  Corporate, regional, or district headquarter offices if: 
(A)  The headquarters is for a permitted use in this Code; 
(B)  The offices occupy at least 20,000 square feet; and 
(C)  Manufacturing is not conducted, unless the manufacturing is a permitted use in the MP zone. 
(b)  Accessory Uses to an Industrial Use. Office uses accessory to a permitted industrial use are permitted. 
(c)  Limited Uses. Offices located on the same site as a permitted industrial use may be permitted, subject to TDC 62.210(4). 
(3)  Size Limitation on Commercial Uses. Permitted or conditional commercial uses, as specified in Table 62-1, are subject to the following size limitations: 
(a)  Employment Areas or Corridors. Commercial uses on land designated Employment Area (EA) or Corridor (CO) Design Type on Map 9-4 must not exceed 60,000 square feet of gross floor area per building or business. 
(b)  Industrial Areas. Commercial uses on land designated as an Industrial Area Design Type on Map 9-4 must not exceed 5,000 square feet for any individual use or a total of 20,000 square feet of all commercial uses on the site. Commercial uses permitted in the Limited Commercial Setback are exempt from this requirement. 
(4)  Limited Commercial Uses. Commercial uses permitted as limited uses, as specified in Table 62-1, must be located on the same site as a permitted industrial use. The site must be used primarily for industrial purposes and the commercial use is subject to the following limitations. The office, retail, and service uses may be located in a stand-alone building or combined in a building with other permitted uses. 
(a)  Offices. Office uses must not exceed 25 percent of the total gross floor area of all buildings on the site. 
(b)  Retail Sales and Services, Eating and Drinking Establishments, or Educational Services. Permitted uses in these categories, as specified in Table 61-1, are subject to the following additional standards: 
(i)  Maximum Size. The use must not exceed 5,000 square feet for any individual use or a total of 20,000 square feet of all retail or service uses on the site. 
(ii)  Spacing Standard. Uses must not be located within 80 feet from any Residential Planning District and from the right-of-way of SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road. 
(iii)  Access Standard. If located in a standalone building, the uses must not have direct access onto any arterial or collector street. 
(5)  Outdoor Uses. All uses must be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except as provided by this section. 
(a)  Permitted Uses. Off-street parking and loading, utility facilities, wireless communication facilities, and outdoor storage occupying less than ten (10) percent of the total site area, are permitted outright as outdoor uses. 
(b)  Conditional Uses. A conditional use permit is required for outdoor storage activity or mechanical equipment when proposed to occupy more than ten (10) percent of the total lot area when part of and necessary for the operation of any permitted use.  
TDC 62.300. - Development Standards. 
Development standards in the MP zone are listed in Table 62-2. Additional standards may apply to some uses and situations, see TDC 62.310. 
Table 62-2 
Development Standards in the MP Zone 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
LOT SIZE 
Minimum Lot Size North of SW Leveton Drive 	40 acres 	Minimum lot size and dimensions for conditional uses are set by City Council to accommodate the proposed use. 
  
Lots or remnant areas created by the location of public streets may be less than 40 acres if necessary to create a logical, safe network of streets in the district. 
Industrial Minimum Lot Size South of SW Leveton Drive, and South on Tonquin Loop Road 	5 acres 	
LOT DIMENSIONS 
Minimum Lot Width 	250 feet 	Measured at the building line. 
  
When lot has frontage on public street, minimum lot width at the street is 250 feet. 
  
When lot has frontage on cul-de-sac street, minimum lot width at the street is 50 feet. 
Infrastructure and Utilities Uses 	— 	As determined through the Subdivision, Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment process 
Flag Lots 	— 	Must be sufficient to comply with minimum access requirements of TDC 73C. 
MINIMUM SETBACKS 
Minimum Building Setback for Yards Adjacent to Streets or Alleys, North of SW Leveton Drive 	100 feet 	
Minimum Building Setback for Yards Adjacent to Streets or Alleys, south of SW Leveton Drive 	60 feet 	
Minimum Building Setback for Yards Adjacent to Residential District, south of Tonquin Loop Road 	60 feet 	
Minimum Setback for Side and Rear Yards not Adjacent to Streets or Alleys, north of SW Leveton Drive 	50 feet 	No minimum setback if adjacent to railroad right-of-way or spur track. 
Minimum Setback for Side and Rear Yards not Adjacent to Streets or Alleys, South of SW Leveton Drive 	0-50 feet 	Determined through Architectural Review Process. 
  
No minimum setback if adjacent to railroad right-of-way or spur track. 
Parking and Circulation Areas Adjacent to Public Right-of-Way 	50 feet 	No minimum setback required adjacent to joint access approach in accordance with TDC 73C. 
Parking and Circulation Areas Adjacent to Private Property Line 	5-25 feet 	Determined through Architectural Review Process. 
  
No minimum setback required adjacent to joint access approach in accordance with TDC 73C. 
Fences 	50 feet 	From public right-of-way. 
STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
Maximum Height 	70 feet 	May be increased to 85 feet if yards adjacent to structure are not less than a distance equal to one and one-half times the height of the structure. 
  
Flagpoles may extend to 100 feet. 
Maximum Height Adjacent to Residential District 	28 feet 	Measured at the required 50-foot or 100-foot setback line, includes flagpoles. The building height may extend above 28 feet on a plane beginning at the 50-foot or 100-foot setback line at a slope of 45 degrees extending away from the setback line. 
 
(Ord. No. 1418-19, § 1, 4-22-19)  
TDC 62.310. - Additional Development Standards. 
(1)  Industrial Master Plan. Minimum lot size, setbacks, maximum height, and other development standards may be modified by submittal of an Industrial Master Plan application. See TDC 33.050. 
(2)  Spur Rail Tracks. Spur rail tracks are not permitted within 200 feet of an adjacent residential district. 
(3)  Wetland Conservation Lots. Minimum lot size, width, or frontage requirement do not apply to wetland conservation lots. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18)  
CHAPTER 63 - INDUSTRIAL USES AND UTILITIES AND MANUFACTURING ZONES—ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS 
 
TDC 63.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare by applying environmental regulations to all industrial uses and utilities, and manufacturing planning districts in the City. These environmental regulations are also intended to protect natural areas from the adverse effects of industrial development. It is intended that the following standards provide statutory authority for the enforcement of regulations relating to noise, vibration, air quality, odors, heat, glare and lighting, storage and stored materials, liquid and solid waste materials, and dangerous substances.  
TDC 63.020. - Applicability. 
The regulations of this Chapter apply to: 
(1)  All industrial uses and utilities, regardless of the Planning District in which they are located, and 
(2)  All Manufacturing Planning Districts, regardless of the use category.  
TDC 63.051. - Noise. 
All uses and development must comply with the Oregon State Department of Environmental Quality standards relating to noise and the City of Tualatin noise ordinance in, TMC 6-14.  
TDC 63.052. - Vibration. 
(1)  Restrictions. All uses and development must not cause or permit ground vibration into the property of another person that exceeds the limits set forth below in this section. 
(a)  Ground vibration as measured at the boundary of a residential planning district and an industrial planning district must not exceed 0.01 inches per second (0.00025 meters per second) RMS velocity. 
(b)  Ground vibration as measured at a common property boundary of any two properties within any industrial planning district must not exceed 0.1 inches per second (0.0025 meters per second) RMS velocity. 
(2)  Method of Measurement. Vibration measurement procedures must conform to the methods described in this section and to procedures approved by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. 
(a)  Instrumentation must be capable of measuring RMS value of the vibration velocity over the frequency range of ten to 1,000 hertz. 
(b)  Measurement values must be recorded for a sufficient period of observation to provide a representative sample. 
(c)  Attachment of the vibration transducer to the ground must be by magnetic or screw attachment to a steel bar of a minimum of nine inches (22.9 cm.) in length, driven flush with the ground surface. 
(3)  Exemptions.The requirements of TDC 63.052(1) do not apply to: 
(a)  Vibration resulting from the operation of any equipment or facility of a surface carrier engaged in interstate commerce by railroad; 
(b)  Vibration resulting from the operation of any road vehicle; 
(c)  Vibration resulting from construction activities and use of construction equipment; and 
(d)  Vibration resulting from roadway maintenance and repair equipment.  
TDC 63.053 - Air Quality. 
(1)  Restrictions. All uses and development must comply with the most recent air quality standards adopted by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. Plans of construction and operations must comply with the recommendations and regulations of the State Department of Environmental Quality. 
(2)  Method of Measurement. All measurements of air pollution must be by the procedures and with equipment approved by the State Department of Environmental Quality or equivalent and acceptable methods or measurement approved by the City. Upon request of the City, persons responsible for a suspected source of air pollution must provide quantitative and qualitative information regarding the discharge that will adequately and accurately describe operation conditions.  
TDC 63.054. - Odors. 
All uses and development must not emit odors in such quantities as to create a nuisance condition at any point beyond the subject property line of the emitting use.  
TDC 63.055. - Heat and Glare. 
(1)  All uses and development must conduct all operations producing heat or glare entirely within an enclosed building. 
(2)  All uses and development may utilize exterior lighting, but the exterior lighting must be screened, baffled or directed away from residential planning districts.  
TDC 63.056. - Storage and Stored Materials. 
(1)  All uses and development must store all materials, including wastes, in a manner that will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents, or in any other way create a health or safety hazard. 
(2)  All uses and development that utilize open storage that would otherwise be visible at the property line must conceal it from view at the abutting property line by a sight obscuring fence not less than six feet high and not accessible to the general public to protect public safety.  
TDC 63.057. - Liquid or Solid Waste Materials. 
All uses and development are prohibited from disposing waste onto the site or into adjacent drainage ditches, creeks or other natural waterways in violation of State of Oregon DEQ standards, Clean Water Services Standards, City Standards, or in a manner that causes harm to wildlife.  
TDC 63.058. - Dangerous Substances. 
All uses and development are prohibited from the storage, transfer, or processing of hazardous, toxic, or radioactive waste. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18)  
CHAPTER 64 - MANUFACTURING BUSINESS PARK ZONE (MBP) 
 
TDC 64.100. - Purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of this zone is to provide an environment exclusively for and conducive to the development and protection of modern, large-scale specialized manufacturing and related uses and research facilities. Such permitted uses must not cause objectionable noise, smoke, odor, dust, noxious gases, vibration, glare, heat, fire hazard or other wastes emanating from the property. The zone is to provide for an aesthetically attractive working environment with park or campus like grounds, attractive buildings, ample employee parking and other amenities appropriate to an employee oriented activity. The purpose is also to protect existing and future sites for such uses. The purpose of this zone is to provide an environment for industrial development consistent with the Southwest Concept Plan (SWCP) and with the Metro-designated Regionally Significant Industrial Area (RSIA). 
(2)  The Manufacturing Business Park (MBP) Zone will be a mix of light industrial and high-tech uses in a corporate campus setting. Permitted uses are required to be conducted within a building and uses with unmitigated hazardous or nuisance effects are restricted. The RSIA-designated area requires at least one 100-acre parcel and one 50-acre parcel for large industrial users. The remainder of the area is likely to include light to medium industrial uses with some limited, local-serving commercial services. The zone is intended to provide for an aesthetically attractive working environment with campus-like grounds, attractive buildings, ample employee parking and other amenities appropriate to an employee oriented activity. It also is intended to protect existing and future sites for such uses by maintaining large lot configurations, a cohesive planned-development design and limiting uses to those that are of a nature that will not conflict with other industrial uses or nearby residential areas of the City.  
TDC 64.200. - Use Categories. 
(1)  Use Categories. Table 64-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally Permitted (C) in the MBP zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to the limitations listed in Table 64-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 64.210. Limitations may restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided in TDC 31.070. 
(2)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay zone Chapters for additional uses. 
Table 64-1 
Use Categories in the MBP Zone 
USE CATEGORY 	STATUS 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Household Living 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to a caretaker residence if located in the Tonquin Light Manufacturing Overlay, subject to TDC 64.210(4). 
  
In all other locations, caretaker residence may be permitted as a conditional use. 
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Commercial Parking 	P 	— 
Eating and Drinking Establishments 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to a restaurant in the Commercial Services Overlay and subject to TDC 64.210(2). 
Marijuana Facilities 	P (L) 	Subject to TDC Chapter 80. 
Office 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited, see TDC 64.210(3). 
Retail Sales and Services 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Sale of goods produced on-site subject to TDC 64.210(1); and 
 • Within the Commercial Services Overlay, additional uses subject to TDC 64.210(2). 
INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES 
Heavy Manufacturing 	P (L) 	Primary processing of organic materials, such as tanning of leather, is prohibited. 
  
All other uses permitted outright. 
Light Manufacturing 	P/C (L) 	Conditional uses limited to trade and industrial school or training center. Truck driving schools are prohibited. 
  
All other uses permitted outright. 
Warehouse and Freight Movement 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to warehousing uses that are accessory to a permitted industrial use, subject to TDC 64.210(3). 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES 
Basic Utilities 	P 	— 
Greenways and Natural Areas. 	P 	— 
Public Safety Facilities 	P (L) 	Permitted uses limited to public works storage yard and shop. 
Transportation Facilities 	P 	— 
Wireless Communication Facility 	P/C (L) 	Permitted uses limited to: 
 • Wireless Communication Facility Attached. 
  
Conditional uses limited to: 
 • Wireless Communication Facility. 
  
Subject to maximum height and minimum setback standards defined by TDC Chapter 73F. 
  
TDC 64.210. - Additional Limitations on Uses. 
(1)  Sale of Goods Produced On-Site. The retail sale of goods produced on-site is permitted, provided that the retail sale area, including the showroom area, is no greater than five percent of the gross floor area of the building and does not exceed 1,500 square feet. 
(2)  Commercial Services Overlay. The purpose of the Commercial Services Overlay is to provide for specific commercial services for area businesses and employees. The area of the overlay is depicted in Map 9-5. Commercial uses and development standards are subject to this section. 
(a)  Permitted Uses. The following commercial uses are permitted in the Commercial services Overlay: 
(i)  Retail Sales and Service. Retail sales and service uses are limited to: 
(A)  Branch banks and ATM banking kiosks; 
(B)  Child day care centers; 
(C)  Food stores; 
(D)  Dry cleaners; and 
(E)  Printing, copying and office services. 
(ii)  Offices. Office uses are limited to general offices or medical and healing arts offices. 
(iii)  Eating and Drinking Establishments. Eating and drinking establishments are limited to a restaurant without drive-up or drive through facilities. 
(b)  Maximum Size. The maximum building size for a permitted use is 3,000 square feet and the maximum building size for a building with multiple tenants is 20,000 square feet. 
(c)  Enclosure Requirement. All uses must be conducted within an enclosed building, except for outdoor play areas of child care centers. 
(3)  Offices. Office uses are a permitted or conditional use as follows: 
(a)  Permitted Uses. 
(i)  Research and Development Offices. Research and development offices and laboratories for chemical, engineering, and physical sciences; medical and pharmaceutical products; alternative energy production from sources such as solar and wind; industrial products and consumer products. 
(ii)  Headquarters Offices. Corporate, regional, or district office headquarters are permitted outright if the headquarters is for any use permitted in this Code, the offices occupy at least 20,000 square feet, and no manufacturing is conducted that is otherwise not a permitted use in the MBP zone. 
(b)  Accessory Uses to an Industrial Use. Offices that are accessory uses to a permitted industrial use are permitted. 
(c)  Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses: 
(i)  Film and video production; 
(ii)  Call center or customer service center; and 
(iii)  Data processing or data storage center. 
(4)  Tonquin Light Manufacturing Overlay. Additional uses are permitted in the Tonquin Light Manufacturing Overlay, shown on Map 9-5. Uses within the overlay are subject to the standards of this section. 
(a)  Additional Permitted Uses. All permitted or conditional uses in the Light Manufacturing Zone are permitted under the same status in the MBP Zone, except that the following uses are permitted outright: contracting firms with on-site storage of equipment and materials; machine shop, including automotive and truck machine shop, of 7,500 square feet or larger; cold storage warehouse; motor freight facility, including office, repair, and maintenance, and transfer and storage for vehicles, equipment, and materials; and caretaker residence. 
(b)  Additional Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses in the overlay: 
(i)  Restaurant, without drive-up or drive through facilities, with a maximum floor area of 3,000 square feet; and 
(ii)  Industrial card lock fueling facility with 3,000 feet separation from another facility. 
(c)  Expanded or New Permitted Use. Expanded or new permitted uses, including expanded or new outdoor storage, must be reviewed according to TDC Chapter 32 (Procedures) for the Architectural Review Application Review Process, and requires both Architectural Features and Public Facilities review consistent with TDC Chapters 73A through 73G, and 74. 
(d)  Nonconforming Use. All existing uses not listed as permitted uses in TDC 64.210(4)(a) are allowed as non-conforming uses. Expansion of these uses may occur only to the extent and as provided in TDC Chapter 35 (Nonconforming Situations). 
(e)  Annexation Agreement. An Annexation Agreement must be prepared when one or more property owners with the Tonquin Light Manufacturing Overlay submits a petition for annexation to the City. 
(5)  Outdoor Uses. All uses must be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except off-street parking and loading, Basic Utilities, Wireless Communication Facilities, outdoor storage of materials and products directly related to the permitted use and outdoor play areas of child day care centers as required by state day care certification standards.  
TDC 64.300. - Development Standards. 
Development standards in the MBP zone are listed in Table 64-2. Additional standards may apply to some uses and situations, see TDC 64.310. 
Table 64-2 
Development Standards in the MBP Zone 
STANDARD 	REQUIREMENT 	LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES 
LOT SIZE 
Minimum Lot Size for Parcels not Identified in the RSIA 	20,000 square feet 	See map 9-5 for RSIA boundaries. 
Minimum Lot Size for Parcels Identified in the RSIA 	— 	See map 9-5 for RSIA boundaries. 
  
Minimum lot size subject to see TDC 64.310(3). 
LOT DIMENSIONS 
Minimum Lot Width 	100 feet 	When lot has frontage on public street, minimum lot width at the street is 100 feet. 
  
When lot has frontage on cul-de-sac street, minimum lot width at the street is 50 feet. 
Infrastructure and Utilities Uses 	— 	As determined through the Subdivision, Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment process. 
Flag Lots 	— 	Must be sufficient to comply with minimum access requirements of TDC 73C. 
MINIMUM SETBACKS 
Front 	30-50 feet 	
Side 	0-100 feet 	Determined through Architectural Review Process. 
  
No minimum setback if adjacent to railroad right-of-way or spur track. 
  
For a Corner Lot, the minimum setback must be 30-50 feet from a public street. 
Rear 	0-100 feet 	Determined through Architectural Review Process. No minimum setback if adjacent to railroad right-of-way or spur track. 
Rear Setback Adjacent to Residential or Manufacturing Park District 	50 feet 	
Parking and Circulation Areas Adjacent to Public Right-of-Way 	20-25 feet 	— 
Parking and Circulation Areas Adjacent to any Other Property Line 	10 feet 	
Private Streets 	5 feet 	— 
Fences 	50 feet 	From public right-of-way. 
STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
Maximum Height 	65 feet 	May be increased to 85 feet if yards adjacent to structure are not less than a distance equal to one and one-half times the height of the structure. 
  
Flagpoles may extend to 100 feet. 
Maximum Height Adjacent to Residential District 	28 feet 	Measured at the 50-foot setback line, includes flagpoles. The building height may extend above 28 feet on a plane beginning at the 50-foot setback line at a slope of 45 degrees extending away from the 50-foot setback line. 
  
TDC 64.310. - Additional Development Standards. 
(1)  Industrial Master Plan. Minimum lot size, setbacks, maximum height, and other development standards may be modified by submittal of an Industrial Master Plan application. See TDC 33.050. 
(2)  Spur Rail Tracks. Spur rail tracks are not permitted within 200 feet of an adjacent residential district. 
(3)  Minimum Lot Size in RSIA. In accordance with the Metro RSIA designation and Metro Ordinance No. 02-969B and No. 02-990A, the minimum lot area for one or more parcels in the RSIA identified on Map 9-5 is 100 acres and 50 acres. When the minimum lot area of one or more Lots of Record in the RSIA is 100 acres, the minimum lot area for one or more lots may be reduced to 50 acres. 
(a)  When the minimum lot area requirements for RSIA designated properties in subsection (4) are met through a land platting process or established in an Industrial Master Plan process, the minimum lot size for remaining parcels located in the RSIA is 20,000 square feet. 
(b)  The minimum lot area of a property within the RSIA may be reduced to less than 100 acres or 50 acres pursuant to an approved Industrial Master Plan as provided in TDC 33.050. 
(c)  Lots or remnant areas created by the location of public streets may be less than 100 acres if necessary to create a logical, safe network of streets in the zone. 
(4)  Sound Barrier Construction. Sound barrier construction is required to mitigate the impact of noise associated with overhead doors and building mechanical equipment, including but not limited to heating, cooling and ventilation equipment, compressors, waste evacuation systems, electrical transformers, and other motorized or powered machinery located on the exterior of a building. Sound barrier construction must conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Applicability. New construction, including additions or changes to existing facilities, must comply with the provisions of this section. When additions or changes to existing facilities are proposed, existing structures on the property may be required to comply with the provisions of this section, as determined through the Architectural Review process. Where buildings or outdoor use areas located on more than one parcel are all part of a single use as determined through the Architectural Review process, all of the parcels may be required to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Distance from Residential Use. Sound barriers must be used to intercept all straight-line lateral (direct line between two points) paths of 450 feet or less between a residential property within a residential planning district and: 
(i)  Any side edge of an overhead door or other doorway larger than 64 square feet, at a minimum height of eight feet above the floor elevation of the doorway; or 
(ii)  Any building mechanical device at a minimum height equal to the height of the mechanical object to be screened. 
(c)  Exemption for Existing Structures. Where existing structures (on or off site) are located such that they will reflect sound away from residential areas and will function as a sound barrier, on-site sound barrier construction must not be required, except that at the time such structures are removed, sound barrier construction must be required. 
(d)  Design. Sound barriers must consist of masonry walls or earth berms located so as to reflect sound away from, rather than toward, noise sensitive properties. This may include masonry wing walls attached to a building, detached masonry walls (such as at the perimeter of the site), earth berms, or combinations of the three. Wing walls must be at least as tall as the tallest overhead door they are designed to screen at the point where they meet the building. The height of the wall may be reduced along a maximum incline formed by a horizontal distance twice the vertical change in height, or 26.5 degrees from horizontal. 
(5)  Wetland Conservation Lots. No minimum lot size, width or frontage requirement must apply to wetland conservation lots. 
(6)  Setbacks for Conditional Uses. Setback requirements for conditional uses must be as determined and approved through the Conditional Use Permit process in accordance with TDC Chapter 33 and the Architectural Review process in accordance with TDC Chapter 33 and TDC Chapter 73A through 73F. However, no setback greater than 50 feet may be required. 
(7)  Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural Areas. To preserve natural areas and habitat for fish and wildlife, the decision-making authority may provide a front, side, or rear yard setback reduction for developments that are adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas that dedicate land for conservation or public recreational purposes, in accordance with the following standards. 
(a)  Setback Reduction. All permitted uses may be allowed a reduction of up to 35 percent of the front, side, or rear yard setbacks, as determined through the Architectural Review process, if as a result the buildings are farther away from fish and wildlife habitat areas. 
(b)  Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. A portion of the parcel must be located in one of the following conservation or protection areas: 
(i)  Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or 
(ii)  Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor. 
(c)  Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural Area Lot must be one of the following: 
(i)  Dedicated to the City at the City's option; 
(ii)  Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to a non-profit conservation organization; or 
(iii)  Retained in private ownership. 
(d)  Ownership Considerations. The decision-making authority must consider, but is not limited to, the following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway or Natural Area Lot: 
(i)  Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway, pedestrian or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other public facility; 
(ii)  Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more significant trees; 
(iii)  Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a unique or intrinsically valuable element; 
(iv)  Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties; 
(v)  Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility; 
(vi)  Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need; 
(vii)  Does the lot contain environmental hazards; 
(viii)  Geologic stability of the lot; and 
(ix)  Future maintenance costs for the lot. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. 1427-19 , § 31, 11-25-19)  
CHAPTER 68 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
 
TDC 68.010. - Purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of this Chapter is to establish procedures and standards to preserve, protect, maintain, and enhance those landmark resources which represent or reflect elements of the City's history, cultural, social, economic, political, and architectural history, and to provide educational value, enjoyment and economic diversification as well as beautification of the City and enhancement of property values. 
(2)  A designated landmark, or part thereof, must not be demolished, relocated or altered, or new construction take place on a historic resource site except in conformity with this Chapter.  
TDC 68.015. - Federal Projects. 
Any project that involves federal property, federal funding, or federal licensing or permitting is subject to State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) review as required by Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act. Federal projects often include work done in national parks, funding from HUD grants, and permits from the Army Corps of Engineers.  
TDC 68.020. - Definitions. 
Definitions in this Chapter are specific to Historic Resources, Significant Historic Resources, Landmarks and Historic Preservation and only apply to this Chapter. 
Adaptive Reuse. As it relates to a landmark structure or an accessory feature of a landmark, modifying the landmark to a use or activity which is allowed under the applicable planning district designation. 
Alteration. Addition to, or otherwise change the exterior appearance of any part of a landmark including new construction. Maintenance and repair as defined in TDC 68.140(2) is not considered alteration of a landmark. 
Archaeological Site. As defined in state law ORS 358.905 "Archaeological site" means: (1) A geographic locality in Oregon, including but not limited to submerged and submersible lands and the bed of the sea within the state's jurisdiction, that contains archaeological objects and the contextual associations of the archaeological objects with: (a) Each other; or (b) Biotic or geological remains or deposits. (2) Examples of archaeological sites described in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph include but are not limited to shipwrecks, lithic quarries, house pit villages, camps, burials, lithic scatters, homesteads and townsites. 
Archaeological Site of Significance. As defined in state law, ORS 358.905 "Site of archaeological significance" means: (1) Any archaeological site on, or eligible for inclusion on, the National Register of Historic Places as determined in writing by the State Historic Preservation Officer; or (2) Any archaeological site that has been determined significant in writing by an Indian tribe. 
Archaeological Object. As defined in state law ORS 358.905(1) means an object that: (1) Is at least 75 years old; (2) Is part of the physical record of an indigenous or other culture found in the state or waters of the state; and (3) Is material remains of past human life or activity that are of archaeological significance including, but not limited to, monuments, symbols, tools, facilities, technological by-products and dietary by-products. 
Historic Resources. Are those buildings, structures, objects, sites or district that potentially have a significant relationship to events or conditions of the human past. 
Historic Resources Inventory. Is a compilation or update of information on those buildings, structures, objects, sites or districts that have been surveyed and potentially have a significant relationship to events or conditions of the human past. 
Owner. Means any one of the following: (1) The owner of fee title of the property as shown in the deed records of the County where the property is located; (2) The purchaser under a land sale contract, if there is a recorded land sale contract in force for the property; (3) If the property is owned by the trustee of a revocable trust, the settler of a revocable trust, except that when the trust becomes irrevocable only the trustee is the owner; (4) For a locally significant historic resource with multiple owners, including a district, a simple majority of owners as defined in (i) through (iii). (5) Does not include individuals, partnerships, corporations or public agencies holding easements or less than fee interests (including leaseholds) of any nature; or (6) Means for National Register Resources, the same as defined in 36 CFR 60.3(k). 
Landmark. Is a locally significant historic resource, which includes any site, object, building, structure or district designated as a landmark by the City. 
National Register Resource. Buildings, structures, objects, sites or districts listed in the National Register of Historic Places pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (PL 89-665;16 U.S.C. 470). 
Significant Historic Resource. A local landmark or a National Register Resource.  
TDC 68.030. - Historic Resource Inventory. 
When the City chooses to inventory potential historic resources or update an existing inventory, it must comply with state law. The Historic Resource Inventory is maintained by the City and available to the public.  
TDC 68.035. - Evaluation and Determination of Significance. 
(1)  After the City compiles an inventory of potential historic resources or updates an existing inventory, it must evaluate which resources in the inventory are significant, in compliance with state law. 
(2)  The evaluation of significance should be based on the National Register Criteria for Evaluation, historic context statement, and historic preservation plan. The National Register criteria are: 
(a)  Significant association with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of local, regional, state or national history; 
(b)  Significant association with the lives of persons significant to local, regional, state or national history; 
(c)  Distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction, or represents the work of a master or possesses high artistic values, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; 
(d)  A high likelihood that, if preserved, would yield information important in prehistory or history; or 
(e)  Relevance within the local historic context and priorities described in the historic preservation plan.  
TDC 68.040. - Designated Landmark List. 
(1)  After inventorying and evaluating the significance of historic resources, the City must adopt or amend its historic resource list if it chooses to protect a historic resource. 
(2)  Each site, structure, building, object or district designated by the City as a landmark must be added to the City's Designated Landmark List, except as otherwise provided for in Section 68.100 (6). 
(3)  The City's Designated Landmark's List must be maintained by the City Manager and made available to the general public on the City's website. 
(4)  City's Designated Landmark List 
• Luster House (c.1857) 9030 SW Sagert Street (2S126AB, 102) 
• Sweek House (1858) 18815 SW Boones Ferry Road (2S123, 300) 
• Byrom House (1878) 9385 SW Arikara Street (2S126CD, 5600) 
• Jurgens Barn (c.1880) 17700 SW Shasta Trail (2S114CD, 9700) 
• Francis House (1885) 8430 SW Avery Street (2S125BC, 5401) 
• Zeke Eddy House (c.1890) 9005 SW Avery Street (2S126AA, 700) 
• Little White House (c.1890) 8570 SW Cherokee Street (2S123AA, 1500) 
• Wesch House (c.1890) 18400 SW 86th Avenue (2S123AA, 1601) 
• Smith/Boone House (c.1895) 18815 SW Boones Ferry Road (2S123, 300) 
• Winona Cemetery (1900) 9900 SW Tualatin Road (2S123BA, 2700) 
• Black House (1900) 11640 SW Myslony Street (2S122C, 1500) 
• Robinson Store (1912) 18810 SW Boones Ferry Road (2S124BC, 3001) 
• Elmer House (1914) 11450 SW Elmer Court (2S114DC, 1100) 
• Wager House (1915) 12075 SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road (2S127B, 300) 
• Logan House (1917) 19930 SW Boones Ferry Road (2S123DD, 1600), now currently located at 8678 SW Logan Lane 
• (1918) 11325 SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road (2S127B, 700), now currently located at 20570 SW 115th Avenue (2S127AB00900) 
• Sherburn House (1925) 19840 SW Boones Ferry Road (2S123DD, 1400) 
• Methodist Church (1926) previously located at 19100 SW Boones Ferry Road (2S124CB, 900), the Methodist Church building was relocated to 8700 SW Sweek Drive and is currently the Heritage Center. 
• Avery Chicken Hatchery (1939) 8385 SW Avery Street (2S125BB, 601) 
• Winona Grange (1940) 8340 SW Seneca Street (2S124BC, 4700)  
TDC 68.050. - National Register Resources. 
(1)  National Register Resources must be protected regardless of whether the resources are also designated by the City as a Landmark. 
(2)  In addition to other requirements of this Chapter, the review of demolition or relocation that includes a National Register Resource must consider the following factors: 
(a)  Condition; 
(b)  Historic integrity; 
(c)  Age; 
(d)  Historic significance; 
(e)  Value to the community; 
(f)  Economic consequences; 
(g)  Design or construction rarity; and 
(h)  Consistency with and consideration of other policy objectives in the acknowledged comprehension plan. 
(3)  The City may apply additional protection measures upon considering, at a public hearing, the following factors: 
(a)  Historic characteristics identified in the National Register nomination; 
(b)  The historic significance of the resource; 
(c)  The relationship to the historic context statement and historic preservation plan contained in the comprehensive plan; 
(d)  The goals and policies in the comprehensive plan; and 
(e)  The effects of the additional protection measures on the ability of property owners to maintain and modify features of their property. 
(4)  National Register Resources List: • John Sweek House (1858) 18815 SW Boones Ferry Road (2S123D003400)  
TDC 68.100. - Landmark Designation. 
(1)  Applicability. Buildings, structures, sites, or objects may be designated as a landmark, as provided in this section. 
(2)  Procedure Type. Designation of a landmark is processed as a Type IV procedure under TDC Chapter 32. 
(3)  Who May Request Designation. A landmark designation may be initiated by the following: 
(a)  The City Council; 
(b)  The owner of the proposed resource; or 
(c)  Any other person may file a request with the City Council for initiation of the designation of a landmark, provided the proposed resource is not the subject of a pending application for alteration or demolition that was submitted prior to the date of the initiation of designation. 
(4)  Additional Submittal Requirements. In addition to the submittal requirements for a Type IV application under TDC Chapter 32, an application for landmark designation must include: 
(a)  Narrative description of the proposed resource addressing the criteria in (5) below and including: 
(i)  Significant features of the site to be covered by the designation; and 
(ii)  Significant people and events connected with the proposed resource. 
(b)  Site plan; 
(c)  Current photographs of all elevations of the building or structure and any significant feature; 
(d)  Copies of any historical photographs, plans, or maps; 
(e)  Any other documentation demonstrating the significance of the proposed resource; and 
(f)  A statement explaining compliance or non-compliance with the applicable approval criteria contained in TDC 33.070(5) and TDC 68.100(4). 
(5)  Criteria. An application for the designation of a landmark must be granted if the following criteria in (a) (b) and (c) below are met: 
(a)  Age. The proposed landmark is at least fifty years old, or demonstrates exceptional significance if less than fifty years of age; and 
(b)  Significance. The proposed landmark demonstrates significance in at least one of the following areas: 
(i)  Is listed on the National Register of Historic Places; 
(ii)  Has a primary or secondary ranking in the City's Historic Resource Inventory; 
(iii)  Is associated historically with the life or activities of a person, group, organization or institution that has made a significant contribution to the local community, state, or nation; 
(iv)  Is associated with events that have significantly affected past social or economic activities in the community, state or nation; 
(v)  Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, important information concerning prehistory or history; 
(vi)  Has relevance within the local historic context and priorities described in an historic preservation plan; 
(vii)  Embodies the distinctive characteristics or a type, period, or method of construction; 
(viii)  Represents the work of a master; 
(ix)  Possesses high artistic values in its workmanship and materials; 
(x)  Site or structure is significant as a visual historic resource; or 
(xi)  Site, in its immediate setting, retains the planting scheme, plant materials, or land uses of the relevant historic period or the landscaping is consistent with that period. 
(c)  Integrity: 
(i)  The building or structure retains sufficient original design characteristics, craftsmanship, or material to serve as an example of an architectural period or a significant building type, structural type, construction technique or recognized architectural style; 
(ii)  The building or structure is in its original setting and remains substantially as originally constructed; or 
(iii)  Site, in its immediate setting, retains its landscaping or land uses of the relevant historic period. 
(6)  Owner Consent. A property owner may refuse to consent to landmark designation at any point during the designation process under state law; In this case, the City must not include the property on the landmark list if the owner of the property objects to its designation on the public record. A refusal to consent during the designation process acts to remove the property from consideration for landmark designation. The City is not required to remove a historic resource from an inventory because an owner refuses to consent on designation.  
TDC 68.110. - Demolition Criteria. 
(1)  Applicability. Prior to the issuance of a permit for the demolition of a Landmark or National Register Resource, the owner must first obtain a demolition permit. A neighborhood developer meeting is required before application for a demolition of a Landmark or National Register Resource can be made. At the time a demolition application is made, the City Manager must review alternatives to demolition with the owner of the Landmark or National Register Resource, including, but not limited to local, state and federal preservation programs; other alternatives may include, but are not limited to, sale of the property or building to preserve it and/or appropriate relocation. 
(2)  Procedure Type. A Permit for Demolition of a Landmark is a Type II procedure under TDC Chapter 32. A Permit for Demolition of a National Register Resource is a Type IV-A procedure under Chapter 32 and pursuant to state law. 
(3)  Additional Submittal Requirements. In addition to the submittal requirements in TDC Chapter 32 for a Type II demolition application for a Landmark or a Type IV-A demolition application for a National Register Resource, a demolition application must include: 
(a)  The street address or other easily understood geographical reference to the historic resource property; 
(b)  A drawing or site map illustrating the location of the historic resource; 
(c)  A statement explaining compliance with the applicable approval criteria; 
(d)  Plan drawings to include site, landscaping and elevations, drawn to scale; 
(e)  Photographs of the significant historic resource which show all exterior elevations and views from each direction of the property; 
(f)  A list of mailing recipients of the Neighborhood/Developer meeting; and 
(g)  Any other information deemed necessary by the City Manager. 
(4)  Notice of Application to Tualatin Historic Society. In addition to any other persons entitled to notice under TDC Chapter 32 (Type II Decision for a Landmark and Type IV-A Decision for National Register Resource), the City Manager must mail notice of application to demolish a significant historic resource to the president of the Tualatin Historical Society. 
(5)  Criteria for Demolition Permit. 
(a)  A National Register Resource Demolition Permit is subject to the criteria and requirements of Section 68.050, 68.110 (7) Mandatory Conditions of Approval and TDC Section 68.120. 
(b)  A Landmark Demolition Permit must be granted if the applicant demonstrates at least one of the following: 
(i)  The landmark is no longer historically significant. 
(ii)  The landmark is no longer architecturally significant; or 
(iii)  The benefits of demolishing the landmark and the construction of the identified conflicting permitted use(s) outweigh the value to the community of preserving the landmark. 
(6)  Evidence and Judgment of Criteria for Landmark Demolition Permit. This criterion applies only when a Landmark is not also a National Register Resource. The criteria will be judged based upon the following factors: 
(a)  The information used in the original designation of the landmark; 
(b)  Any evidence the applicant or property owner has provided demonstrating that there would be no reasonable, long-term economic benefit to the property owner from preservation of the historic resource. In making this determination, the owner must show that all uses or adaptive uses of the landmark have been thoroughly examined. For example: 
(i)  The fact that a higher economic return would result from demolition than preservation on its own is insufficient to meet criterion (b). 
(ii)  A lack of adequate funds to pursue potential uses or adaptive uses is insufficient to meet the criterion (i.e., selling, partially preserving, or moving the historic resource are options that must be considered). 
(c)  Whether issuance of a Landmark Demolition Permit would act to the detriment of the public welfare; 
(d)  The City may consider the Economic, Social, Environmental and Energy consequences to the community of demolishing the historic resource as compared to preserving it; 
(e)  The physical condition of the historic resource; and 
(f)  For a landmark, whether it is identified as a primary or secondary resource, which are distinguished by the age of resource. Additional importance must be accorded to preserving historic resources with a primary designation. 
(7)  Mandatory Conditions of Approval. Each Landmark or National Register Resource Demolition permit must contain a condition to require the owner to: 
(a)  List the significant historic resource for sale with a real estate agent for a period of not less than 90 days; it must be advertised in at least one local or state newspaper of general circulation in the City for a minimum of ten days over a 5-week period. A copy of the advertisement must be submitted to the Planning Department prior to issuance of a demolition permit from the Building Official; 
(b)  Post a sign offering the significant historic resource "For Sale." For a historic building the sign must read as follows: HISTORIC BUILDING TO BE DEMOLISHED—FOR SALE; If the significant historic resource is not a building, the specific type of resource, such as structure or object, should be substituted for the word "Building" in the sign. The applicant must post the sign within ten feet of a public street on the parcel on which the significant historic resource is located. The applicant is responsible for assuring that the sign is posted for a continuous 90-day period in conjunction with (a) above. Marketing conducted by the applicant or property owner prior to application for demolition or relocation which meets requirements of 5(a) and 
(c)  Above may be applied towards meeting the requirements; 
(d)  Prepare and make available through the City any information related to the history and sale of the property to all individuals, organizations and agencies who inquire; and 
(e)  Prepare photographic documentation, architectural drawings, and other graphic data or history as deemed necessary by the City Manager to preserve an accurate record of the significant historic resource. The basic format to be followed will be guidelines from the Historic American Building Survey (HABS, December 1973). The historical documentation materials are the property of the City or other party determined appropriate by the City Manager.  
TDC 68.120. - 120-day Delay for Demolition or Modification Permit. 
(1)  Pursuant to State Law, the City must not issue a permit for the demolition or modification of a Landmark or National Register Resource for at least 120 days from: 
(a)  The date of the property owner's refusal to consent to historic resource designation, or 
(b)  The date of an application to demolish or modify the resource. 
(2)  During this waiting period, the City Manager must review alternatives to demolition with the owner of the Landmark or National Register Resource, including, but not limited to, local, state and federal preservation programs, sale of the resource and relocation of the resource.  
TDC 68.125. - Removal of Landmark Designation. 
(1)  Applicability. Buildings, structures, sites, objects or districts may have local landmark designation removed as provided in this section, except as provided in Section 68.120 (3). 
(2)  Procedure Type. Removal of a local landmark designation is processed as a Type IV-A procedure under Chapter 32. 
(3)  Who May Initiate Removal. Removal of local landmark designation may be initiated by the following: 
(a)  The City Council; or 
(b)  The owner of the landmark. 
(4)  Additional Submittal Requirements. In addition to the submittal requirements for a Type IV-A application under TDC 32.140, an application for removal of landmark designation must include: 
(a)  Narrative description of the resource proposed for delisting including: 
(i)  Significant features of the site covered by the designation; and 
(ii)  An evaluation of the current integrity of the resource including an assessment of the amount of remaining original design characteristics, craftsmanship and material. 
(b)  Site plan; 
(c)  Current photographs numbered and labeled with all elevations and views in each direction (north, east, south and west) of the landmark; 
(d)  Documentation demonstrating that the owner objected to the original designation if applicable; 
(e)  Any other documentation demonstrating that the resource proposed for delisting no longer meets the requirements of TDC 68.100 (Landmark Designation); and 
(f)  A statement explaining compliance or non-compliance with the applicable approval criteria contained in TDC 33.070(5). 
(5)  Criteria. An application for removal of a landmark designation must be granted if either of the following criteria is met: 
(a)  The property no longer meets the criteria for local landmark designation under TDC 68.100 (Landmark Designation); or 
(b)  The owner at the time of application for removal was the owner at the time of designation; and 
(c)  The owner can demonstrate either: 
(i)  An objection to designation in the public record; or 
(ii)  That the owner was not provided an opportunity to object to the designation. 
(6)  Effect of 120-day Delay for Demolition or Modification Permit on Landmark List. When a landmark is approved for demolition it must not be removed from the Landmark List until the required 120-day delay period as provided in Section 68.120 is completed, and no alternative has been deemed by the City to prevent the demolition of the landmark.  
TDC 68.130. - Relocation Criteria. 
(1)  Applicability. Prior to the issuance of a permit for the relocation of a significant historic resource, the owner must first obtain a significant historic resource relocation permit. A neighborhood developer meeting is required before application for a relocation of a significant historic resource can be made. At the time relocation application is made, the City Manager must review alternatives to relocation with the owner of the significant historic resource, including, but not limited to local, state and federal preservation programs. Other alternatives may include, but are not limited to, sale of the property or building to preserve it. 
(2)  Procedure Type. Landmark Relocation approval is a Type II procedure under TDC Chapter 32. National Register Resource Relocation approval is a Type IV-A procedure under Chapter 32, and pursuant to State Law. 
(3)  Additional Submittal Requirements. In addition to the submittal requirements in TDC Chapter 32 for a Type II relocation application for a Landmark or Type IV-A relocation application for a National Register Resource, an application for relocation must include: 
(a)  The street address or other easily understood geographical reference to the historic resource property; 
(b)  A drawing or site map illustrating the location of the historic resource; 
(c)  A statement explaining compliance with the applicable approval criteria; 
(d)  Plan drawings to include site, landscaping and elevations, drawn to scale; 
(e)  Photographs of the historic resource which show all exterior elevations; 
(f)  A list of mailing recipients of the Neighborhood/Developer meeting; and 
(g)  Any other information deemed necessary by the City Manager. 
(4)  Notice of Application to Tualatin Historic Society. In addition to any other persons entitled to notice under TDC Chapter 32 (Type II Decisions and Type IV Decisions), the City Manager must mail notice of application to relocate a significant historic resource to the president of the Tualatin Historical Society. 
(5)  Criteria. 
(a)  A National Register Resource Relocation Permit is subject to the criteria and requirements of Section 68.050, 68.130 (7) Mandatory Conditions of Approval and TDC Section 68.120. 
(b)  A Landmark Relocation Permit must be granted if the applicant demonstrates at least one of the following: 
(i)  The proposed relocation site will not compromise the historical and architectural significance of the historic resource, and 
(ii)  Relocation is the only alternative for preservation of the significant historic resource. 
(6)  Evidence and Judgment of Criteria for a Landmark Relocation Permit. The criteria will be judged based upon the following factors: 
(a)  The information used in the original designation of the landmark; 
(b)  Whether the landmark is within a Planning District that allows higher density or intensity of development than currently exists on the site, or is on land that is needed to accommodate the planned widening or realignment of a public road or transportation facility; 
(c)  Whether the landmark can reasonably be used in conjunction with a use permitted in the Planning District; 
(d)  Whether the continued location of the landmark on a proposed development site precludes development of other uses permitted on the site; 
(e)  Whether the landmark is structurally capable of relocation; 
(f)  Whether the proposed relocation site is an appropriate setting for the landmark; 
(g)  Whether the proposed relocation site is within the City limits or preferably within the neighborhood within which it is currently located; and 
(h)  The City may apply the Economic, Social Environmental and Energy consequences to the community of relocating the historic resource as compared to preserving it. 
(7)  Mandatory Conditions of Approval. Each Significant Historic Resource Relocation permit must contain a condition to require the owner to prepare and make available through the City any information related to the history and sale of the property to all individuals, organizations and agencies who inquire. 
(8)  Effect on Landmark List. When a landmark is relocated to another site within the City limits, the designated landmark status is automatically retained for that landmark at the new site unless an application for landmark designation removal is submitted and approved under TDC 68.125.  
TDC 68.140. - Alteration and New Construction Applications and Criteria. 
(1)  Applicability. Prior to making any alteration to or new construction on a designated landmark property, including any contributing structures a Landmark Alteration Permit is required. Applications for alterations or new construction on landmark property require Architectural Review approval in addition to a Landmark Alteration Permit. 
(2)  Exceptions. Maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature which does not involve a change in design, material or appearance of such feature or which the Building Official determine is required for the public safety due to an unsafe or dangerous condition does not require a Landmark Alteration Permit. Maintenance or repair include, but are not limited to the following activities: 
(a)  Replacement of gutters and downspouts, or the addition of gutters and downspouts, using materials that match either existing materials or those that were typically used on similar style buildings; 
(b)  Repairing, or providing a new foundation that does not result in raising or lowering the building elevation unless the foundation materials and craftsmanship contributes to the historical and architectural significance of the historic resource; 
(c)  Replacement of wood siding, when required due to deterioration of material, with wood material that matches the appearance of the original siding; 
(d)  Repair and/or replacement of roof material with the same kind of roof materials existing, or with materials which replicate the original roof; 
(e)  Installation of storm windows and doors made with wood, bronze or flat finished anodized aluminum or baked enamel frames which complement or match the color, detail and proportions of the building; 
(f)  Replacement of wood sashes with wood sashes, or the addition of wood sashes when such is consistent with the original historic appearance; and 
(g)  Painting and related preparation. 
(3)  Procedure Type. A Landmark Alteration Permit is subject to Type II Review in accordance with TDC Chapter 32. 
(4)  Additional Submittal Requirements. In addition to the information required for a complete application in accordance with TDC Chapter 32, the following information must be submitted: 
(a)  A drawing or site map illustrating the location of the landmark including any contributing structures or landscaping on the site; 
(b)  A statement explaining compliance with the applicable approval criteria, as appropriate; 
(c)  Plan drawings to include site, landscaping and elevations, drawn to scale; 
(d)  Photographs of the landmark and its site with views from all directions (north, east, south and west) which show all exterior features and structures in the context of the site; Photographs must be numbered and labeled and include a description of what is shown; 
(e)  A list of owners of property within 1,000 feet of the subject property together with the owners' current mailing addresses; and 
(f)  Any other information deemed necessary by the City Manager. 
(5)  Criteria. A Landmark Alteration Permit must be granted if the applicant demonstrates: 
(a)  The alteration will not diminish the historical significance of the landmark; 
(b)  The alteration will not diminish the architectural significance of the landmark; 
(c)  The design of the proposed structure is compatible with the design of the landmark on the site considering scale, style, height, architectural detail, materials and colors; 
(d)  The location and orientation of the new structure on the site is consistent with the typical location and orientation of similar structures on the site considering setbacks, distances between structures, location of entrances and similar siting considerations; 
(e)  The use of the landmark, the reasonableness of the proposed alteration, and the relationship of these factors to the public interest in preservation of the landmark; 
(f)  The value and significance of the historic resource; 
(g)  The physical condition of the historic resource; 
(h)  The United States Department of the Interior's Secretary of the Interior Standards: 
(i)  A property must be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and environment; 
(ii)  The historic character of a property must be retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property must be avoided; 
(iii)  Each property is recognized as a physical record of its time, place and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural elements from other buildings, must not be undertaken; 
(iv)  Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired significance in their own right must be retained and preserved; 
(v)  Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a historic property must be preserved; 
(vi)  Deteriorated historic features must be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature must match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features must be substantiated by documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence; 
(vii)  Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials must not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, must be undertaken using the gentlest means possible; 
(viii)  Significant archeological resources affected by a project must be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures must be undertaken; 
(ix)  New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction must not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new work must be differentiated from the old and must be compatible with the massing, size, scale and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment; and 
(x)  The addition, adjacent, or related new construction is undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.  
TDC 68.150. - Time Limit of Approval. 
All decisions made under this Chapter are void after one year from the date the decision was mailed unless: 
(1)  A building permit has been issued and substantial construction pursuant to building permit has taken place as defined by the Oregon Uniform Building Code; or 
(2)  The City Manager grants an extension under TDC 68.160.  
TDC 68.160. - Extension of Approval Decision. 
(1)  Applicability. The City Manager may grant a one-year extension of a decision under this Chapter. 
(2)  Procedure Type. Extensions of Approval pursuant to this section are processed as a Type I procedure under TDC Chapter 32. 
(3)  Submittal Requirements. In addition to the submittal requirements under TDC 32.150, an application for an extension must include the reason(s) the request is being made. 
(4)  Criteria. An application for an extension must be approved if the City Manager finds there have been no significant changes in any conditions, ordinances, regulations, or other standards of the City or applicable agencies that affect the previously approved decision so as to warrant its resubmittal. 
(5)  Number of Extensions. There is no limit on the number of extensions the City Manager may grant. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18)  
CHAPTER 69 - INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS PARK OVERLAY PLANNING DISTRICT 
 
TDC 69.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this district is to recognize and accommodate the changing Industrial Commercial marketplace by allowing mixed uses within the context of an enforceable Master Plan reviewed and approved during Architectural Review. Industrial uses are emphasized, but office and selected service and retail uses are allowed through the operation of the Industrial Business Park Overlay District. A second purpose of this district is to recognize that it is not necessarily appropriate to assume that all industrial, office, service and retail uses are incompatible and, therefore, must be separated based on planning districts. The Industrial Business Park Overlay District allows flexibility in the uses permitted for selected General Manufacturing (MG) District areas. Further, the purpose of this district is to allow selected retail and service uses that are supportive of and secondary to the industrial and office uses. 
(Ord. 1040-99 § 5, 12-13-99; Ord. 1370-14 § 16, 03-24-14)  
TDC 69.020. - Permitted Uses. 
(1)  The following additional uses are permitted when the Industrial Business Park Overlay District is applied to one of the selected General Manufacturing (MG) District areas and the site is ten acres or greater: 
(a)  Business offices. 
(b)  Commercial offices. 
(c)  Branch banks and banking kiosks, with or without drive-up or drive-through facilities. 
(d)  General offices, but not government offices. 
(e)  Medical and healing arts offices. 
(f)  Real estate offices. 
(g)  Child day care center, provided that all exterior walls and outdoor play areas shall be a minimum distance of 400 feet from the exterior walls and pump islands of any automobile service station, irrespective of any structures in between. 
(2)  The following additional uses are permitted when the Industrial Business Park Overlay District is applied to a property in one of the selected General Manufacturing (MG) District areas and the site is 20 acres or greater: 
(a)  Retail Uses: 
(i)  Food or convenience store of less than 4,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(ii)  Restaurant or deli, with or without drive-up or drive-through facilities. 
(b)  Service Uses: 
(i)  Correspondence, trade and vocational schools, except vocational high schools. 
(ii)  Health or fitness facility. 
(iii)  Job training and related services. 
(iv)  Mailing operations. 
(v)  Reproduction, photocopying. 
(vi)  Dry cleaning. 
(3)  The properties in the General Manufacturing (MG) District where the Industrial Business Park Overlay District may be applied in accordance with TDC 69.040 are: 
(a)  North of the G.I. Joe's/Safeway Shopping Center and more particularly described as: 
(i)  Tax Map T2S, R1W, Section 13A, Tax Lot 800. (As of September 1, 1994 described as T2S, R1W, 13AA, Tax Lot 1200). 
(ii)  Tax Map T2S, R1E, Section 18BB, Tax Lots 2200, 2300, and 2400. 
(iii)  Tax Map T2S, R1E, Section 18BC, Tax Lots 200, 300, and 400. (As of September 1, 1994 described as T2S, R1E, 18BC, Tax Lots 200, 202, 300, and 400). 
(b)  PacTrust Area (Upper and Lower Boones Ferry Road) and more particularly described as Tax Map T2S, R1W, Section 24B, Tax Lots 1000, 1007, and 1008. 
(c)  Drake Management Company ownership at the northwest corner of SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road and Avery Street and more particularly described as Tax Map TS1, R1W, Section 27B, Tax Lots 100, 102 and 200. 
(Ord. 849-91 § 37, 11-25-91; Ord. 1040-99 § 1 and § 2, 12-13-99; Ord. No. 1251-08 § 1, 1-28-08; Ord. 1370-14 § 17, 03-24-14)  
TDC 69.030. - Prohibited Uses. 
As per the underlying MG District, except as permitted in TDC 69.020. 
(Ord. 1040-99 § 3, 12-13-99; Ord. 1370-14 § 18, 03-24-14)  
TDC 69.040. - Implementation of the Industrial Business Park Overlay District. 
At the time of application for Architectural Review, the applicant shall state in writing if the proposed project is to be developed under the provisions of the Industrial Business Park Overlay District. Selection of the overlay district is at the option of the developer and application of the overlay district shall be implemented upon the developer's statement as part of the Architectural Review application. No public hearing shall be held to decide to apply the overlay district. The overlay district shall only be used in conjunction with the selected MG District areas. The Architectural Review decision may include conditions of approval in accordance with TDC 73.055. 
(Ord. 1040-99 § 4, 12-13-99; Ord. 1370-14 § 19, 03-24-14)  
TDC 69.045. - Timing of Uses. 
The retail and service uses shall be supportive of and secondary to the industrial and office uses and shall follow or be concurrent with the development of industrial and office uses. Office uses shall be secondary to industrial uses and shall follow or be concurrent with the development of industrial uses. Architectural Review approval, Building Permit issuance and Final Occupancy sign-off for office, retail and service uses shall follow or be concurrent with Architectural Review approval, Building Permit issuance and Final Occupancy sign-off for industrial uses. 
(Ord. 1040-99 § 5, 12-13-99)  
TDC 69.050. - Site Size. 
The minimum site size for the application of the Industrial Business Park Overlay District shall be ten acres for the uses listed in TDC 69.020(1) and 20 acres for the uses listed in TDC 69.020(2). 
(Ord. 1040-99 § 6, 12-13-99)  
TDC 69.055. - Lot Size. 
As per the underlying MG District. 
(Ord. 1040-99 § 6, 12-13-99; Ord. 1370-14 § 20, 03-24-14)  
TDC 69.060. - Urban Renewal Area—Lot Size. 
As per block area requirements in the underlying MG District. 
(Ord. 1040-99 § 6, 12-13-99; Ord. 1370-14 § 21, 03-24-14)  
TDC 69.065. - Mixed Use Percentage. 
(1)  When the Industrial Business Park Overlay District site size is 10.00 to 19.99 acres, the combined gross floor area of office and child day care center uses shall not be greater than 50 percent of the total gross floor area of buildings on the site. The gross floor area of a child day care center use listed in TDC 69.020(1)(g) may occupy up to ten percent of the total gross floor area of buildings on the site, except as provided in TDC 69.065(2)(a). 
(2)  When the site size is 20.00 acres or greater: 
(a)  The gross floor area of office, service and retail buildings combined shall not be greater than 50 percent of the total gross floor area of buildings on the site. 
(b)  The gross floor area of office uses listed in TDC 69.020(1) may occupy up to 50 percent of the total gross floor area of buildings on the site, except as provided in TDC 69.065(2)(a). 
(c)  The gross floor area of retail uses listed in TDC 69.020(2)(a) may occupy up to ten percent of the total gross floor area of buildings on the site, except as provided in TDC 69.065(2)(a). 
(d)  The gross floor area of service uses listed in TDC 69.020(2)(b) and a child day care center use listed in TDC 69.020(1)(g) may occupy up to ten percent of the total gross floor area of buildings on the site, except as provided in TDC 69.065(2)(a). 
(3)  The percentages in (1) and (2) of this section shall not be exceeded and may be reduced in the Architectural Review decision when information shows the impact, or the cumulative impact, of the development generated by the uses allowed through the Industrial Business Park Overlay District exceed the capacity of the onsite or offsite public infrastructure to support the development. 
(Ord. 1040-99 § 7, 12-13-99; Ord. 1251-08 § 2, 1-28-08)  
TDC 69.070. - Setback Requirements. 
As per the underlying MG District, except that retail and service uses be set back from any designated arterial or collector street right-of-way and any Residential District not less than 80 feet. 
(Ord. 1040-99, 12-13-99; Ord. 1370-14 § 22, 03-24-14)  
TDC 69.080. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. 862-92 § 49, adopted March 23, 1992, repealed § 69.080.  
TDC 69.090. - Structure Height. 
(1)  No structure which is in the MG District and is overlaid by the Industrial Business Park Overlay District shall exceed a height of 70 feet, except as provided in TDC Chapter 32, in which case the maximum permitted structure height may be increased to 100 feet, provided that all yards adjacent to the structure are not less than a distance equal to the height of the structure. 
(2)  Height Adjacent to a Residential District. Where a property line or alley separates MG land from land in a residential district, a building shall not be greater than 28 feet in height at the setback line. No building or structure shall extend above a plane beginning at 28 feet in height above the setback line and extending inward and upward at a slope of 45 degrees, subject always to the maximum height limitation set in subsection (1) above. 
(Ord. 1040-99 § 8, 12-13-99; Ord. 1370-14 § 23, 03-24-14)  
TDC 69.100. - Access. 
Access shall be in accordance with the Access Management Standards in TDC Chapter 75 and the underlying ML or MG District, except that retail and service uses shall not have access directly onto an arterial or collector street. 
(Ord. 1040-99 § 9, 12-13-99)  
TDC 69.110. - Off-Street Parking and Loading. 
Refer to TDC Chapter 73.  
TDC 69.120. - Environmental Standards. 
Refer to TDC Chapter 63.  
TDC 69.130. - Floodplain District. 
Refer to TDC Chapter 70.  
TDC 69.140. - Wetlands Protection District. 
Refer to TDC Chapter 71.  
TDC 69.150. - Greenway and Riverbank Protection District. 
Refer to TDC Chapter 72.  
TDC 69.160. - Community Design Standards. 
Refer to TDC Chapter 73.  
TDC 69.170. - Landscaping Standards. 
Refer to TDC Chapter 73. 
(Ord. 862-92, § 50, 3-23-92) 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18)  
CHAPTER 70 - FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (FP) 
General Provisions 
Administration 
Variance Procedure  
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
TDC 70.005. - Authorization. 
Under Article XI, section 2 of the Oregon Constitution and the Charter of the City of Tualatin, the City of Tualatin has the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Tualatin adopts this Floodplain Management Chapter. 
(Ord. 1070-01 § 9, 4-9-01; Ord. 1070-01, 04-09-01; Ord 1413-18, 10-08-18)  
TDC 70.007. - Findings of Fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the City of Tualatin are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health, and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. 1413-18, 10-08-18)  
TDC 70.010. - Statement of Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(6)  Help to maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
(8)  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. 1070-01 § 9, 4-9-01; Ord. 1070-01, 04-09-01; Ord 1413-18, 10-08-18)  
TDC 70.020. - Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this Chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
(1)  Restricting or prohibiting uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
(4)  Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert flood waters or that may increase flood hazards in other areas; and 
(6)  Coordinating and supplementing the provisions of the state building code with local land use and development ordinances. 
(Ord. 1070-01 § 9, 4-9-01; Ord. 1070-01, 04-09-01; Ord 1413-18, 10-08-18)  
TDC 70.030. - Definitions. 
The words and phrases have the following meanings: 
Appeal means a request for a review of the Local Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
Area of Shallow Flooding means a designated AO, or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater chance off flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of Special Flood Hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the flood insurance rate map, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, or V1-30, VE, or V. For purposes of these regulations, the term "special flood hazard area" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard." 
Base Flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the "100-year flood." Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V. 
Basement means any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Below-Grade Crawl Space means an enclosed area below the base flood elevation in which the interior grade is not more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade and the height, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation, does not exceed four feet at any point. 
Critical Facility means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous material or hazardous waste. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard. 
Elevated Building means for insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns. 
Flood or Flooding means: 
(a)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
(3)  Mudslides (i.e, mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph (a)(2) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
(b)  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph (a)(1) of this definition. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazards areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM). 
Flood Insurance Study means ans an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood Proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Lowest Floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; Provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter, found in TDC 70.180(1)(c) (Specific Standards for Residential Construction). 
Manufactured Dwelling means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured dwelling" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured dwelling lots for rent or sale. 
New Construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
Recreational Vehicle means a vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of Construction means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured dwelling. 
Substantial Damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal to or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial Improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation (the requirements of this Chapter). 
Water Dependent Use means a structure for commerce or industry which cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations. 
(Ord. 717-87 § 1, 4-27-87; Ord. 1007-98 § 2, 7-13-98; Ord. 1048-00 § 1, 2-28-00; Ord. 1265-08 § 1, 07-28-08; Ord. 1413-18, 10-08-18)  
TDC 70.040. - Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Tualatin.  
TDC 70.050. - Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Rate Map, Washington County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas," effective date November 4, 2016 with superseded panels 41067C0593F and 41067C606F effective October 19, 2018, together with the "Flood Insurance Study for Washington County Oregon and Incorporated Areas," dated October 19, 2018, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at the City of Tualatin City Offices, 18880 SW Martinazzi Avenue, Tualatin, Oregon 97062. The best available information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in TDC 70.140(2) Duties and Responsibilities of Local Floodplain Administrator) shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued which incorporates the data utilized under TDC 70.140(2) (Duties and Responsibilities of Local Floodplain Administrator). 
(Ord. 717-87, § 2, 4-27-87; Ord. 1007-98, § 3, 7-13-98; Ord. 1397-16, 10-24-16; Ord. 1413-18, 10-08-18)  
TDC 70.060. - Penalties for Noncompliance. 
(1)  No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(2)  Violations of the provisions of this Chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a civil infraction and subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00. Each violation, and each day that a violation continues, is a separate civil infraction. 
(3)  The civil infraction procedures in Tualatin Municipal Code Chapter 7-01 apply to the prosecution of any violation of this Chapter. 
(4)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Tualatin from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy. 
(Ord. 717-87, § 3, 4-27-87; Ord 1413-18, 10-08-18)  
TDC 70.070. - Abrogation and Severability. 
(1)  This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and any code, ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(2)  If any section clause, sentence, or phrase of this Chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. 717-87, § 4, 4-27-87; Ord. 1413-18, 10-08-18)  
TDC 70.080. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. 717-87. § 5, 4-27-87)  
TDC 70.090. - Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Tualatin, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. 717-87, § 6, 4-27-87; Ord 1413-18, 10-08-18)  
ADMINISTRATION 
 
TDC 70.100. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. 717-87, § 17, adopted April 27, 1987, repealed § 70.100.  
TDC 70.110. - Development Permit Required. 
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established by TDC 70.050 (Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard). The permit shall be for all structures, including manufactured homes, as set forth in TDC 70. 030 (Definitions), and for all other development, including fill and other activities, also as set forth in TDC 70. 030 (Definitions). 
(Ord. 717-87, § 7, 4-27-87; Ord 1413-18, 10-08-18)  
TDC 70.120. - Application for Development Permit. 
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Local Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of floodproofing of any structure; 
(3)  Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood proofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood proofing criteria in TDC 70.180 (Specific Standards for Nonresidential Structures); and 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Ord. 717-87, § 8, 4-27-87; Ord. 1413-18, 10-08-18)  
TDC 70.121—70.124. - Reserved.  
TDC 70.130. - Designation of the Local Floodplain Administrator. 
The City Manager, or designee is hereby appointed as the Local Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
(Ord. 717-87, § 9, 4-27-87; Ord. 1265-08 § 2, 7-28-08; 1413-18, 10-08-18)  
TDC 70.140. - Duties and Responsibilities of the Local Floodplain Manager. 
Duties of the Local Floodplain Administrator shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Development Permit Application and Review. 
(a)  Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this Chapter have been satisfied. 
(b)  Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 
(c)  Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of TDC 70.190 (Floodways) are met. 
(d)  Provide to building officials the base flood elevation and freeboard applicable to any building requiring a building permit. 
(e)  Review all development permit applications to determine if the proposed development qualifies as a substantial improvement, as set forth in TDC 70.030 (Definitions). 
(2)  Use of Other Base Flood Data (In A and V Zones). When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with TDC 70.050 (Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard), the Local Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer TDC 70.180 (Specific Standards) and TDC 70.190 (Floodways). 
(3)  Review of Building Permits. Where a FIRM and Flood Insurance Study have not been provided by the Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration and elevation date is not available from another authoritative source (TDC 70. 140(2) (Use of Other Base Flood Data (In A and V Zones))), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates 
(4)  Information to Be Obtained and Maintained. 
(a)  Where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study, FIRM, or as required by TDC 70.140(2) (Use of Other Base Flood Data (In A and V Zones)), obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement and below-grade crawlspaces) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement. 
(b)  For all new or substantially improved flood proofed structures where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study, FIRM, or as required in TDC 70.140(2) (Use of Other Base Flood Data (In A and V Zones)): 
(i)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level); and 
(ii)  Maintain the flood proofing certifications required by 70.120(3)(Application for Development Permit). 
(c)  Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(5)  Alteration of Watercourses. 
(a)  Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Land Conservation and Development and other appropriate state and federal agencies, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration as required in TDC 70.130(6). 
(b)  Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(6)  Requirement to Submit New Technical Data. 
(a)  Notify FEMA within six months of project completion when an applicant had obtained a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) from FEMA, or when development altered a watercourse, modified floodplain boundaries, or modified Base Flood Elevations. This notification shall be provided as a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). 
(b)  The property owner shall be responsible for preparing technical data to support the LOMR application and paying any processing or application fees to FEMA. 
(c)  The Floodplain Administrator shall be under no obligation to sign the Community Acknowledgement Form, which is part of the CLOMR/LOMR application, until the applicant demonstrates that the project will or has met the requirements of this code and all applicable State and Federal laws. 
(7)  Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations when needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in TDC 70.150 (City Council as Appeal Board). 
(8)  Critical Facilities. Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet above BFE or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible. 
(Ord. 717-87, § 10, 4-27-87; Ord. 1265-08 § 3, 7-28-08; Ord 1413-18, 10-08-18)  
VARIANCE PROCEDURE 
 
TDC 70.150. - City Council as Appeal Board. 
(1)  The City Council of the City of Tualatin shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this Chapter. 
(2)  The City Council shall decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Local Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this Chapter. 
(3)  Those aggrieved by the decision of the City Council, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision in accordance with State law. 
(4)  In passing upon such applications, the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this Chapter, and: 
(a)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(b)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(c)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(d)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(e)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, when applicable; 
(f)  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(g)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(h)  The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and flood plain management program for that area; 
(i)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(j)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(k)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(5)  Upon consideration of the factors in TDC 70.150(4) (City Council as Appeal Board) and the purposes of this Chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this Chapter. The requirements for variances as described in TDC 33 must also be met. 
(6)  The Local Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration upon request. 
(Ord. 717-87, § 11, 4-27-87; Ord. 743-88 Ord. 743-88, § 39, 3-28-88; Ord 1413-18, 10-08-18)  
TDC 70.151—70.154. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. 717-87, § 17, adopted April 27, 1987, repealed §§ 70.151—70.154.  
TDC 70.160. - Conditions for Variances. 
(1)  Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (a)—(k) in TDC 70.150(4) (City Council as Appeal Board) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(2)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures without regard to the procedures set forth in this section, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure' s designation as an " historic structure" and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(3)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(4)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(5)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
(a)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(b)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
(c)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, creation of nuisances, fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in TDC 70.150(4) (City Council as Appeal Board) or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(6)  Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare. 
(7)  Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of flood proofing than watertight or dry-flood proofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria except 70.160(1) (Conditions for Variances), and otherwise complies with subsections 70.170(1) and (2) (General Standards). 
(8)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest-floor elevation and that such construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be permanently maintained with the floodplain development permit. 
(Ord. 717-87, § 12, 4-27-87; Ord 1413-18, 10-08-18)  
TDC 70.161—70.163. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. 717-87, § 17, adopted April 27, 1987, repealed §§ 70.161—70.163.  
TDC 70.170. - General Standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required: 
(1)  Anchoring. 
(a)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(b)  All manufactured dwellings shall be anchored according to TDC 70. 180(3)(Specific Standards for Manufactured Dwellings). 
(2)  Construction Materials and Methods. 
(a)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(b)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(c)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(3)  Utilities. 
(a)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(b)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and 
(c)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located so as to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding consistent with the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. 
(4)  Subdivision Proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed so as to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
(d)  Here base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less). 
(5)  AH and AO Zone Drainage. Adequate drainage paths are required around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. 717-87, § 14, 4-27-87; Ord. 988-97, § 10, 12-8-97; Ord. 1265-08 § 4, 7-28-08; 1413-18, 10-08-18).  
TDC 70.180. - Specific Standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided (Zones A1-30, AH, and AE) as set forth in TDC 70.050 (Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard) or TDC 70.140(2) (Use of Other Base Flood Data (In A and V Zones)), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential Construction. 
(a)  New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(b)  New public streets providing vehicle access to residences, including residences within mixed use developments, shall be constructed at or above the base flood elevation. Public street rights-of-way in existence as of January 14, 1993, shall not be subject to this requirement. 
(c)  Below grade crawl-space construction in the floodplain shall comply with all NFIP specifications and applicable Building Code Requirements. 
(d)  Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters. 
(iv)  If a building has more than one enclosed area below the lowest floor, each area shall be equipped with adequate flood openings. 
(2)  Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to a minimum according to ASCE 24; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 
(a)  Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
(b)  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; 
(c)  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in TDC 70.140(3)(b) (Duties and Responsibilities of the Local Floodplain Administrator); 
(d)  Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in TDC 70. 180(1)(d)(Specific Standards for Residential Construction). 
(e)  Applicants shall supply a Maintenance Plan for the entire structure to include but not limited to: exterior envelope of structure; all penetrations to the exterior of the structure; all shields, gates, barriers, or components designed to provide floodproofing protection to the structure; all seals or gaskets for shields, gates, barriers, or components; and, the location of all shields, gates, barriers, and components as well as all associated hardware, and any materials or specialized tools necessary to seal the structure. 
(3)  Manufactured Dwellings. New construction, including placement, and substantial improvement of any manufactured dwelling shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Manufactured dwellings supported on solid foundation walls shall be constructed with flood openings that comply with TDC 70. 180(1)(d)(Specific Standards for Residential Construction) above; 
(b)  The bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam in A zones (excluding coastal A zones), shall be at or above BFE; 
(c)  The manufactured dwelling shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement during the base flood. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (Reference FEMA's Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas" guidebook for additional techniques); and 
(d)  Electrical crossover connections shall be a minimum of 12 inches above BFE. 
(4)  Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites are required to: 
(a)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and 
(b)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
(c)  Meet the requirements of TDC 70.180(3)(Specific Standards for Manufactured Dwellings) above and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured dwellings. In addition, recreational vehicles that are permanently placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE shall be on a permanent foundation and shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation and shall be securely anchored to a foundation system in accordance with TDC 70.170(1)(b). 
(5)  Small Accessory Structures. Relief from elevation or floodproofing as required in TDC 70.180(1)(Specific Standards for Residential Structures) or TDC 70.180(2)(Specific Standards for Nonresidential Structures) above may be granted for small accessory structures that are: 
(a)  Less than 200 square feet and do not exceed one story; 
(b)  Not temperature controlled; 
(c)  Not used for human habitation and are used solely for parking of vehicles or storage of items having low damage potential when submerged; 
(d)  Not used to store toxic material, oil or gasoline, or any priority persistent pollutant identified by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality shall unless confined in a tank installed in compliance with this ordinance or stored at least one foot above Base Flood Elevation; 
(e)  Located and constructed to have low damage potential; 
(f)  Constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(g)  Anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood; 
(h)  Constructed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for complying with this requirement must be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or: 
(i)  Provide a minimum of two openings with a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above the higher of the exterior or interior grade or floor immediately below the opening; 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions without manual intervention. 
(i)  Constructed with electrical, and other service facilities located and installed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of the base flood. 
(6)  Below-Grade Crawl Spaces. Below-grade crawlspaces are allowed subject to the following standards as found in FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01, Crawlspace Construction for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas: 
(a)  The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Hydrostatic loads and the effects of buoyancy can usually be addressed through the required openings stated in Section TDC 70.180(1)(Specific Standards for Residential Structures) above. Because of hydrodynamic loads, crawlspace construction is not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than five feet per second unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design professional, such as a registered architect or professional engineer. Other types of foundations are recommended for these areas. 
(b)  The crawlspace is an enclosed area below the base flood elevation (BFE) and, as such, must have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. The bottom of each flood vent opening can be no more than one-foot above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. 
(c)  Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation walls of the crawlspace used to elevate the building, but also any joists, insulation, or other materials that extend below the BFE. The recommended construction practice is to elevate the bottom of joists and all insulation above BFE. 
(d)  Any building utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above B components during flood conditions. Ductwork, in particular, must either be placed above the BFE or sealed from floodwaters. 
(e)  The interior grade of a crawlspace below the BFE must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade. 
(f)  The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall must not exceed four feet at any point. The height limitation is the maximum allowable unsupported wall height according to the engineering analyses and building code requirements for flood hazard areas. 
(g)  There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should be drained within a reasonable time after a flood event. The type of drainage system will vary because of the site gradient and other drainage characteristics, such as soil types. Possible options include natural drainage through porous, well-drained soils and drainage systems such as perforated pipes, drainage tiles or gravel or crushed stone drainage by gravity or mechanical means. 
(h)  The velocity of floodwaters at the site shall not exceed five feet per second for any crawlspace. For velocities in excess of five feet per second, other foundation types should be used. 
For more detailed information refer to FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01 
(Ord. 717-87, 4-27-87; Ord. 882-92 § 11, 12-14-99; Ord. 988-97, § 11, 12-8-97; Ord. 993-98 § 1, 2-23-98; Ord. 1048-00 § 2, 2-28-00; Ord. 1265-08 § 5, 7-28-08; Ord. 1397-16, 10-24-16; 1413-18, 10-08-18)  
TDC 70.185. - Before Regulatory Floodway. 
In areas where a regulatory floodway has not been designated, and where the Flood Insurance Study indicates that it is possible to calculate a floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones Al-30 and AE on the community' s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(Ord. 14713-18, 10-08-18)  
TDC 70.190. - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established by TDC 70.050 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters that carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  Except as provided in TDC 70. 190(3) (Floodways), prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional civil engineer is provided 70-21 demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that encroachments shall not result in any increase in base flood or floodway elevations when compared to pre-project conditions. 
(2)  If TDC 70.190(1) (Floodways) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of TDC 70.170 to and including 70.190, Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction, or ASCE 24, whichever is more stringent. 
(3)  Temporary structures placed in the floodway: Relief from no-rise evaluation, elevation or dry flood-proofing standards may be granted for a non-residential structure placed during the dry season (June—October) and for a period of less than 90 days. A plan for the removal of the temporary structure after the dry season or when a flood event threatens shall be provided. The plan shall include disconnecting and protecting from water infiltration and damage all utilities servicing the temporary structure. 
(4)  Projects for stream habitat restoration may be permitted in the floodway provided: 
(a)  The civil engineer shall, as a minimum, provide a feasibility analysis and certification that the project was designed to keep any rise in 100-year flood levels as close to zero as practically possible and that no structures will be impacted by a potential rise in flood elevation; and 
(b)  An agreement to monitor the project, correct problems, and ensure that flood carrying capacity remains unchanged is included as part of the local approval. 
(Ord. 717-87, 4-27-87; Ord 1413-18, 10-08-18)  
TDC 70.200. - Alterations to Floodplain, Drainage, or Watercourses. 
(1)  Applicants proposing to increase the Base Flood Elevation by more than one foot or alter a watercourse must obtain a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) from FEMA before any encroachment, including fill, new constructions, substantial improvement, or other development, in the regulatory floodway is permitted. 
(2)  Within six months of project completion, an applicant for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) must submit a completed application to FEMA and submit evidence to the City that a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) has been requested that reflects the as-built changes to the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and/or Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). 
(3)  The applicant must prepare and submit technical data to support the Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) application and pay any processing or application fees to FEMA. 
(Ord. 1397-16, 10-24-16)  
CHAPTER 71 - WETLANDS PROTECTION DISTRICT (WPD) 
 
TDC 71.010. - Purpose. 
(1)  There is hereby established in the City a Wetlands Protection District (WPD), which contains in excess of 300 acres of highly desirable developed and developable land within which there are situated certain natural marshes and wetlands. These natural marshes and wetlands constitute a wildlife habitat and natural resource of important physical, biological, recreational, aesthetic, educational and economic value to the existing and future residents of the City of Tualatin. 
(2)  It is the express purpose, objective and intent of this chapter to protect the natural marshes and wetlands of the City occurring within the Wetlands Protection District (WPD), as hereinafter identified and defined, while simultaneously permitting and encouraging development and use of the lands adjacent to these areas that lie within the Wetlands Protection District (WPD) to the fullest extent consistent with those primary planning district classifications that are applicable thereto. 
(a)  Accordingly, the Wetlands Protection District (WPD) is hereby divided into three sub-districts. One shall be designated the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA), which contains the natural marshes and wetlands to be protected by this chapter. The other shall be the Sweek Pond Management Area (SPMA) which contains the Sweek Pond and adjacent area planned for environmental, educational and interpretive land uses as authorized by this chapter of the City of Tualatin Development Code. The third shall be designated the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA), which contains the balance of the land contained in the Wetlands Protection District (WPD) and which is now, or which will be, subject of the development and usage to be permitted and encouraged by this chapter. 
(b)  The Wetlands Protection District (WPD) established hereby is an overriding planning district classification; and all conditions and restrictions of land use established by this chapter of the City of Tualatin Development Code shall apply as indicated herein to all lands and areas within the subdistricts above described, in addition to such restrictions and conditions as may be imposed and established in the primary planning district classifications applicable to such lands and areas by reason of the provisions of other chapters of the City's Development Code. 
(c)  Where conflicts develop between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the primary planning district or other regulations applicable to any specific area, areas or uses subject of this chapter, such conflicts shall be resolved in favor of the purposes, objectives and intent of this chapter above set forth. 
(d)  Subject to the provisions of TDC 71.090(4) of this chapter, nothing contained in this Code shall be construed to prohibit or otherwise limit the City of Tualatin from acquiring from any owners of property lying within the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) any form of interest in, or ownership of, all or any portion of such property by any lawful means for any lawful purpose. 
(e)  In the event that the City Council determines, after appropriate public hearings, that the areas contained within the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) no longer constitute an important wildlife habitat, then the Council shall appropriately amend the Tualatin Community Plan and render this chapter to be of no further force or effect. The City shall notify the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and other federal and state agencies who may have an interest in the Wetlands Protection District (WPD) prior to such action by the City Council. 
(Ord. 800-90, § 5, 3-26-90)  
TDC 71.020. - Definitions. 
The Wetlands Protection Area (WPA) is defined to mean and include those land areas lying within the Wetlands Protection District (WPD) that are saturated or inundated by ground water or surface water at such duration or frequency as to support vegetation structurally and physiologically adapted to live in water or water-saturated soil and which provide wildlife habitat, supply primary wildlife production to adjacent waterway ecosystems, improve water quality and constitute the valuable community resources above described. The Sweek Pond Management Area (SPMA) is defined to mean the land and water area within and adjacent to the Sweek Pond which is planned for environmental, educational and interpretive land uses as authorized by this chapter of the City of Tualatin Development Code, subject to the Resource Management Plan. The Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA) is defined to mean and include those lands in the immediate watershed of the Wetlands Protection Area (WPA) that constitute the balance of the area contained within the Wetlands Protection District (WPD) established by this chapter. The physical boundaries of the Wetlands Protection District (WPD), the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA), the Sweek Pond Management Area (SPMA) and the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA), are hereby fixed and established as shown on Map 71-1. 
The Resource Management Plan is defined to mean that plan developed and approved by the Oregon Division of State Lands, the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Wetlands Conservancy, the Audubon Society of Portland and a representative of Emery Zidell. The Resource Management Plan shall encompass at a minimum that portion of the WPA and SPMA within the Zidell property, and shall address wildlife habitat improvement, wetland function, fencing and vegetative screening north of the WPA, storm water quality within the WPA and SPMA, and the specific type and location of uses to be allowed within the Sweek Pond Management Area. 
(Ord. 800-90, § 7, 3-26-90)  
TDC 71.025. - Boundaries. 
(1)  The boundaries of the Wetlands Protection Area (WPA) are described as shown on Exhibit N. 
(2)  The boundaries of the Sweek Pond Management Area (SPMA) are described as shown on Exhibit O. 
(Ord. 800-90, 3-26-90)  
TDC 71.030. - Applicability. 
Uses located within the Wetlands Protection District (WPD) shall comply with the certification requirements contained in TDC 71.040.  
TDC 71.040. - Certification Required. 
(1)  All applications to the City for permits or approvals to fill or excavate, to construct buildings or other improvements, or to engage in public works upon lands lying within the Wetlands Protection District (WPD) which are otherwise required by City ordinance shall be accompanied by a written certification by a qualified engineer, licensed by the State of Oregon, which certification shall contain the following: 
(a)  A statement that the activities subject to such application will conform to the environmental standards herein set forth; 
(b)  Proposed construction methods and schedule; and 
(c)  The basis upon which the engineer has founded the statements contained in such certification. 
(2)  Prior to issuing any approval or permit, the City may transmit the applicant's certification to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/or the Oregon State Department of Fish and Wildlife for comment. The City shall use the comments, if any, received by it from these agencies to evaluate the applicant's certification; and, predicated thereon, the City may, within 45 days from the date of its submission by the applicant, direct modification or deny the adequacy of the certification, in writing, delivered or mailed to the applicant, wherein the City shall set forth the specific basis upon which it has denied or directed modification of such certification. 
(3)  Unless the City acts affirmatively to approve, deny or modify the certification within the time limit above set forth, the certification shall be deemed approved for all purposes. Pending such approval, no excavation of any kind excepting soil or ground water testing shall be permitted upon the property subject to such certification. 
(Ord. 800-90, § 7, 3-26-90)  
TDC 71.050. - Appeals. 
Appeals shall be conducted pursuant to the procedure defined herein by TDC 31.076 and 31.077. 
(Ord. 743-88, § 22, 3-28-88)  
TDC 71.060. - Environmental Standards. 
All construction or development, including excavation or filling, or the use of any land within the Wetlands Protection District (WPD), shall conform to the environmental standards required by TDC 71.061 to 71.066. 
(Ord. 800-90, 3-26-90)  
TDC 71.061. - Development Setback. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided for herein, all permanent surface structures and other surface improvements located adjacent to the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) shall be set back not less than 40 feet from the boundary of the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) established in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Where buildings or other surface structures are placed on or immediately adjacent to the outer edge of the setback area, and where means of emergency access or egress is required to be furnished to or from the sides of such buildings or structures that adjoin or face the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA), such means of access or egress may be provided within the setback area. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided herein or in the Resource Management Plan, no setback for permanent surface structures and other surface improvements is required from the boundary of the Sweek Pond Management Area (SPMA). 
(Ord. 800-90, § 7, 3-26-90)  
TDC 71.062. - Excavation and Filling. 
Excavation, filling and earth-moving activities are permitted within the Wetlands Protection District (WPD), subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Within the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA), temporary dredging, filling, de-watering or other activities may be undertaken in order to place, install, service or maintain utilities or similar improvements within or across the area only during such periods and in such manner as to reduce as much as reasonably practicable the significant detrimental effects, if any, such activities may have on wildlife within, or on the hydrological integrity of the area. 
(2)  Within the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA), excavation and filling shall be allowed in all areas for purposes related to its full development and use in accordance with applicable primary planning district classifications and for purposes of increasing or decreasing the elevations within such area to, or in excess of, the level of the so-called "100-year flood plain"; provided, however: 
(a)  Excavation or filling in the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA) shall not, when completed, result in significant increase or decrease in the volume of surface water that will thereafter flow or discharge into the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) from the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA). 
(b)  All excavation, filling or other earth-moving activities within the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA) shall be conducted in such a manner that erosion and silting of surface water runoff into the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) will not take place. Where upland areas are exposed and subject to erosion due to such excavation, filling or other earth-moving activities, temporary grass cover or other soil stabilizing vegetation shall be established immediately upon completion of such activities if such exposure and erosion will result in erosion or siltation of any portion of the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA). 
(3)  Where necessary or desired in order to fully utilize all land lying in the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA), or for the purpose of the installation or maintenance of subsurface improvements located thereon, fill, excavation or other earth-moving activities shall be permitted within the setback area above described; provided that, upon completion of such activities, the profile of the setback area shall conform with the characteristics of a "Type A" or "Type B" development setback, as depicted by Figure 71-1. 
(a)  Fill materials placed in the setback area shall consist of topsoil of suitable nature and character to allow re-vegetation in accordance with the provisions of TDC 71.064, or, in the alternative, where topsoil is not utilized for purposes of fill, the materials that are utilized as fill shall be covered with topsoil to a depth of at least 12 inches where the underlying fill material is heavily compacted. 
(b)  Quatoma, Woodburn or Hillsboro loam, when identified within the setback area or upon adjacent land inside the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA) by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service or by other reliable means, shall be suitable in nature and character to serve as topsoil for purposes of allowing re-vegetation of soil surfaces altered by filling, excavation or other earth-moving activities undertaken within the set-back area, or elsewhere within the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA) in accordance with the requirements of the provisions of TDC 71.064. Where other types of soils or materials are proposed for use as topsoil in accordance with this subsection, the same shall be of a type and character that will promote rapid propagation and growth of vegetation which will provide food, cover and nesting areas for wildlife, as well as a visual barrier or screen between the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) and adjacent uplands. 
(c)  Cove clay and silty clay loam shall not be used for purposes of providing any topsoil cover required to be placed within the setback area after filling, excavation or other earth-moving activities. 
(d)  Placement of landfill and topsoil within the setback area should be accomplished before September 15 in order to provide adequate opportunity for re-vegetation to occur during the ensuing growing season. Pending permanent re-vegetation in accordance with the requirements of TDC 71.064, filled areas within the setback area should be planted with temporary grass cover, winter cereal grains (broadcast at a rate of not less than 100 pounds per acre), or other soil-stabilizing vegetation for fast and effective control of any erosion or siltation that will occur in the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) if stabilization is not effected in such areas. 
(4)  Within the Sweek Pond Management Area (SPMA) filling, de-watering or other activities may be undertaken in order to place, install, service or maintain utilities or similar improvements, subject to the Resource Management Plan. The work will be accomplished in such manner as to reduce as much as reasonably practicable the significant detrimental effects, if any, such activities may have on wildlife within, or on the hydrological integrity of the area. 
(Ord. 800-90, § 7, 3-26-90)  
TDC 71.063. - Contamination and Sedimentation. 
During the course of development, site preparation, construction of any improvements, or usage of lands lying within the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA) or the Sweek Pond Management Area (SPMA), the introduction of storm drainage, surface and roof runoff into the Wetlands Protection Area (WPA) and the Sweek Pond Management Area (SPMA) shall only occur when such runoff is substantially free of silt, debris, oil or other materials injurious to plants or wildlife in the Wetlands Protected Area and the Sweek Pond Management Area (WPA and SPMA). 
(1)  All apparent and potential sources of storm drainage and surface runoff contamination located within the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA) and the Sweek Pond Management Area (SPMA) such as operating areas, and equipment cleaning and maintenance area, shall have curbs and be drained into impoundment areas or a waste treatment system in such a manner that no contaminated storm drainage or surface runoff originating in such areas will be discharged directly into the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) or Sweek Pond Management Area (SPMA) without treatment that would render such drainage uncontaminated. 
(2)  No solid wastes that are known to be toxic to vegetation or wildlife within the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) and the Sweek Pond Management Area (SPMA) shall be permanently stored or disposed of within the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA) or Sweek Pond Management Area (SPMA). 
(3)  No pesticides shall be used in the Wetlands Protected District before the type, duration and manner of use have been approved by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. 
(4)  To prevent soil movement into, or erosion within, the Wetlands Protected Area and the Sweek Pond Management Area (WPA and SPMA) as a result of drainage from adjacent upland areas within the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA) and Sweek Pond Management Area (SPMA) during the course of development, site preparation, construction of improvements or use, a combination of filters or diversions or other appropriate means to be specified by an engineer shall be employed where necessary in order to supplement soils stabilization that will result from re-vegetation as otherwise provided for and described in TDC 71.062(2) and 71.064. 
(Ord. 800-90, § 7, 3-26-90)  
TDC 71.064. - Vegetation. 
(1)  Vegetation occurring within the Wet-lands Protected Area (WPA) and the Sweek Pond Management Area (SPMA) shall not be degraded or damaged except as a result of activities otherwise permitted by this chapter. 
(2)  Vegetation occurring within the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA) may be removed or altered at any time during the course of development, site preparation, construction of improvements or usage, when reasonably required for any of such purposes, subject to the following: 
(a)  Areas where vegetation has been removed or altered incidental to construction or development of land areas within the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA) lying outside the setback area, which are not otherwise committed and used as the location or site of surface improvements associated with the development or use of the property, shall be seeded or planted to reestablish a vegetation cover compatible with the adjacent wetland habitats insofar as practicable. 
(b)  Areas where vegetation has been removed or altered incidental to development or usage of land areas within the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA) which occurs by reason of filling, excavation or other activities undertaken within the setback areas, shall be seeded or planted so as to effect eventual reestablishment of vegetation, if practicable, of the character, type and density that occurred in the areas affected prior to such removal or alteration. 
(c)  Owners and occupiers of land lying within the setback area upon which vegetation has been disturbed as a result of development, site preparation, construction of improvements or use shall permit access to such areas by public agencies, resource management groups and environmental interest groups approved by the City for purposes of entry and the conduct of activities designed or intended to effect the seeding, planting and maintenance of vegetation within the setback area in addition to, or in lieu of, the vegetation to be placed therein in accordance with TDC 71.064(2)(b) in the nature of trees, shrubs or other vegetation forms that will provide food, cover and nesting areas for wildlife and which may also provide a visual barrier or screen between the boundary of the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) and adjacent upland areas. No such activity shall be authorized or permitted where the same or the effects thereof may materially impair or damage the structural integrity or usefulness of landfill occurring within such area, or which may enhance the area's susceptibility to erosion or damaging surface or subsurface water flow, or which may damage, or impair the usefulness of, utilities or other improvements lying within or adjacent to the area otherwise permitted under the terms of this chapter. 
(d)  Re-vegetation as required by the provisions of this section shall begin as soon as practicable, but in no event later than 60 days, after cessation of development, unless otherwise approved by the City. Such re-vegetation shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of this chapter if approved or recommended as to type, species and placement by either the U.S. Soil Conservation Service or the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. 
(3)  Land areas within the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA) that lie outside the 40-foot setback area and which are not otherwise committed to development or use in connection with the intended development or use to be made of such areas by the owners, developers or occupiers thereof, shall be left, insofar as practicable, in their natural state for so long as such development or use does not require their alteration. Subject to the limitations set forth in TDC 71.064(2)(c), access shall be afforded to public agencies, resource management groups and environmental interest groups approved for purposes of planting and maintenance of vegetation within such areas that will afford food, cover and nesting areas for wildlife indigenous to the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) except where such entry or activities are unsafe or may damage the property or security of adjacent developed areas. Any such vegetation shall be subject to removal at a later date, should such areas be required or involved in future development. 
(4)  There shall be included in the statement of proposed construction methods and schedule required as part of the certification by TDC 71.040 of this chapter, a landscaping and re-vegetation plan and schedule, which shall set forth in reasonable detail the means by which the applicant(s) for any building permits, subdivision approvals or public works permits within the Wetlands Protection District (WPD) shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. 800-90, 3-26-90)  
TDC 71.065. - Uses. 
Except as otherwise provided for, or permitted, by the provisions of this chapter, and subject to the provisions of the Resource Management Plan, no permanent use of the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) will be allowed other than passive nature study, wildlife protection and enhancement, the north-south collector road (90th Avenue) and pedestrian bridge through the Zidell property (2S1—23-100), and other activities compatible with the intent, purposes and objectives of this chapter above set forth. The pedestrian bridge shall be located within 300 foot wide corridor west of the Pratt-Broome property (2S1—23-100). 
Except as otherwise provided for, or permitted by the provisions of this chapter (and subject to the Resource Management Plan), no permanent use of the Sweek Pond Management Area (SPMA) will be al-lowed other than the following uses: 
• Public uses; 
• Habitat protection; 
• Water supply protection; 
• Enhancement; 
• Restoration; 
• Wetland resource protection; 
• Historic houses such as the ("Hedges House") relocation; 
• Environmental educational facility; 
• Gardens; 
• Landscaping; 
• Trails; 
• Parking lot; 
• Lighting; 
• Signing; 
• Picnic facilities; 
• Boardwalk with viewing platform into Sweek Pond; 
• Access road east of Pond area; and 
• Other uses deemed to be consistent with the Resource Management Plan. 
All uses in the WPA and SPMA will be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Such permitted uses shall be in all cases and at all times remain subject to the provisions of TDC 71.090(2) and (3) of this chapter and to such other or further restrictions or conditions as may be, or become, reasonably necessary to afford to the owner(s) or to others entitled to possession or control of the area reasonable assurance that they will suffer or incur no loss, damage, expense or liability of any kind by reason of such uses or any activities undertaken in connection therewith. 
(2)  No discharge of firearms, trapping, poisoning, or intentional destruction of wildlife shall be permitted in the Wetlands Protection District (WPD). 
(3)  Annual monitoring of the number of plant and animal species and the number within each species occurring within the Wetlands Protection Area (WPA) and 40-foot setback within the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA) may be undertaken by conservation groups under the supervision, or with the approval, of the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. 
(4)  Uses occurring within the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA) shall be restricted to those uses allowed by the primary planning district classifications and standards. 
(5)  Structures and other permanent improvements to land lying adjacent to the boundary of the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) and Sweek Pond Management Area (SPMA) shall be located as far removed from such boundary as is consistent with the development objectives and plans of the owners or developers of such adjacent property, subject in all cases to the provisions of TDC 71.061 of this chapter. 
(6)  Where upland development occurs and immediately adjacent to the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) and the 40-foot set-back provided for by TDC 71.061, such development and usages associated therewith shall be effected in such a manner as to minimize to the greatest extent practicable, consistent with full development and usage of the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA), disturbance of recognized valuable wildlife forms within the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) by automobile, truck and pedestrian traffic, shipping and receiving activities, trash and refuse pickup or disposal activities, and outdoor production or manufacturing operations. 
(Ord. 800-90, § 7, 3-26-90; Ord. 1354-13§ 9, 02-28-13)  
TDC 71.066. - Exceptions. 
If degradation of the wildlife habitat within the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) occurs despite protective work accomplished complying with an approved certification statement pursuant to TDC 71.040, and such degradation is caused by an overburdening by an Act of God of the protective methods so approved; then the owners, occupiers, or users of the land where said degradation originated shall not be liable for such adverse effects on the Wetland Protected Area (WPA). After an Act of God, said owner, occupiers, or users shall immediately take steps to conform to the provisions of this chapter. An Act of God, for the purposes of this section, shall be extreme climatic conditions which include, but are not limited to, a rain storm in excess of the 25-year frequency storm, extremely long periods of drought or freezing weather, or damage caused by wildfires or unusual insect infestations. 
(Ord. 800-90, § 7, 3-26-90)  
TDC 71.067. - Wetland Protection District Crossings. 
All crossings of the Wetland Protection District have been completed and no additional crossings are contemplated. 
(Ord. 800-90, § 7, 3-26-90; Ord. 1354-13 § 10, 02-25-13)  
TDC 71.080. - Issuance of Permits and Approvals. 
Where otherwise required by City ordinance, no permit or approval shall be issued for the filling or excavation of land, or the construction, alteration, enlargement or modification of any building, structure or improvement, within the Wetlands Fringe Area (WFA), until all the terms and provisions of this chapter have been satisfied, which satisfaction shall be evidenced by approval of the certification required by TDC 71.040. 
(1)  The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to inspect such filling or excavation of land and the construction of all such improvements, alterations and/or modifications while the same are in process at such intervals and in such manner as will enable such officer to determine whether or not the terms and conditions of this chapter are being observed by the applicant. 
(2)  If, at any time during the course of such filling, excavation or construction, the Building Official determines that the work is not being done in conformity with the approved certification, plans and permits, a stop-work order may be issued to the applicant, his agents, or any other person in control of such activities. 
(3)  Upon receipt of such a stop-work order, all activities enumerated therein shall immediately cease until such time as the circumstances giving rise to the issuance of such order are corrected or the order is withdrawn, whichever event occurs first. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for the recipient of a stop-work order to initiate or continue any activities proscribed and enumerated therein and, upon conviction for violation of this subsection, the recipient of such stop-work order shall be subject to fine as provided herein pursuant to TDC 31.111. 
(Ord. 800-90, § 7, 3-26-90)  
TDC 71.090. - Miscellaneous. 
(1)  Owners of land within the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA), their agents, successors in interest and assigns shall be and are hereby relieved of all and any duty or obligation to manage, protect or maintain any portion of their property lying within the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) except as required by virtue of the provisions of this chapter, unless they shall specifically assume responsibility for such management, protection or maintenance in writing filed with the City Engineer, and except as required by reason of their status as riparian owners of such property. 
(2)  All persons entering or conducting activities upon, or departing from, lands within the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA), shall enter or conduct such activities thereon or depart therefrom at their sole risk and jeopardy. Neither the City of Tualatin nor any owner(s) of any land within said Wet-lands Protected Area (WPA) shall incur liability for any form of loss or damage to property, or for any form of injury to persons, or death, occurring during, or attributable to, entry upon, or activities undertaken within, or departure from, said lands unless caused by the active negligence, willful misconduct, or criminal activity of the City or such owner(s). Printed notice containing the provisions of this subsection shall be prepared, posted and maintained at the expense of the City in at least one conspicuous location at or near each point or place that may be or become a customary or commonly used means of access to the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA). 
(3)  Where property lying within the Wetlands Protection District (WPD) is severed or divided by areas lying within the Wetlands Protection Area (WPA) to an extent that access to one or more portions of such property lying outside the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) is, or becomes, practically impossible by means of surface vehicular traffic or rail access, construction of alternative public means of access to such severed property shall be coordinated and supported by the City of Tualatin, subject to the Tualatin Transportation Plan. 
(4)  Neither the City of Tualatin nor any agency, public or private, nor any person, firm or organization, public or private, shall have or acquire by any means other than written conveyance, license, or permit, voluntarily granted by the lawful owner thereof, any property interest in or to any portion of the lands lying within the Wetlands Protected Area (WPA) by operation of law, condemnation, adverse possession, permissive user, prescription or otherwise. 
(Ord. 800-90, 3-26-90)  
TDC 71.900. - Exhibits 
EXHIBIT F 
March 21, 1990 
LEGAL DESCRIPTION 
FOR ZIDELL 
45 FOOT ROAD CORRIDOR THROUGH WETLANDS PROTECTED AREA: 
That portion of the Northeast quarter of Section 23, Township 2 South, Range 1 West, Willamette Meridian, City of Tualatin, Washington County, Oregon, described as follows: 
BEGINNING at a point on the East line of the Northeast quarter of Section 23 marked by a ⅝ inch iron rod set in Washington County Survey number 20550, said iron rod being located 855.00 feet North of the East quarter corner of said Section 23; 
THENCE North along said East line of the Northeast quarter of said Section 23, 141.00 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 85° 35' 36" West 141.04 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 87° 40' 52" West 179.83 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 67° 29' 21" West 140.78 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 44° 18' 12" West 121.60 feet to a point on the arc of a 477.50 foot radius non-tangent curve to the right (said point being on the Westerly right-of-way line of a proposed 45 foot road) and the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING; 
THENCE South 76° 07' 50" East 32.43 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 43° 00' 21" East 14.26 feet to a point on the arc of a 522.50 feet radius non-tangent curve to the left (being on the Easterly right-of-way line of a proposed 45 foot road); 
THENCE following the arc of said 522.50 foot radius curve to the left, the radial bearing of which bears North 63° 33' 04" West, through a central angle of 10° 00' 11" an arc distance of 91.22 feet, the long chord of which bears North 21° 26' 51" East for a chord distance of 91.11 feet; 
THENCE North 44° 18' 12" West 52.36 feet to the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING. 
It is the intent of the above description to create a 45 foot corridor through a portion of the Wetlands Protected Areas as shown on Washington County surveys number 20550 and number 20819, and adopted by the City Council of the City of Tualatin under Resolution Number 1434-84. 
EXHIBIT G 
March 19, 1990 
LEGAL DESCRIPTION 
FOR ZIDELL 
PEDESTRIAN CORRIDOR THROUGH THE WETLANDS PROTECTED AREA: 
That portion of the Northeast quarter of Section 23, Township 2 South, Range 1 West, Willamette Meridian, City of Tualatin, Washington County, Oregon, described as follows: 
BEGINNING at a point on the East line of the Northeast quarter of Section 23 marked by a ⅝ inch iron rod set in Washington County survey number 20550, said iron rod being located 855.00 feet North of the East quarter corner of said Section 23; 
THENCE South along said East line of the Northeast quarter of Section 23 37.21 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod set in Washington County survey number 20819 to mark the boundary of the amended Wetlands Protected Area as adopted by the City Council of the city of Tualatin under Resolution Number 1434-84; 
THENCE following the boundary of the amended Wetlands Protected Area, South 59° 47' 08" West 63.50 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 65° 48' 33" West 40.57 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 37° 51' 17" West 69.35 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 77° 50' 14" West 184.70 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 56° 36' 32" West 197.63 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 59° 34' 53" West 236.68 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod and the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING; 
THENCE South 36° 50' 45" West 257.07 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE leaving the boundary of said Wetlands Protected Area, North 26° 29' 21" West 326.86 feet to a point on the North line of the proposed amended boundary of the Wetlands Protected Area; 
THENCE North 80° 52' 10" East 181.29 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod at an angle point in the Original Wetlands Protected Area boundary; 
THENCE following the boundary of the Wetlands Protected Area North 29° 08' 40" East 107.90 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 45° 47' 30" East 25.62 feet; 
THENCE leaving the boundary of the Wetlands Protected Area South 00° 04' 00" East 194.12 feet more or less, regardless of footage, to the Southwest corner of the "Sweek Estate" as shown on Washington County survey number 22785; 
THENCE South 56° 01' 04" East 60.08 feet more or less, regardless of footage, to a ⅝ inch iron rod at the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING. 
EXHIBIT N 
February 26, 1990 
LEGAL DESCRIPTION 
FOR ZIDELL 
AMENDED BOUNDARY OF WETLANDS PROTECTED AREA: 
That portion of Section 23, Township 2 South, Range 1 West, Willamette Meridian, Washington County, Oregon, described as follows: 
BEGINNING at a point on the East line of the Northeast quarter of said Section 23, marked by a ⅝ inch iron rod set in Washington County survey number 20550, said iron rod being located 855.00 feet North of the East quarter corner of said Section 23; 
THENCE along the East line of the Northeast quarter of said Section 23, North 141.00 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 85° 35' 36" West 141.04 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 87° 40' 52" West 179.83 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 67° 29' 21" West 140.78 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 44° 18' 12" West 121.60 feet to a point on the arc of a non-tangent 477.50 foot radius curve to the right (being the Westerly right-of-way line of a proposed 45 foot road); 
THENCE along the arc of said 477.50 foot radius non-tangent curve to the right, the radial bearing of which bears North 76° 37' 33" West through a central angle of 13° 19' 19" an arc distance of 111.03 feet; 
THENCE South 76° 07' 50" East 32.43 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 43° 00' 21" East 86.15 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 17° 53' 21" West 57.97 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 51° 04' 18" West 108.35 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 42° 13' 03" West 179.52 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 45° 47' 30" West 65.28 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 29° 08' 40" West 107.90 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod;71.090 
THENCE South 80° 52' 10" West 359.44 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 80° 23' 48" West 113.56 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 87° 34' 44" West 136.49 feet; 
THENCE South 09° 56' 49" West 289.60 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 87° 40' 51" West 887.38 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod on the West line of the Northeast quarter of said Section 23, the last mentioned ⅝ inch iron rod being North 00° 02' 13" East 300.89 feet from a ¾ inch iron pipe set for the center of said Section 23 in Washington County survey number 18174; 
THENCE along the West line of the Northeast quarter of said Section 23, South 00° 02' 13" West 50.89 feet to the Northeast corner of that tract of land described in Exhibit A in a conveyance from THE NATURE CONSERVANCY to THE WETLANDS CONSERVANCY recorded as Document Number 82007596, deed records; 
THENCE South 74° 51' 42" West 348.14 feet to the Northwest corner of said tract de-scribed in Exhibit A, Document Number 82008596, deed records; 
THENCE South 82° 55' 14" West 331.85 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 57° 57' 41" West 227.20 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod on the South line of the Northwest quarter of said Section 23, the last mentioned ⅝ inch iron rod being South 89° 50' 38" West 857.82 feet from a ¾ inch iron pipe set for the center of said Section 23 in Washington County survey number 18174; 
THENCE South 05° 39' 10" West 182.09 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 54° 21' 48" West 222.00 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 57° 56' 29" West 199.67 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 71° 29' 00" West 253.84 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 64° 33' 57" West 258.50 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod at the Northeast corner of Lot 15, Premier Industrial Park; 
THENCE North 69° 11' 24" West 275.29 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 82° 57' 08" West 172.29 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod at the Westerly point of curve return in Lot 13; Premier Industrial Park; 
THENCE North 89° 47' 48" West 59.99 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod at the Easterly point of curve return in Lot 8, Premier Industrial Park; 
THENCE North 25° 15' 57" West 81.02 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 85° 30' 35" West 428.39 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod on the West line of said Section 23, the last mentioned ⅝ inch iron rod being South 00° 02' 07" West 417.51 feet from the West quarter corner of said Section 23 as monumented in U.S.B.T. Book 2, page 272, entry 348; 
THENCE along said West line of Section 23, South 00°02' 07" West 82.49 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 84° 12' 26" East 391.63 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 77° 57' 12" East 185.48 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 71° 24' 09" East 96.33 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 59° 46' 28" East 104.95 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 42° 55' 31" East 288.07 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod on the East line of said Lot 15; 
THENCE South 83° 40' 44" East 161.47 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 78° 09' 04" East 391.63 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 10° 17' 21" East 148.83 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 88° 39' 19" East 240.85 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 80° 34' 09" East 248.18 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 06° 41' 12" West 337.06 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 89° 24' 20" East 435.53 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 70° 18' 52" East 139.25 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 22° 46' 10" East 122.94 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 88° 53' 27" East 141.72 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 86° 03' 20" East 12.82 feet to a point on the East line of the Southwest quarter of said Section 23, the last mentioned point being South 00° 02' 13" West 551.10 feet from a ¾-inch iron pipe set for the center of said Section 23 in Washington County survey number 18174; 
THENCE continuing South 86° 03' 20" East, 78.79 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 89° 33' 02" East 106.35 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 03° 39' 34" West 344.73 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 41° 23' 53" East 122.42 feetto a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 86° 55' 31" East 518.95 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 81° 47' 42" East 265.97 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 22° 36' 05" East 127.44 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE continuing South 22° 36' 05" East 20.00 feet; 
THENCE North 84° 34' 12" East 190.04 feet; 
THENCE North 72° 06' 06" East 188.70 feet; 
THENCE North 30° 07' 44" East 129.61 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE continuing North 30° 07' 44" East 83.78 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 31° 57' 59" East 303.53 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 59° 24' 27" East 102.67 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 36° 50' 45" East 257.07 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 59° 34' 53" East 236.68 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 56° 36' 32" East 197.63 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod set in Washington County survey number 20819 to amend the boundaries of the Wetlands Protected Area as adopted by the City Council of Tualatin by Resolution Number 1434-84; 
THENCE following the boundary of said amended Wetlands Protected Area, North 77° 50' 42" East 184.70 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 37° 51' 17" East 69.35 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 65° 48' 33" East 40.57 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 59° 47' 08" East 63.50 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod on the East line of the Northeast quarter of Section 23; 
THENCE North along said East line of the Northeast quarter 37.21 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod at the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
ALSO, that portion of Section 22, Township 2 South, Range 1 West, Willamette Meridian, Washington County, Oregon, designated as the "WETLANDS PROTECTED AREA" in Washington County survey number 20550, which survey, by reference is made a part of this legal description as follows: 
BEGINNING at the East quarter corner of said Section 22 as monumented in U.S.B.T. Book 2, page 272, entry number 348; 
THENCE along the East line of the Southeast quarter of said Section 22, South 00° 02' 07" West 500.00 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 87° 26' 13" West 150.00 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 02° 33' 47" East 40.00 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 87° 26' 13" West 500.00 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 02° 33' 47" East 40.00 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 87° 26' 13" West 670.49 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod on the East line of the West half of the Southeast quarter of said Section 22; 
THENCE along the East line of said West half, North 00° 09' 17" East 436.49 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod on the South line of that tract of land conveyed by August Guetz to Henry Saxton by deed recorded in Book "P" page 151, said point being the Southwest corner of Lot 17, Glenmorage Park; 
THENCE North 00° 02' 15" East along the West boundary of said Lot 17, a distance of 88.51 feet, to the Northwest corner of said Lot 17, said point being on the Southerly right-of-way of the Southern Pacific Railroad; 
THENCE along the Northerly line of said Lot 17, and said Southerly right-of-way, North 67° 35' 15" East 86.52 feet to a ½ inch iron rod; 
THENCE leaving said Northerly line, and said Southerly right-of-way, South 127.36 feet to a ½ inch iron rod; 
THENCE continuing South 5.04 feet to a point on the Southerly line of said Glenmorag Park, said line also being the Southerly line of said Saxton tract; 
THENCE along the Southerly line of said Glenmorag Park and said Saxton tract the following courses: South 82° 14' 45" East 855.49; thence North 71° 29' 15" East 411.91 feet to the East quarter corner of said Section 22 and the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
EXHIBIT O 
March 19, 1990 
LEGAL DESCRIPTION 
FOR ZIDELL 
SWEEK POND MANAGEMENT AREA: 
That portion of the Northeast quarter of Section 23, Township 2 South, Range 1 West, Willamette Meridian, City of Tualatin, Washington County, Oregon, described as follows: 
BEGINNING at a point on the East line of the Northeast quarter of Section 23 marked by a ⅝ inch iron rod set in Washington County Survey number 20550, said iron rod being located 855.00 feet North of the East quarter corner of said Section 23; 
THENCE North along said East line of the Northeast quarter of said Section 23, 141.00 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE South 85° 35' 36" West 141.04 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 87° 40' 52" West 179.83 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 67° 29' 21" West 140.78 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod; 
THENCE North 44° 18' 12" West 121.60 feet to a point on the arc of a 477.50 foot radius non-tangent curve to the right (said point being on the Westerly right-of-way line of a proposed 45 foot road) and the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING; 
THENCE following the arc of said 477.50 radius curve to the right, the radial bearing of which bears North 76° 36' 33" West, through a central angle of 18° 20' 06", an arc distance of 152.80 feet, the long chord of which bears South 22° 32' 32" West for a chord distance of 152.15 feet; 
THENCE North 76° 04' 43" West 55.05 feet; 
THENCE South 78° 16' 53" West 91.31 feet; 
THENCE North 80° 48' 48" West 157.49 feet; 
THENCE North 73° 32' 26" West 109.70 feet; 
THENCE North 74° 53' 44" West 81.53 feet; 
THENCE North 10° 09' 15" West 124.85 feet; 
THENCE North 08° 21' 31" East 94.04 feet; 
THENCE North 37° 07' 48" East 141.70 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod marking the South-west corner of a 5.00 foot strip dedicated to the City of Tualatin under Washington County Fee Number 87054114 as set in Washington County survey number 22785; 
THENCE North 88° 42' 42" East 458.98 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod at the Southeast corner of said 5.00 foot strip; 
THENCE North 01° 17' 18" West 5.00 feet to a ⅝ inch iron rod on the South boundary of the Plat of the Town of Tualatin, a subdivision in said Town, according to the duly recorded Plat thereof; 
THENCE North 88° 42' 42" East 14.25 feet to a point on the West right-of-way line of the aforesaid proposed 45 foot road; 
THENCE following the West right-of-way line of said proposed road South 01° 10' 49" East 155.93 feet to a point of curvature; 
THENCE following the arc of a 477.50 foot radius curve to the right, through a central angle of 14.  
CHAPTER 72. - NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT (NRPO) 
 
TDC 72.010. - Purpose. 
(1)  To identify and protect by preservation and conservation the designated significant natural resources and Other Natural Areas. The designated significant natural resources are greenways and natural areas, which include the riparian areas and scenic areas of the Tualatin River and certain creeks and drainage swales, wetlands, upland forests, meadows, fish and wildlife resources, and the geologic features of the Tonquin Scablands. Significant Natural Resources are identified on the Significant Natural Resource List and Map TDC 72.013 and Map 72-3, TDC). The significant natural resources designated for protection are shown on Map 72-1. 
(2)  To provide sufficient area for stormwater runoff to reduce flood hazards and enhance water quality. 
(3)  To provide public access to scenic and riparian areas, where appropriate, by designating pedestrian and bicycle path locations. 
(4)  To provide specific design standards for development adjacent to, and within, greenways and natural areas in order to preserve and conserve them, and provide mechanisms for the granting of easements or dedications for Greenways, and Natural Areas while allowing reasonable economic development of property adjacent to the greenways and natural areas. 
(Ord. 635-84, § 30, 6-11-84; Ord. 933-94, § 31, 11-28-94; Ord. 947-95, § 5, 7-24-95; Ord. 979-97, § 30, 7-14-97; Ord. 1427-19 , § 32, 11-25-19)  
TDC 72.011. - Criteria for Determining Significant Natural Resources. 
(1)  The Significant Resource Criteria in Subsections (2-3) must be considered when determining whether a natural resource site is a Significant Natural Resource or is not significant. 
(2)  Significant Resource Criteria—Wetlands Not in Riparian Corridors. 
(a)  Exclusions. Wetland natural resources are not significant if they fall within any one of the following categories: 
(i)  Wetlands artificially created entirely from upland that are: 
(A)  Created for the purpose of controlling, storing or maintaining stormwater; or 
(B)  Active surface mining or active log ponds; or 
(C)  Ditches without a free and open connection to natural waters of the state (as defined in OAR 141-85-010(9) and which do not contain food or game fish (as defined in ORS 496.009); or 
(D)  Less than one acre in size and created unintentionally as the result of irrigation water overflow or construction activity not related to compensatory mitigation for permitted wetland impacts; or 
(E)  Of any size and created for wastewater treatment, farm or stock watering, settling of sediment, cooling industrial water, or as a golf course hazard. 
(ii)  Wetlands or portions of wetlands that are contaminated by hazardous substances, materials or wastes as per the following conditions: 
(A)  The wetland is documented as contaminated on either the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) National Priority List, or the Department of Environmental Quality's (DEQ) Inventory of Hazardous Substance Sites (ORS 465.225). 
(B)  Only the portion of the wetland affected by such hazardous substances shall be excluded from significance analysis. 
(b)  A Wetland natural resource is a Significant Natural Resource if it meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(i)  The site has a rating of "High" in at least one of the following environmental categories in the City of Tualatin Natural Resource Inventory and Local Wetlands Inventory (December, 1995) Wetland and Natural Areas Inventory Environmental and Social Value Assessment: 
(A)  Fish Habitat Value. The assessment values use the low-medium-high rating for a site based on the modified fish habitat and wildlife habitat assessment methods used in the City of Tualatin Natural Resource Inventory. Fish habitat rates high if potential fish habitat exists. 
(B)  Wildlife Habitat Value. Evaluates habitat diversity. Areas with permanent or seasonal water, diverse vegetation and structure, and interspersion of plant communities rate high. Wildlife habitat value also increases with the size of the site and linkage to open space habitat. 
(C)  Hydrologic Control, Water Quality Protection, and Water Quality Potential. Resource sites that provide or have the potential to provide water quality protection to receiving streams or stormwater detention within the watershed are important and are rated high. 
(ii)  The wetland or a portion of the wetland occurs within a horizontal distance of less than one-fourth mile from a water body listed by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) as a water quality limited body [303(d) list) and the wetland' s water quality protection or potential function is described as High or Medium in the Wetlands and Natural Areas Assessment. 
(iii)  The site has a presence of one or more rare or locally unique plant communities that are relatively undisturbed with few or no non-native plants. 
(iv)  The site has a presence of a plant or animal species that is state or federally listed as sensitive, rare, threatened or endangered, or is a critical habitat for such listed species, unless the appropriate state or federal agency indicates that the wetland is not important for the maintenance of the species. 
(3)  Significant Resource Criteria—Streams, riparian corridors, forests, meadows and geologic features. A stream, riparian corridor, forest, meadow or geologic feature site is a significant resource site if it meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(a)  The site has a presence of a plant or animal species that is state or federally listed as sensitive, rare, threatened or endangered, or is a critical habitat for such listed species; 
(b)  The site has a presence of a physical feature that is designated as a scenic river or natural or geologic resource by county or regional government, or state or federal agencies. This includes but is not limited to designation as a significant natural resource or geologic area. Physical features do not include buildings or other constructed features. 
(c)  The site has a presence of one or more relatively undisturbed native plant communities with few or no non-native plants. 
(d)  The site has a rating of "High" in at least one of the following environmental categories in the City of Tualatin Natural Resource Inventory and Local Wetlands Inventory (December, 1995) Wetland and Natural Areas Inventory Environmental and Social Value Assessment: 
(i)  Fish Habitat Value. The assessment values use the low-medium-high rating for a site based on the modified fish habitat and wildlife habitat assessment methods used in the City of Tualatin Natural Resource Inventory. Fish habitat rates high if potential fish habitat exists. 
(ii)  Wildlife Habitat Value. Evaluates habitat diversity. Areas with permanent or seasonal water, diverse vegetation and structure, and interspersion of plant communities rate high. Wildlife habitat value also increases with the size of the site and linkage to open space habitat. 
(iii)  Hydrologic Control, Water Quality Protection, and Water Quality Potential. Resource sites that provide or have the potential to provide water quality protection to receiving streams or stormwater detention within the watershed are important and are rated high. 
(iv)  Ecological Integrity. Sites are rated high if they provide ecosystem linkage or continuity, allow wildlife passage between larger habitat units or genetic flow between plant populations, provide critical habitat for certain life history stages of sensitive fish and wildlife species, or other watershed or ecosystem functions. This criterion regards the both the ecological integrity and connectivity assessments of the site. 
(v)  Uniqueness. Site contains fish and wildlife species, wildlife habitat, plant communities or geologic features that are unique in the Tualatin area. Uniqueness is a consideration of the quantity and quality of a particular resource site relative to other resources in the Tualatin area. 
(e)  A non-wetland site has a rating of "High" in at least two of the following social categories in the City of Tualatin Natural Resource Inventory (December, 1995) Wetland and Natural Areas Inventory Environmental and Social Value Assessment: 
(i)  Educational Value and Scientific Research. Sites are rated high if they provide potential educational opportunities for local schools or parks and recreation programs or research opportunities for the scientific community. This value is dependent on access and distance from schools. 
(ii)  Aesthetic or Scenic Qualities, or Visual or Noise Buffering Qualities. Rating aesthetic or scenic quality is based on visual characteristics. Buffering qualities refer to the site's ability to serve as a buffer to unattractive or noisy areas such as the interstate freeways. 
(iii)  Opportunity for Passive Recreation. Rating for recreational opportunity is based on a combination of the availability of public access, environmental value, aesthetic and/or scenic value, and low probability for recreational uses that will adversely affect environmental, aesthetic or scenic values. 
(f)  Meets the definition of a riparian corridor in OAR-660-090-(5) and any other criteria in subsections (3)(a-e) and (3)(g). 
(g)  In addition to (a)—(f) above, a final decision to determine whether a resource site is significant or not significant shall consider information about the resource site from all available sources, including but not limited to property owners and interested citizens, and may use factors not listed in criteria (a)—(f) above provided that it is shown the factor(s) address the issue of whether or not the site is significant. 
(Ord. 979-97, § 31, 7-14-97)  
TDC 72.013. - Significant Natural Resources. 
The following natural resource sites identified in the City of Tualatin Natural Resource Inventory and Local Wetlands Inventory (December, 1995) are Significant Natural Resources: 
Unit # 	Resource # 	Assessors Map and Tax Lot 
		(Unit C: Cummins Creek; H: Hedges Creek; N: Nyberg Creek; S: Saum Creek; SD: Seeley Ditch; T: Tualatin River) 
C1 	F25 	2S121A002100 
2S122C000801 	2S121DA00300 	2S121DA00400 
C1 	W37 	2S121D000100 
2S121D000500 
2S121DA00400 
2S122C000801 	2S121D000203 
2S121D000600 
2S122B000800 	2S121D000301 
2S121DA00300 
2S122C000603 
C1 	W38 	2S121A002100 	2S121A002600 	
H 	W25 	2S127D000106 	2S127D001500 	2S127D001500 
BNRR 
H 	W28 	2S126CC06000 		
H 	W36 	2S1220000400 
2S1220000800 
2S122C000502 
2S122C001800 
2S122C002300 	2S1220000500 
2S122B000800 
2S122C000503 
2S122C001900 	2S1220000600 
2S122C000300 
2S122C000603 
2S122C002200 
H 	W47 	2S135B000803 
2S135BA00500 
2S135BD05000 	2S135BA00300 
2S135BD00200 	2S135BA00400 
2S135BD01500 
H 	W22 	2S124B001300 
2S124BC00500 
2S124BC01300 	2S124BC00100 
2S124BC01100 
2S124BC01301 	2S124BC00300 
2S124BC01200 
2S124BC01400 
H2 	F21 	2S1230000100 	2S123AA00800 	
H2 	F22 	2S123CA00300 	2S123CB00102 	
H2 	F23 	2S122D000301 
2S122DA00300 	2S122DA00100 
2S122DA00500 	2S122DA00200 
2S122DA00600 
H2 	W23 	Wetlands Protection District 
H2 	W48 	2S123A00600 		
H2 	F24 	2S122D000500 		
H3 	W35 	2S116C002600 
2S122C002100 	2S1220000700 
2S122D000500 	2S122C000103 
H4 	W34 	2S122C00105 
2S127B000100 
2S127B000500 
2S127B000701 	2S122C001500 
2S127B000102 
2S127B000600 	2S122C001502 
2S127B000300 
2S127B000700 
H5 	F26 	2S127A000100 
2S127A000300 
2S127A000303 	2S127A000105 
2S127A000300 
2S127A000400 	2S127A000200 
2S127A0001302 
2S127D001500 
H5 	W24 	2S127A000105 
2S127B000800 	2S127A000300 	2S127A000302 
H6 	F27 	2S127D000400 
2S127D001500 	2S127D001300 	2S127D001400 
H6 	W26 	2S127D000400 	2S127D001500 	
H7 	F28 	2S127D000400 
2S127D001500 	2S127D001300 	2S127D001400 
H7 	W27 	2S126CA13800 
2S126CC06100 	2S126CB14000 
2S127D001101 	2S126CC00102 
2S127D001201 
H8 	F31 	2S126CD13200 		
H8 	W29 	2S126CD13200 
2S126CD13500 	2S126CD13300 	2S126CD13400 
H9 	F32 	2S127B000502 
2S127D000200 
2S134A001001 
2S134A001600 
2S134A002000 
2S134AA01900 
2S134AA02400 	2S127C000100 
2S127D000300 
2S134A001100 
2S134A001700 
2S134A002002 
2S134AA02200 	2S127C000200 
2S127D000301 
2S134A001501 
2S134A001701 
2S134A002100 
2S134AA02300 
H9 	F33 	2S134A001500 
2S134A002100 	2S134A001501 	2S134A002001 
H9 	M2 	2S134A002100 		
H9 	W32 	2S127D000200 
2S127D000301 
2S134A002001 	2S127D000300 
2S134A001500 
2S134A002100 	2S134A002000 
2S134A001501 
2S134B000600 
RR RR 
N 	F4 	2S126DB00100 		
N 	W5 	2S123DA00100 
2S124CB03100 	2S124CB02200 
2S124CB03200 	2S124CB02601 
N1 	F1 	21E19C00900 	21E19C01200 	21E19C01400 
N1 	W1 	21E19C00200 		
N1 	W2 	21E19C00700 	21E19C00900 	21E19C01200 
N2 	F2 	2S124DB00102 	2S124DC00200 	2S124DC00300 
N2 	W3 	2S124DA00100 
2S124DA00900 	2S124DA00500 
2S124DA01000 	2S124DA00600 
2S124DB00102 
N3 	F3 	2S124CA00100 	2S124CA00300 	2S124CD00100 
N3 	W4 	21E19C00900 
2S124DA00100 
2S124DB00102 	2S124CA00100 
2S124DA00400 	2S124CA00300 
2S124DA00900 
S 	F9 	Interstate 5 Hwy ROW 
S1 	F13 	21E20CB02700 		
S1 	W7 	21E19DD12700 
21E20CB02500 	21E19DA10000 
21E20CB02700 	21E19DD12700 
S1 	W8 	21E30A00990 
21E30A01190 	21E30A01000 	21E30A01090 
S2 	F5 	21E30A01300 
21E30B00200 	21E30A01600 
21E30B00600 	21E30A01700 
21E30B00100 
S3 	W10 	2S125AA05100 
2S125AC03000 	2S125AA05200 	2S125AC00100 
S4 	F39 	2S125CB05800 
2S125CB10000 
2S125CC06400 	2S125CB06400 
2S125CB10100 
2S126DD01100 	2S125CB06500 
2S125CC02400 
SD 1 	F35 	2S135B000900 
2S135BC01100 
2S135BC01400 
2S135BC01700 
2S135BC02000 
2S135BC02300 	2S135B002500 
2S135BC01200 
2S135BC01500 
2S135BC01800 
2S135BC02100 	2S135BC01000 
2S135BC01300 
2S135BC01600 
2S135BC01900 
2S135BC02200 
SD 1 	F36 	2S135B002500 	2S135B002600 	
SD 1 	W31 	2S135B002500 	2S135BC02100 	
T1 	F14 	21E19DA10100 	21E19DA10400 	
T1 	F15 	21E1900900 
21E1901000 	21E19C00200 	21E19DA10400 
T1 	M1 	21E19DA10100 	21E19DA10400 	
T1 	W13 	21E19C00200 		
T1 	W14 	21E19C00200 		
T1 	W50 	21E19DA10100 		
T1—T7 	F43 	21E1900900 
21E19DA10100 
21E20CB02400 
2S114BC01700 
2S114BC02000 
2S114BD04400 
2S114D000200 
2S115AD01200 
21E1901000 
2S115AD01500 
2S115AD01800 
2S115C001500 
2S115C002202 
2S115D001403 
2S115D001600 
2S115DA00300 
2S115DA01100 
2S121A000101 
2S121A000300 
2S121A000500 
2S124A002601 
2S124A002900 
2S124B001100 	21E19C00200 
21E19DA10400 
21E20CB02401 
2S114BC01800 
2S114BC02100 
2S114CA00300 
2S114D000300 
2S115AD01300 
2S115AD01600 
2S115C001400 
2S115C001501 
2S115C002300 
2S115D001404 
2S115D001700 
2S115DA00800 
2S116C002600 
2S121A000102 
2S121A000400 
2S121AB00500 
2S124A002700 
2S124B001006 
2S124B001300 
2S124BC01400 	2S124BC00100 
21E19C00300 
21E19DA10500 
21E20CB02402 
2S114BC01900 
2S114BC02200 
2S114CA00301 
2S115AD01100 
2S115AD01400 
2S115AD01700 
2S115C001401 
2S115C001800 
2S115D001402 
2S115D001500 
2S115DA00100 
2S115DA00900 
2S116D001400 
2S121A000200 
2S121A000401 
2S121AB13700 
2S124A002700 
2S124B001007 
2S124B001500 
T2 	F16 	2S124AA002503 
2S124A002800 	2S124A002601 
2S124A002900 	2S124A002700 
T2 	W15 	2S124A002503 	2S124A002700 	2S124A002800 
T2 	W16 	2S124A002700 		
T3 	F17 	2S124A002700 		
T4 	F18 	2S124B001100 		
T5 	W17 	2S114D000300 	2S123AA00100 	2S123AA00200 
T5 	W18 	2S114D000200 		
T5 	W52 	2S114D000200 		
T6 	F19 	2S115AD01100 
2S115DA00800 	2S115AD01200 
2S115DA00900 	2S115AD01300 
T6 	F29 	2S114BD04400 	2S114CA00300 	2S114CA00301 
T6 	W19 	2S114BC01900 
2S114CB01000 
2S115AD01300 
2S115AD01600 
2S115D001404 
2S115DA00200 
2S115DA00500 
2S115DA00800 	2S114CB00700 
2S115AD01100 
2S115AD01400 
2S115AD01700 
2S115D001405 
2S115DA00300 
2S115DA00600 
2S115DA00900 	2S114CB00800 
2S115AD01200 
2S115AD01500 
2S115AD01800 
2S115DA00100 
2S115DA00400 
2S115DA00700 
2S115DA01100 
T7 	F42 	2S116C002600 	2S121AB13700 	
T7 	W51 	2S116C002600 		
 
(Ord. 979-97, § 32, 7-14-97)  
TDC 72.020. - Location of Greenways and Natural Areas. 
(1)  The designated significant natural resources are the Greenways and Natural Areas on Map 72-1, which shows the general location of the NRPO District. 
(2)  Lands in the Wetland Protection District (WPD) are subject to Chapter 71, and other applicable regulations, but not Chapter 72. 
(Ord. 635-84, § 31, 6-11-84; Ord. 947-95, § 5, 7-24-95; Ord. 979-97, § 33, 7-14-97; Ord. 1427-19 , § 33, 11-25-19)  
TDC 72.030. - Greenways. 
(1)  Greenways can Exhibit Diverse Characteristics. Those along the Tualatin River and Hedges, Nyberg and Saum Creeks can be natural in some sections and have pedestrian and bike paths in other sections. Greenways in built-up areas such as in subdivisions are typically landscaped with lawn and often include concrete pedestrian/bike paths. 
(2)  Riverbank Greenway (NRPO-GR). 
(a)  Except as provided in Subsection (b), the NRPO District along the south bank of the Tualatin River, beginning at the City's western Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) and extending to the City' s eastern UGB, and along the north bank of the Tualatin River from the northwest corner of Tax Lot 1007 to the southeast corner of Tax Lot 1006, Washington County Tax Map 2S1 24B, shall have a width as measured from a line 40 feet inland from the top of the bank extending to the middle of the river. The top of the bank shall be where the landform called "the bank" changes from a generally up-slope feature to a generally flat feature. The NRPO District shall automatically apply to property annexed to the City, except as provided for in Appendix G to the Parks and Recreation Master Plan. 
(b)  For the area 300 feet east and west of the I-5 right-of-way as shown on Map 72-1, the NRPO District on the south bank of the Tualatin River shall have a width as measured from a line 75 feet in-land from the top of the bank extending to the middle of the river. 
(3)  Creek Greenways (NRPO-GC). 
(a)  Except as provided in Subsections (b—d), the NRPO-GC District shall have a width of 50 feet centered on the centerline of Hedges Creek from SW Ibach Street to the western boundary of the Wetlands Protection District and from the eastern boundary of the Wetlands Protection District to the Tualatin River, and centered on Nyberg Creek from SW Tonka Street to the Tualatin River. 
(b)  The NRPO-GC District shall have a width of 30 feet centered on the centerline of Nyberg Creek from SW Boones Ferry Road to SW Tonka Street. 
(c)  Property owners on opposite sides of a creek may enter into a written agreement to allow the NRPO-GC District to be off-center, but in no case shall it be less than 15 feet on one side of the creek. Such agreement shall be binding on property owners, their heirs and assigns; shall be approved by City Council and shall be placed on permanent file with the City Recorder. 
(d)  The NRPO-GC District shall have a width of 50 feet extending out from the top of the stream bank or from the upland edge of wetlands within the stream riparian area on the following creek sections: 
(i)  Hedges Creek from SW 105th Avenue downstream to the private driveway culvert at the upper end of the fire pond at Tri-County Industrial Park, 
(ii)  Hedges Creek from the fire pond dam's outlet at Tri-County Industrial Park downstream to SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road, and 
(iii)  Saum Creek beginning east of I-5, just north of I-205 extending downstream to the Tualatin River, except: 
(A)  A width of 25 feet extending out from the upland edge of wetlands in the stream riparian area for the severely constrained properties shown on Map 72-1; and 
(B)  To the upland edge of the wetland in the stream riparian area adjacent to existing developed residential properties west of Atfalati Park shown on Map 72-1. 
(4)  Other Greenways (NRPO-OG). The greenways listed below are not within a riverbank or creek greenway. These areas are primarily drainage corridors for neighboring residential zones. The location and size of these greenways are shown on Map 72-1. 
(a)  Chieftain/Dakota Greenway; 
(b)  Indian Meadows Greenway; 
(c)  Hi-West Estates Greenway; 
(d)  Shaniko Greenway; 
(e)  Nyberg Creek Greenway (south). 
(Ord. 979-97, § 34, 7-14-97) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 979-97, § 34, adopted July 14, 1997, repealed TDC 72.030 and enacted a new TDC 72.030 as set out herein. Former TDC 72.030 derived from Ord. 721-87, adopted May 26, 1987; Ord. 933-94, adopted November 28, 1994; and Ord. 947-95, adopted July 24, 1995.  
TDC 72.040. - Natural Areas. 
(1)  Natural Areas are the wetlands and upland open space areas on Map 72-1. They provide flood control, water quality, erosion control, fish and wildlife habitat, and valuable scenic qualities. Natural Areas may include restored and enhanced wetlands, park sites and other areas accessible by the public for passive recreation. 
(2)  Wetland Natural Areas. 
(a)  Wetland Preservation Natural Areas (NRPO-WPNA) are shown on Map 72-1. They include all land within a delineated wetland boundary. 
(b)  Wetland Conservation Natural Areas (NRPO-WCNA) are shown on Map 72-1. Except as provided in Subsection (c), they include all land within a delineated wetland boundary. 
(c)  For uses not permitted in TDC 72.060(3), excavation, fill or removal in a NRPO-WCNA is allowed subject to the Oregon Division of State Lands (DSL) requirements and the following standards: 
(i)  The wetland acreage affected by the excavation, fill or removal shall not exceed 30 percent of the subject property's delineated wetland acreage. The wetland acreage affected shall include excavation, fill or removal activities conducted since March 1, 1996. 
(ii)  The excavation, fill or removal shall not reduce or block water features such as springs, drainage courses and streams. 
(iii)  The wetland' s functions and values listed in the City of Tualatin Natural Resource Inventory and Local Wetlands Inventory (December, 1995) shall be retained or improved through mitigation and/or enhancement. The wetland' s functions and values may be assessed using the Oregon Freshwater Wetland Assessment Methodology (DSL, 1996, as amended). 
(iv)  Mitigation shall be conducted either on the subject property or within the same stream watershed as the subject wetland unless the applicant demonstrates the impracticality of doing so. 
(3)  Open Space Natural Areas. 
(a)  Open Space Natural Areas (NRPO-OSNA) are shown on Map 72-1. They include upland forests, upland forests associated with slopes or streams, upland meadows, upland meadows associated with slopes or streams, the geologic features of the Tonquin Scablands, areas with slopes greater than 25 percent, areas within 50 feet of a delineated wetland and areas within 50 feet of a stream top of bank. 
(b)  The top of bank for the Tualatin River is as stated in TDC 72.030 and for all other streams is the bankfull stage. Slope is the vertical elevation divided by the horizontal distance of vertical change and is measured for a horizontal distance of 100 feet. 
(c)  Land use and permit applications shall show the NRPO-OSNA Boundary and shall include information on wetland delineations, location of streams, top of bank, topography and a vegetation inventory. 
(Ord. 635-84, § 32, 6-11-84; Ord. 673-85, § 1, 8-12-85; Ord. 721-87, § 2, 5-26-87; Ord. 933-94, § 33, 11-28-94; Ord. 947-95, § 5, 7-24-95; incorporated into § 72.030 by Ord. 979-97, § 35, 7-14-97; Ord. 979-97, § 35, 7-14-97)  
TDC 72.050. - Reserved. 
(Ord. 635-84, § 33, 6-11-84; Ord. 947-95, § 5, 7-24-97; incorporated into § 72.030 by Ord. 979-97, § 34, 7-14-97)  
TDC 72.055. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. 1427-19 , § 34, adopted November 25, 2019, repealed § 72.055. Former § 72.055 pertained to other natural areas and derived from Ord. 635-84, § 33, adopted June 11, 1984; Ord. 947-95, § 5, adopted July 24, 1995; and Ord. 979-97, § 36, adopted July 14, 1997.  
TDC 72.056. - Vegetated Corridors of Sensitive Areas. 
Lands subject to these regulations are also subject to the regulations in the Unified Sewage Agency's Design and Construction Standards. 
(Ord. 947-95, § 5, 7-24-95; Ord. 979-97, § 37, 7-14-97; Ord. 1070-01 § 10, 4-9-01; Ord. 1070-01, 4-09-01)  
TDC 72.060. - Development Restrictions in Greenways and Natural Areas. 
(1)  Except as provided in Subsection (2), no building, structure, grading, excavation, placement of fill, vegetation removal, impervious surface, use, activity or other development shall occur within Riverbank, Creek and Other Greenways, and Wetland and Open Space Natural Areas. 
(2)  The following uses, activities and types of development are permitted within Riverbank, Creek and Other Greenways, and Wetland and Open Space Natural Areas provided they are designed to minimize intrusion into riparian areas: 
(a)  Public bicycle or pedestrian ways, subject to the provisions of TDC 72.070. 
(b)  Public streets, including bridges, when part of a City approved transportation plan, and public utility facilities, when part of a City approved plan and provided appropriate restoration is completed. 
(c)  Except in Wetland Natural Areas, private driveways and pedestrian ways when necessary to afford access between portions of private property that may be bisected by a Greenway or Open Space Natural Area. 
(d)  Except in Creek Greenways and Wetland Natural Areas, outdoor seating for a restaurant within the Central Urban Renewal District, but outside of any sensitive area or its vegetated corridor. 
(e)  Public parks and recreational facilities including, but not limited to, boat ramps, benches, interpretive stations, trash receptacles and directional signage, when part of a City-approved Greenway or Natural Area enhancement plan. 
(f)  Landscaping, when part of a landscape plan approved through the Architectural Review process. City initiated landscape projects are exempt from the Architectural Review process. Landscaping in Greenways and Natural Areas shall comply with the approved Plant List in the Parks and Recreation Master Plan. When appropriate, technical advice shall be obtained from the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, U.S. Soil Conservation Service, or similar agency, to ensure the proposed landscaping will enhance the preservation of any existing fish or wildlife habitats in the vicinity. 
(g)  Wildlife protection and enhancement, including the removal of non-native vegetation and replacement with native plant species. 
(h)  Except in Wetland Natural Areas, public boating facilities, irrigation pumps, water-related and water-dependent uses including the removal of vegetation necessary for the development of water-related and water-dependent uses, and replacement of existing structures with structures in the same location that do not disturb additional riparian surface. 
(i)  In Wetland Natural Areas, perimeter mowing and other cutting necessary for hazard prevention. 
(3)  The City may, through the subdivision, conditional use, architectural review, or other development approval process, attach appropriate conditions to approval of a development permit. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  Use of Greenways and Natural Areas for storm drainage purposes; 
(b)  Location of approved landscaping, pedestrian and bike access areas, and other non-building uses and activities in Greenways and Natural Areas; 
(c)  Setback of proposed buildings, parking lots, and loading areas away from the Greenway and Natural Area boundary. 
(4)  Greenways and Natural Areas in which an access easement is owned by the City, but retained in private ownership, shall be maintained by the property owner in their natural state and may only be modified if a landscape and maintenance plan complies with the approved Plant List in the Parks and Recreation Master Plan, and has been approved through the Architectural Review process or by the Parks and Recreation Director when Architectural Review is not required. 
(5)  The Parks and Recreation Director shall be included as a commentor when a development application proposes dedication of Greenway or Natural Area property to the City or when development is pro-posed on Greenway or Natural Areas property maintained by the Parks and Recreation Department. 
(Ord. 673-85, § 2, 8-12-85; Ord. 933-94, § 34, 11-28-94; Ord. 947-95, § 5, 7-24-95; Ord. 979-97, § 38, 7-14-97)  
TDC 72.065. - Hardship Created, Map Error, Property Not Buildable. 
(1)  Applications for variances due to a hardship resulting from the requirements of Chapter 72 shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 33. For variance applications alleging the requirements of Chapter 72 have rendered a property not buildable, the applicant has the burden of proof to show the property is not buildable and to specify which Chapter 72 requirements are proposed to be reduced or removed to render the property buildable. 
(2)  Claims of a location error in a Greenway or Natural Area Boundary on Map 72-1 shall be considered as part of an application for a subdivision, partition, lot line adjustment, architectural review or variance. Claims that an existing Greenway or Natural Area Boundary should be deleted, or added, on Map 72-1 shall be considered through the Plan Amendment process. Claims of map errors shall be supported by adequate inventory information and analysis to justify the claim and meet the land use application approval criteria. Claims of map error for wetland boundaries shall be verified by the Oregon Division of State Lands. 
(Ord. 979-97, § 39, 7-14-97)  
TDC 72.070. - General Guidelines for Pedestrian and Bike Paths in Greenways. 
To construct bike and pedestrian paths in greenways, the developer of the path shall adhere to the following guidelines, wherever practicable: 
(1)  Incorporate trails into the surrounding topography. 
(2)  Provide viewing opportunities for special vistas, wetlands, and unique natural features. 
(3)  Protect existing vegetation to the greatest extent possible. In wooded areas meander paths through the woods to avoid significant trees. An arborist should be consulted to determine methods for minimizing impact of construction of paths near trees greater than five inch caliper as measured four feet above-grade. 
(4)  Replant trees in the vicinity where they were removed. Use native species. 
(5)  Minimize impact on wetland environments. Build paths above wetlands wherever possible. Use boardwalks, bridges or other elevated structures when passing through a wetland. Direct trails away from sensitive habitat areas such as nesting or breeding grounds. 
(6)  Provide interpretive opportunities along the trail. Use interpretive signage and displays to describe plant and animal species, nesting areas, wildlife food sources, and geologic, cultural and historic features. 
(7)  Provide amenities along the trail. Place benches, picnic tables, trash receptacles and interpretive signage where appropriate. 
(8)  Where paths are placed in utility corridors, path design should be coordinated with the City's Engineering and Building Department and Operations Department to allow utility maintenance. 
(9)  Mitigate surface water drainage near wetlands and streams. Where hard surface trails occur adjacent to wetlands or creeks, provide, when appropriate, an open water system through swales, trench percolation, or on-site detention ponds to prevent erosion and negative impacts. 
(10)  Incorporate signage. Place properly scaled and sited regulatory and guide signs to instruct users on accessibility, local conditions, safety concerns and mileage information. 
(Ord. 635-84, § 35, 6-11-84 and Ord. 933-94, § 35, 11-28-94; Ord. 947-95, § 5, 7-24-95; Ord. 1427-19 , § 35, 11-25-19)  
TDC 72.080. - Shift of Density for Residential Development Adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas. 
(1)  A shift of density may be allowed in accordance with TDC 41.150 (RML District), 42.150 (RMH District), 43.180 (RH District) and 44.160 (RH/HR District). 
(2)  Small lots may be allowed in subdivisions and partitions in accordance with TDC 40.055 (RL District). 
(Ord. 979-97, § 40, 7-14-97; Ord. 1136-03, 4-28-03)  
TDC 72.085. - Landscaping Credit within Commercial and Industrial Planning Districts Adjacent to Greenways and Natural Areas. 
(1)  When a property owner in a Commercial, Institutional, or Industrial Planning District dedicates to the City a portion of the NRPO District, or vegetated corridor located within or adjacent to the NRPO District in accordance with a City-approved landscape plan, a Greenway and Natural Area Landscaping Credit shall be applied toward a portion of the site's percentage landscaping requirement. 
(2)  The amount of the Greenway and Natural Area Landscaping Credit shall be as provided in TDC Chapter 73. The applicant must meet all landscaping requirements in this Code to the satisfaction of the Planning Director through the Architectural Review process. 
(Ord. 673-85, § 2, 8-12-85; Ord. 933-94, § 37, 11-28-94; Ord. 947-95, § 5, 7-24-95; Ord. 979-97, § 41, 7-14-97; Ord. 1216-06, 7-24-06; Ord. 1427-19 , § 36, 11-25-19)  
TDC 72.090. - Reduction in Setback Requirements. 
When a property owner in a IN, CO, CR, CO/MR, ML, or MG Planning District dedicates to the City land in the NRPO District, a bikeway or pedestrian path facility, or a vegetated corridor located within or adjacent to the NRPO District, the minimum front yard setback may be reduced through the AR process as provided in Chapters 50, 51, 52, 55, 60, and 61. 
(Ord. 721-87, § 3, 5-26-87; Ord. 933-94, § 38, 11-28-94; Ord. 947-95, § 5, 7-24-95; Ord. 979-97, § 42, 7-14-97; Ord. 1216-06, 7-24-06; Ord. 1427-19 , § 37, 11-25-19)  
TDC 72.100. - Parks Systems Development Charge (SDC) Credit. 
Tualatin Municipal Code Chapter 2-6 (System Development Charges) establishes a System Development Charge for Parks in residential planning districts. The ordinance contains provisions for credits against the Parks SDC, subject to certain limitations and procedures. Credit may be received up to the full amount of the Parks SDC fee. Dedication of NRPO District Areas, or vegetated corridors located within or adjacent to the NRPO District listed in the SDC capital improvement list are eligible for a SDC credit. Dedication and improvement of bicycle and pedestrian paths may also be eligible for a SDC credit. 
(Ord. 933-94, § 39, 11-28-94; Ord. 947-95, § 5, 7-24-95; Ord. 979-97, § 43, 7-14-97; Ord. 1427-19 , § 38, 11-25-19)  
TDC 72.110. - Easements for Pedestrian and Bicycle Access. 
In any portion of the NRPO District, the City may, through the subdivision, partition, conditional use, architectural review, or other applicable development approval process, require that easements for pedestrian and bicycle access and maintenance uses be granted as a condition of approval when said easements are necessary to achieve the purposes of the Parks and Recreation Master Plan, Greenway and Trail Development Plan (Figure 72-2), or Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan (Figure 11-4). 
(Ord. 933-94, § 40, 11-28-94; Ord. 947-95, § 5, 7-24-95; Ord. 979-97, § 44, 7-14-97; Ord. 1427-19 , § 39, 11-25-19)  
TDC 72.120. - Wetlands Protection District. 
In cases where land within the NRPO District is also within the Wetlands Protection District, Chapter 71, any development permitted by TDC 72.060 shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 71. 
(Ord. 933-94, § 41, 11-28-94; Ord. 947-95, § 5, 7-24-95; Ord. 979-97, § 45, 7-14-97)  
TDC 72.130. - Floodplain District. 
In cases where land within the NRPO District is also within the Floodplain District, Chapter 70, any development permitted by TDC 72.060 shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 70. 
(Ord. 933-94, § 42, 11-28-94; Ord. 947-95, § 5, 7-24-95; Ord. 979-97, § 46, 7-14-97)  
TDC 72.140. - Dedication of Land for Park Purposes. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the dedication of land within the NRPO District to the public for park or open space purposes when the City Council finds that such dedication would be consistent with the purpose and objectives of the parks and recreation element of the Tualatin Public Facilities Plan. 
(Ord. 933-94, § 43, 11-28-94; Ord. 947-95, § 5, 7-24-95; Ord. 979-97, § 47, 7-14-97)  
TDC 72.150. - Modifications for Storm Drainage Improvements. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the City or any property owner from altering, enlarging, straightening, piping, or otherwise modifying a creek channel in the NRPO District upon a finding by the City Engineer that such modification is necessary for maintaining the ability of the creek to transmit storm water run-off. 
(Ord. 933-94, § 44, 11-28-94; Ord. 947-95, § 5, 7-5-95; Ord. 979-97, § 48, 7-14-97)  
CHAPTER 73A - SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 
General Purpose and Objectives of Site and Building Design Standards 
Residential Design Standards 
Common Wall Design Standards 
Commercial Design Standards 
Industrial Design Standards 
Institutional Design Standards  
GENERAL PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES OF SITE AND BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
TDC 73A.010. - Site and Building Design Standards Purpose and Objectives. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the site and building design objectives and standards found in TDC 73A through TDC 73G is to promote functional, safe, innovative, and attractive sites and buildings that are compatible with the surrounding environment, including, but not limited to: 
(a)  The building form, articulation of walls, roof design, materials, and placement of elements such as windows, doors, and identification features; and 
(b)  The placement, design, and relationship of proposed site elements such as buildings, vehicular parking, circulation areas, bikeways and bike parking, accessways, walkways, buffer areas, and landscaping. 
(2)  Objectives. The objectives of site and building design standards in TDC 73A through TDC 73G are to: 
(a)  Enhance Tualatin through the creation of attractively designed development and streetscapes; 
(b)  Encourage originality, flexibility, and innovation in building design; 
(c)  Create opportunities for, or areas of, visual and aesthetic interest for occupants and visitors to the site; 
(d)  Provide a composition of building elements which responds to function, land form, identity and image, accessibility, orientation and climatic factors; 
(e)  Conserve, protect, and restore fish and wildlife habitat areas, and maintain or create visual and physical corridors to adjacent fish and wildlife habitat areas; 
(f)  Enhance energy efficiency through the use of landscape and architectural elements; and 
(g)  Minimize disruption of natural site features such as topography, trees, and water features.  
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
TDC 73A.100. - Single-Family Design Standards Applicability; Exceptions. 
(1)  Applicability. The single-family design standards apply to: 
(a)  New single-family dwelling; or 
(b)  An addition or alteration to an existing single-family dwelling when it results in: 
(i)  A 35 percent or more expansion of the structure's existing footprint; 
(ii)  A new second or higher story; or 
(iii)  A 35 percent or more alteration of an existing wall plane. For purposes of this section wall plane means all vertical surfaces on one side of a dwelling from the base of the main floor level up including walls, garage doors, entries, gable ends, dormers, etc., and excluding any roof areas. 
(2)  Exceptions. The single-family design standards in subsection (1) do not apply to a side wall plane that abuts the side yard of an adjacent dwelling.  
TDC 73A.110. - Clear and Objective (Type I) Single Family Design Standards. 
Single-Family uses using the Clear and Objective (Type I) standards must comply with the following: 
(1)  Front Face. The front face of a single family dwelling must contain: 
(a)  Windows that occupy at least 12 percent of the wall plane. 
(i)  This requirement may be reduced to ten percent if one additional Residential Wall Design Element is provided beyond the minimum. 
(ii)  This requirement may be reduced to eight percent if two or more additional Residential Wall Design Element are provided beyond the minimum. 
(iii)  Garage door windows may be counted toward the window coverage percentage. 
(b)  At least three Residential Roof Design Elements; and 
(c)  At least five of the Residential Wall Design Elements. 
(2)  Rear. The rear of a single family dwelling must contain: 
(a)  Windows that occupy at least 12 percent of the wall plane 
(i)  This requirement may be reduced to ten percent if one or more additional Residential Wall Design Element is provided beyond the minimum. 
(ii)  Garage door windows may be counted toward the window coverage percentage. 
(b)  At least two Residential Roof Design Elements; and 
(c)  At least four Residential Wall Design Elements 
(3)  Side-Corner Lot. If the side of a single family dwellings abuts a public street, the side must contain: 
(a)  Windows that occupy at least eight percent of the wall plane; 
(i)  This requirement may be reduced to six percent of the wall plane if one or more additional Residential Wall Design Elements are provided on the same side elevation. 
(ii)  Garage door windows may be counted toward the window coverage percentage. 
(b)  At least two Residential Roof Design Elements; and 
(c)  At least four Residential Wall Design Elements.  
TDC 73A.120. - Single-Family Residential Roof Design Elements. 
The following are the single-family residential roof design elements: 
(1)  Dormer, such as hipped, gabled, shed, or eyebrow dormer design, which is a projecting structure built out from a sloping roof and housing a window, vent, or decorative element. 
(2)  Pitched or sloping roof, such as a gable roof, which slopes downward in two parts from a central ridge forming a gable at each end, or hip roof, which has sloping ends and sides that meet at an inclined projecting angle. 
(3)  Roof eave of at least 12 inches. 
(4)  Roof overhang (barge-board or verge board) of at least six inches measured outward from the face of the dwelling wall or wall plane. 
(5)  Window, decorative vent, door, decorated verge boards, trusses, false beams, corbels, brackets, or other decorative element(s) in gable ends; and 
(6)  Variation in roof pitch, height of roof planes, or roof orientation, such as in a roof with multi-level eaves.  
TDC 73A.130. - Single-Family Residential Wall Design Elements. 
The following are the single-family residential wall design elements: 
(1)  Recessed entry—Front facade only; 
(2)  Portico—Front facade only. A roofed porch-like space, open along at least one side, connected to the main dwelling entrance, supported by columns or pillars, and either protruding from or recessed within the main dwelling structure; 
(3)  Covered porch at least 36 square feet in area and at least four feet deep; 
(4)  Balcony, which development from the wall plane and is enclosed by a railing or parapet (low protective wall); 
(5)  Vertical offsets, at least two, either projecting or recessed, and at least six inches deep and a minimum of four feet long; 
(6)  Horizontal offset, either projecting or recessed, at least five inches deep; 
(7)  Bay window, box window, or box bay, which development at least six inches outward from the wall plane and forms a bay, alcove, or window seat; 
(8)  Column or pilaster, either complete or engaged (where one part of its surface is in contact with a wall plane), and in the wall plane, at a change in wall plane, or at a corner of the dwelling; 
(9)  Exterior chimney of brick, stone, composite masonry or similar materials; 
(10)  Engaged tower, either square, rectangular, circular or polygonal in form; 
(11)  Window trim or surround (casing) at least three and one-half inches wide that completely surrounds the window, either with or without a sill beneath the window; 
(12)  Window grids, windows with multi-paned sashes, or elliptical, palladian, segmental arch, semicircular, or similarly shaped windows; 
(13)  Lintel, arch, or similar decorative header casing on windows, the main entry door, portico, garage door(s), or other opening in the wall plane; 
(14)  Shutters, as a matched pair for or on a window, either movable or fixed, designed to cover a window and filter light, and usually of wood or similar construction and paneled or fitted with louvers; 
(15)  Variation in wall cladding, wall-surface pattern, or decorative materials such as shakes, shingles, brick, stone or other similar; 
(16)  Decorative or "architectural" garage door(s), with or without windows, and including patterning relief at least five-eighths inches deep over the door(s) surface, excepting the window area if windows are present; 
(17)  Decorative trellis or trellis-work, consisting of open rafter ends or beams and cross pieces to create the appearance of a structure over which climbing plants might be trained to grow; and 
(18)  Band, band course, band molding, belly band, belt course, or similar horizontal element of relatively slight projection marking a division in the wall plane and adding architectural interest to a facade or elevation.  
TDC 73A.140. - Discretionary (Type II) Single Family Design Standards. 
Single Family uses using Type II discretionary standards, and not using the clear and objective standards, must demonstrate compliance the following discretionary standards: 
(1)  All roofs must be pitched or sloping and articulated by use of such elements as dormers, gables, overhangs or eaves, and must have variations in roof pitch, height of roof planes, or roof orientation to create visual interest and avoid monotony in appearance; 
(2)  Architectural articulation and other design elements, such as balconies, porches, dormers, bay windows, vertical or horizontal offsets, variations in cladding, or moldings must be used on all sides of the dwelling (except for the side of a dwelling adjacent to another dwelling) to avoid stark unarticulated building facades (elevations), to minimize the scale and visual impact of a continuous flat wall surface, and to create a sense of visual interest for passersby and neighboring property owners; 
(3)  The architectural character (i.e., exterior materials, architectural articulation, design elements, etc.) of the front facade (elevation) of the dwelling must be utilized on all sides of the structure to create a unified appearance and to avoid a single block or box appearance; 
(4)  New dwellings must be designed and situated on a property in order to create and maintain a visual sense of harmony with surrounding development and must not overwhelm the scale of surrounding development; and 
(5)  The overall architectural design of the dwelling must foster a compatible, positive relationship with the scale and character of the street, and the scale and character of surrounding existing development.  
COMMON WALL DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
TDC 73A.200. - Common Wall Design Standards. 
The following standards are minimum standard for all duplex, townhouse, and multi-family developments in all zones. These standards do not apply to development in the Central Design District and Mixed Use Commercial (MUC) zone, which have separate standards and may be less than the minimums provided below. 
(1)  Private Outdoor Areas. Common wall uses must provide private outdoor area features as follows: 
(a)  A separate outdoor area of not less than 80 square feet must be attached to each ground level dwelling unit; and 
(b)  The private outdoor area must be separated from common outdoor areas in a manner that enables the resident to control access from common areas with elements, such as walls, fences or shrubs. 
(2)  Balconies, Terraces, and Loggias. Common wall uses must provide balconies, terraces, and loggias features as follows: 
(a)  A separate outdoor area of not less than 48 square feet in the form of balconies, terraces, or loggias must be provided for each unit located above the ground level; and 
(b)  The balconies, terraces, and loggias standard does not apply to duplexes and townhouses. 
(3)  Entry Areas. Common wall uses must provide entry area features as follows: 
(a)  A private main entry area must be provided as a private extension of each dwelling unit; 
(b)  The entry area must be separated from on-site parking areas and public streets with landscaping, change of grade, low fences, walls or other means that enable the resident to supervise and control access and to retain privacy; 
(c)  The entry area must be a minimum of 24 square feet in area for each dwelling unit; 
(d)  The entry area may be combined to serve more than one unit as determined by the City; and 
(e)  The entry area standard does not apply to duplexes and townhouses. 
(4)  Shared Outdoor Areas. Common wall uses must provide shared outdoor area features as follows: 
(a)  Must provide year round shared outdoor areas for both active and passive recreation; 
(b)  The shared outdoor area must be a minimum of: 
(i)  Three hundred square feet per dwelling unit; or 
(ii)  Four hundred fifty square feet per dwelling unit for 55 and older communities. 
(c)  Gazebos and other covered spaces are encouraged to satisfy this requirement; 
(d)  The shared outdoor area must provide approximately the same accessibility to the maximum number of dwelling units possible; 
(e)  The shared outdoor area must allow residents to watch over these areas from windows in at least two adjacent dwelling units; 
(f)  The shared outdoor area must be separated from all entryway and parking areas with a landscaped transition area measuring a minimum of ten feet wide; 
(g)  The shared outdoor area must have controlled access from off-site as well as from on-site parking and entrance areas with features such as fencing, walls and landscaping; 
(h)  The shared outdoor area must provide both sunny and shady spots; 
(i)  The shared outdoor area must provide a usable floor surface (material such as lawn, decks, wood chips, sand and hard surface materials qualify); and 
(j)  The shared outdoor area must standard does not apply to: 
(i)  Duplexes and townhouses; and 
(ii)  Any development with less than 12 dwelling units. 
(5)  Children's Play Areas. Common wall uses must provide children's play area features as follows: 
(a)  The children's play area must provide year round shared outdoor areas for both active and passive recreation; 
(b)  The children's play area must be a minimum of 150 square feet per dwelling unit; 
(c)  The children's play area must provide approximately the same accessibility to the maximum number of dwelling units possible; 
(d)  The children's play area must allow residents to watch over these areas from windows in at least two adjacent dwelling units; 
(e)  The children's play area must provide a separation from all entryway and parking areas with a landscaped transition area measuring a minimum of ten feet wide; 
(f)  The children's play area must have controlled access to shared outdoor areas from off-site as well as from on-site parking and entrance areas with features such as fencing, walls and landscaping; 
(g)  The children's play area must provide both sunny and shady spots; and 
(h)  The children's play area must provide a usable floor surface (material such as lawn, decks, wood chips, sand and hard surface materials qualify); and 
(i)  The children's play area standard does not apply to: 
(ii)  Duplexes and townhouses; 
(iii)  Fifty-five and older communities; and 
(iv)  Any development with less than 12 dwelling units. 
(6)  Storage. Common wall uses must provide storage features as follows: 
(a)  Enclosed storage areas are required and must be attached to the exterior of each dwelling unit to accommodate garden equipment, patio furniture, barbecues, bicycles, etc. 
(i)  Garages do not satisfy the storage requirements. 
(b)  Each storage area must be a minimum of six feet in height and have a minimum floor area of: 
(i)  24 square feet for studio and one bedroom units; 
(ii)  36 square feet for two bedroom units; and 
(iii)  48 square feet for greater than two bedroom units. 
(7)  Walkways. Common wall uses must provide walkways as follows: 
(a)  Walkways for duplexes and townhouses must be a minimum of three feet in width; 
(b)  All other multi-family development must have walkways of a minimum of six feet in width; 
(c)  Walkways must be constructed of asphalt, concrete, or a pervious surface such as pavers or grasscrete (not gravel or woody material); and 
(d)  The walkways must meet ADA standards applicable at time of construction or alteration. 
(8)  Accessways. 
(a)  When Required. Accessways are required to be constructed when a common wall development is adjacent to any of the following: 
(i)  Residential property; 
(ii)  Commercial property; 
(iii)  Areas intended for public use, such as schools and parks; and 
(iv)  Collector or arterial streets where transit stops or bike lanes are provided or designated. 
(b)  Design Standard. Accessways must meet the following design standards: 
(i)  Accessways must be a minimum of eight feet in width; 
(ii)  Public accessways must be constructed in accordance with the Public Works Construction Code; 
(iii)  Private accessways must be constructed of asphalt, concrete or a pervious surface such as pervious asphalt or concrete, pavers or grasscrete, but not gravel or woody material; 
(iv)  Accessways must meet ADA standards applicable at time of construction or alteration; 
(v)  Accessways must be provided as a connection between the development's walkway and bikeway circulation system; 
(vi)  Accessways must not be gated to prevent pedestrian or bike access; 
(vii)  Outdoor Recreation Access Routes must be provided between the development's walkway and bikeway circulation system and parks, bikeways, and greenways where a bike or pedestrian path is designated; and 
(viii)  Must be constructed, owned and maintained by the property owner. 
(c)  Exceptions. The Accessway standard does not apply to the following: 
(i)  Where a bridge or culvert would be necessary to span a designated greenway or wetland to provide a connection, the City may limit the number and location of accessways to reduce the impact on the greenway or wetland; and 
(ii)  Accessways to undeveloped parcels or undeveloped transit facilities need not be constructed at the time the subject property is developed. In such cases the applicant for development must enter into a written agreement with the City guaranteeing future performance by the applicant and any successors in interest of the property being developed to construct an accessway when the adjacent undeveloped parcel is developed. The agreement recorded is subject to the City's review and approval. 
(9)  Carports and Garages. Common wall uses must provide Carports and Garage features as follows: 
(a)  At least one garage space must be provided for each duplex or townhouse. The form, materials, color, and construction must be compatible with the unit served; and 
(b)  If carports or garages are provided for multi-family development, the form, materials, color, and construction must be compatible with the complex they serve. 
(10)  Safety and Security. Common wall units must provide safety and security features as follows: 
(a)  Private outdoor areas must be separated from shared outdoor areas and children's play areas with elements such as walls, buildings, landscaping, and changes in grade in a manner which enables residents to utilize these areas as an extension of their units; 
(b)  Windows must be located to encourage watching over entry areas, shared outdoor areas, walkways and parking areas; 
(c)  An outdoor lighting system must be provided which facilitates police observation and resident observation through strategic location, orientation and brightness without shining into residential units, public rights-of-way, or fish and wildlife habitat areas; 
(d)  An identification system must be established which clearly orients visitors and emergency services as to the location of residential units. Where possible, this system must be evident from the primary vehicle entryway; and 
(e)  The safety and security standard does not apply to duplexes and townhouses. 
(11)  Service, Delivery and Screening. Common wall uses must provide service, delivery, and screening features as follows: 
(a)  Provisions for postal delivery must be conveniently located and efficiently designed for residents and mail delivery personnel; 
(b)  Safe pedestrian access from unit entries to postal delivery areas, shared activity areas, and parking areas must be provided. Elements include, but not limited to: 
(i)  Concrete paths; 
(ii)  Raised walkways; and 
(iii)  Bark chip trails 
(c)  Above grade and on-grade electrical and mechanical equipment such as transformers, heat pumps and air conditioners must be screened with sight obscuring fences, walls or landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 15, 6-22-20)  
COMMERCIAL DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
TDC 73A.300. - Commercial Design Standards. 
The following standards are minimum requirements for commercial development in all zones, except the Mixed-Use Commercial (MCU) zone, which has its own standards: 
(1)  Walkways. Commercial development must provide walkways as follows: 
(a)  Walkways must be a minimum of six feet in width; 
(b)  Walkways must be constructed of asphalt, concrete, or a pervious surface such as pavers or grasscrete (not gravel or woody material); 
(c)  Walkways must meet ADA standards applicable at time of construction or alteration; 
(d)  Walkways must be provided between the main building entrances and other on-site buildings, accessways, and sidewalks along the public right-of-way; 
(e)  Walkways through parking areas, drive aisles, and loading areas must be visibly raised and of a different appearance than the adjacent paved vehicular areas; 
(f)  Bikeways must be provided that link building entrances and bike facilities on the site with adjoining public right-of-way and accessways; and 
(g)  Outdoor Recreation Access Routes must be provided between the development's walkway and bikeway circulation system and parks, bikeways and greenways where a bike or pedestrian path is designated. 
(2)  Accessways. 
(a)  When Required. Accessways are required to be constructed when a common wall development is adjacent to any of the following: 
(i)  Residential property; 
(ii)  Commercial property; 
(iii)  Areas intended for public use, such as schools and parks; and 
(iv)  Collector or arterial streets where transit stops or bike lanes are provided or designated. 
(b)  Design Standard. Accessways must meet the following design standards: 
(i)  Accessways must be a minimum of eight feet in width; 
(ii)  Public accessways must be constructed in accordance with the Public Works Construction Code; 
(iii)  Private accessways must be constructed of asphalt, concrete or a pervious surface such as pervious asphalt or concrete, pavers or grasscrete, but not gravel or woody material; 
(iv)  Accessways must meet ADA standards applicable at time of construction or alteration; 
(v)  Accessways must be provided as a connection between the development's walkway and bikeway circulation system; 
(vi)  Accessways must not be gated to prevent pedestrian or bike access; 
(vii)  Outdoor Recreation Access Routes must be provided between the development's walkway and bikeway circulation system and parks, bikeways, and greenways where a bike or pedestrian path is designated; and 
(viii)  Must be constructed, owned and maintained by the property owner. 
(c)  Exceptions. The Accessway standard does not apply to the following: 
(i)  Where a bridge or culvert would be necessary to span a designated greenway or wetland to provide a connection, the City may limit the number and location of accessways to reduce the impact on the greenway or wetland; and 
(ii)  Accessways to undeveloped parcels or undeveloped transit facilities need not be constructed at the time the subject property is developed. In such cases the applicant for development must enter into a written agreement with the City guaranteeing future performance by the applicant and any successors in interest of the property being developed to construct an accessway when the adjacent undeveloped parcel is developed. The agreement recorded is subject to the City's review and approval. 
(3)  Drive-up Uses. Drive-up uses must comply with the following: 
(a)  Provide a minimum stacking area clear of the public right-of-way and parking lot aisles from the window serving the vehicles as follows: 
(i)  Banks—Each lane must be 100 feet long; 
(ii)  Restaurants—Each lane must be 160 feet long; and 
(iii)  Other uses—Each lane must be between 80 and 160 feet long, as determined by the City. 
(b)  Stacking area must not interfere with safe and efficient access to other parking areas on the property. 
(c)  Drive-up aisles and windows must be a minimum of 50 feet from residential zones. 
(d)  The width and turning radius of drive-up aisles must be approved by the City. 
(e)  A wall or other visual or acoustic may be required by the City. 
(4)  Safety and Security. Commercial development must provide safety and security features as follows: 
(a)  Locate windows and provide lighting in a manner that enables tenants, employees, and police to watch over pedestrian, parking, and loading areas; 
(b)  Locate windows and interior lighting to enable surveillance of interior activity from the public right-of-way; 
(c)  Locate, orient, and select exterior lighting to facilitate surveillance of on-site activities from the public right-of-way without shining into public rights-of-way or fish and wildlife habitat areas; 
(d)  Provide an identification system which clearly locates buildings and their entries for patrons and emergency services; and 
(e)  Above ground sewer or water pumping stations, pressure reading stations, water reservoirs, electrical substations, and above ground natural gas pumping stations must provide a minimum six foot tall security fence or wall. 
(5)  Service, Delivery, and Screening. Commercial development must provide service, delivery, and screening features as follows: 
(a)  Above grade and on-grade electrical and mechanical equipment such as transformers, heat pumps and air conditioners must be screened with sight obscuring fences, walls or landscaping; 
(b)  Outdoor storage must be screened with a sight obscuring fence, wall, berm or dense evergreen landscaping; and 
(c)  Above ground pumping stations, pressure reading stations, water reservoirs; electrical substations, and above ground natural gas pumping stations must be screened with sight-obscuring fences or walls and landscaping. 
(6)  Adjacent to Transit. Commercial development adjacent to transit must comply with the following: 
(a)  Development on a transit street designated in TDC Chapter 11 (Figure 11-5) must provide either a transit stop pad on-site, or an on-site or public sidewalk connection to a transit stop along the subject property's frontage on the transit street. 
(b)  Development abutting major transit stops as designated in TDC Chapter 11 (Figure 11-5) must: 
(i)  Locate any portion of a building within 20 feet of the major transit stop or provide a pedestrian plaza at the transit stop; 
(ii)  Provide a reasonably direct pedestrian connection between the major transit stop and a building entrance on the site; 
(iii)  Provide a transit passenger landing pad accessible to disabled persons; 
(iv)  Provide an easement or dedication for a passenger shelter as determined by the City; and 
(v)  Provide lighting at the major transit stop. 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 16, 6-22-20)  
TDC 73A.400 - Mixed Use Commercial Design Applicability; Exceptions. 
(1)  Applicability. The mixed-use design standards apply to: 
(a)  New buildings in the Mixed-Use Commercial (MUC) zone. 
(b)  Expansion or substantial exterior remodeling of existing non-residential development in the Mixed-Use Commercial (MUC) zone which is greater than 50 percent of the building's gross floor area or alters any facade visible from a public or private street frontage by more than 50 percent. 
(2)  Exceptions: The City Manager may allow exceptions to these standards as determined through the Architectural Review process, if the physical characteristics of the site or existing structure (e.g., steep slopes, wetlands, other bodies of water, trees or other significant natural features of the site, buildings or other existing development, utility lines and easements, etc.) make compliance with the standard impractical. 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 17, 6-22-20)  
TDC 73A.410 - Mixed Use Commercial Design Standards. 
The following are the minimum standards for development in the Mixed-Use Commercial zone. 
(1)  Walkways. Mixed-Use Commercial zone development must provide walkways as follows: 
(a)  Walkways must be a minimum of six feet in width; 
(b)  Walkways must be constructed with scored concrete or modular paving materials; 
(c)  Walkways must meet ADA standards applicable at time of construction or alteration; 
(d)  Walkways must be continuous and connect all building entrances within the development to one another and to: all public streets or private access abutting the site: all parking areas, storage areas, recreational facilities and common areas associated with the development; and adjacent development, transit stops, and public greenways and parks; and 
(e)  Walkways must provide connection to an abutting street every 200 linear feet of frontage. 
(2)  Parking Location. Parking for all Mixed-Use Commercial zone uses must be provided within garages or parking lots as follows: 
(a)  Parking and loading areas are prohibited between the public street and proposed building(s); 
(b)  Parking is allowed on the side or rear of proposed building(s). If located on the side, the parking area may not exceed 50 percent of the total frontage of the site; 
(c)  Parking must be setback a minimum of 50 feet from the front property line; and 
(d)  Parking required for residential uses must be provided on the development site of the primary structure. 
(3)  Drive-up Uses. Drive-up uses must comply with the following: 
(a)  Provide a minimum stacking area clear of the public right-of-way and parking lot aisles from the window serving the vehicles as follows: 
(i)  Banks—Each lane must be 100 feet long; 
(ii)  Restaurants—Each lane must be 160 feet long; and 
(iii)  Other uses—Each lane must be between 80 and 160 feet long, as determined by the City. 
(b)  Stacking area must not interfere with safe and efficient access to other parking areas on the property. 
(c)  Drive-up aisles and windows must be a minimum of 50 feet from residential zones. 
(d)  The width and turning radius of drive-up aisles must be approved by the City. 
(e)  A wall or other visual or acoustic may be required by the City. 
(4)  Adjacent to Transit. Mixed-Use Commercial zone development adjacent to transit must comply with the following: 
(a)  Development on a transit street designated in TDC Chapter 11 (Figure 11-5) must provide either a transit stop pad on-site, or an on-site or public sidewalk connection to a transit stop along the subject property's frontage on the transit street. 
(b)  Development abutting major transit stops as designated in TDC Chapter 11 (Figure 11-5) must: 
(i)  Locate any portion of a building within 20 feet of the major transit stop or provide a pedestrian plaza at the transit stop; 
(ii)  Provide a reasonably direct pedestrian connection between the major transit stop and a building entrance on the site; 
(iii)  Provide a transit passenger landing pad accessible to disabled persons; 
(iv)  Provide an easement or dedication for a passenger shelter as determined by the City; and 
(v)  Provide lighting at the major transit stop. 
(5)  Building Location. Buildings must occupy a minimum of 50 percent of arterial and collector street frontages. Buildings must be located at public street intersections on arterials and collectors. 
(6)  Building Design Standards. Mixed Use Commercial Zone development must meet the following building design standards. 
(a)  Non-residential buildings and mixed-use buildings where 50 percent or less of the gross floor area of the building is residential must comply with the following: 
(i)  Ground floor windows. Street-facing elevations must include a minimum of 50 percent of the wall area with windows that allow views into working areas or lobbies, pedestrian entrances, or display windows set into the wall. The ground floor wall area shall be measured from three feet above grade to nine feet above grade the entire width of the street-facing elevation. Up to 50 percent of the ground floor window requirement may be met on an adjoining elevation as long as all of the requirement is located at a building corner. 
(ii)  Building Facade. Street-facing facades must extend no more than 50 feet without providing at least one of the following features: 
(A)  A variation in building materials; 
(B)  A building offset of at least one foot; 
(C)  A wall area that is entirely separated from other wall areas by a projection, such as an arcade; or 
(D)  By other design features that reflect the building's structural system. 
(iii)  Weather Protection. Weather protection for pedestrians, such as awnings, canopies and arcades, must be provided at building entrances and extend a minimum of six feet over the sidewalk connection and must not obstruct or prevent the placement of street trees, tree canopies or other improvements within the public right-of-way. Weather protection is encouraged along building frontages abutting a public sidewalk. 
(iv)  Building Materials. The following are not permitted as exterior finish materials for building walls: plain concrete block, plain concrete, corrugated metal, plywood, sheet pressboard or vinyl siding. 
(A)  Exceptions. Foundation material may be plain concrete or plain concrete block where the foundation material is not revealed for more than two feet above grade. 
(v)  Roof Lines. Except in the case of a building entrance feature, roofs must be designed as an extension of the primary materials used for the building and should respect the building's structural system and architectural style. False fronts and false roofs are not permitted. 
(vi)  Roof-mounted Equipment. Roof-mounted equipment must be screened from view from adjacent public streets. Screening shall be integrated with exterior building design. Satellite dishes and other communication equipment must be set back or positioned on a roof so that exposure from adjacent public streets is minimized. 
(b)  Residential-only, and mixed-use buildings where 50.1 percent or more of the gross floor area of the building is residential, must comply with the following: 
(i)  Front Facades. All primary ground-floor common entries or individual unit entries must be oriented to the street, not to the interior or to a parking lot. The front facade of large structures must be divided into smaller areas or planes of 500 square feet or less. Trim must be used to mark all building roof lines, porches, windows and doors. Projecting features such as porches, balconies, bays and dormer windows and roof pediments are encouraged, to create visual interest. 
(ii)  Main Entrance. Primary structures must be oriented with their main entrance facing the street upon which the project fronts. If the site is on a corner, it may have its main entrance oriented to either street or at the corner. 
(iii)  Unit Definition. Each dwelling unit must be emphasized with a roof dormer or bay windows on the street-facing elevation, or by providing a roof gable or porch that faces the street. Ground-level dwelling units must include porches with no dimension less than six feet and an area of at least 48 square feet. 
(iv)  Building Materials. The following are not permitted as exterior finish materials for building walls: plain concrete block, plain concrete, corrugated metal, plywood, sheet pressboard or vinyl siding. 
(A)  Exceptions. Foundation material may be plain concrete or plain concrete block where the foundation material is not revealed for more than two feet above grade. 
(v)  Roof Lines. Roofline offsets must be provided at intervals of 40 feet or less to create variety in the massing of structures and to relieve the effect of a single, long roof. Offsets must be a minimum four foot variation, either vertically or horizontally, from the gutter line. 
(vi)  Roof-mounted Equipment. Roof-mounted equipment must be screened from view from adjacent public streets. Screening shall be integrated with exterior building design. Satellite dishes and other communication equipment must be set back or positioned on a roof so that exposure from adjacent public streets is minimized. 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 18, 6-22-20)  
INDUSTRIAL DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
TDC 73A.500. - Industrial Design Standards. 
The following standards are minimum requirements for industrial development in all zones, except the Mixed-Use Commercial (MUC) zone, which has its own standards: 
(1)  Walkways. Industrial development must provide walkways as follows: 
(a)  Walkways must be a minimum of five feet in width; 
(b)  Walkways must be constructed of asphalt, concrete, or a pervious surface such as pavers or grasscrete (not gravel or woody material); 
(c)  Walkways must meet ADA standards applicable at time of construction or alteration; 
(e)  Walkways must be provided between the main building entrances and other on-site buildings, accessways, and sidewalks along the public right-of-way; 
(f)  Walkways through parking areas, drive aisles, and loading areas must be of a different appearance than the adjacent paved vehicular areas; and 
(g)  Outdoor Recreation Access Routes must be provided between the development's walkway and bikeway circulation system and parks, bikeways and greenways where a bike or pedestrian path is designated. 
(2)  Accessways. 
(a)  When Required. Accessways are required to be constructed when a common wall development is adjacent to any of the following: 
(i)  Residential property; 
(ii)  Commercial property; 
(iii)  Areas intended for public use, such as schools and parks; and 
(iv)  Collector or arterial streets where transit stops or bike lanes are provided or designated. 
(b)  Design Standard. Accessways must meet the following design standards: 
(i)  Accessways must be a minimum of eight feet in width; 
(ii)  Public accessways must be constructed in accordance with the Public Works Construction Code; 
(iii)  Private accessways must be constructed of asphalt, concrete or a pervious surface such as pervious asphalt or concrete, pavers or grasscrete, but not gravel or woody material; 
(iv)  Accessways must meet ADA standards applicable at time of construction or alteration; 
(v)  Accessways must be provided as a connection between the development's walkway and bikeway circulation system; 
(vi)  Accessways may be gated for security purposes; 
(vii)  Outdoor Recreation Access Routes must be provided between the development's walkway and bikeway circulation system and parks, bikeways, and greenways where a bike or pedestrian path is designated; and 
(viii)  Must be constructed, owned and maintained by the property owner. 
(c)  Exceptions. The Accessway standard does not apply to the following: 
(i)  Where a bridge or culvert would be necessary to span a designated greenway or wetland to provide a connection, the City may limit the number and location of accessways to reduce the impact on the greenway or wetland; and 
(ii)  Accessways to undeveloped parcels or undeveloped transit facilities need not be constructed at the time the subject property is developed. In such cases the applicant for development must enter into a written agreement with the City guaranteeing future performance by the applicant and any successors in interest of the property being developed to construct an accessway when the adjacent undeveloped parcel is developed. The agreement recorded is subject to the City's review and approval. 
(3)  Drive-up Uses. Drive-up uses must comply with the following: 
(a)  Must provide a minimum stacking area clear of the public right-of-way and parking lot aisles from the window serving the vehicles as follows: 
(i)  Banks—each lane must be 100 feet long; 
(ii)  Restaurants—each lane must be 160 feet long; and 
(iii)  Other uses—each lane must be between 80 and 160 feet long, as determined by the City. 
(b)  Stacking area must not interfere with safe and efficient access to other parking areas on the property; 
(c)  Drive-up aisles and windows must be a minimum of 50 feet from residential zones. 
(d)  The width and turning radius of drive-up aisles must be approved by the City; and 
(e)  A wall or other visual or acoustic may be required by the City. 
(4)  Safety and Security. Industrial development must provide safety and security features as follows: 
(a)  Locate windows and provide lighting in a manner that enables tenants, employees, and police to watch over pedestrian, parking, and loading areas; 
(b)  Locate windows and interior lighting to enable surveillance of interior activity from the public right-of-way; 
(c)  Locate, orient, and select exterior lighting to facilitate surveillance of on-site activities from the public right-of-way without shining into public rights-of-way or fish and wildlife habitat areas; 
(d)  Provide an identification system which clearly locates buildings and their entries for patrons and emergency services; and 
(e)  Above ground sewer or water pumping stations, pressure reading stations, water reservoirs, electrical substations, and above ground natural gas pumping stations must provide a minimum six foot tall security fence or wall. 
(5)  Service, Delivery, and Screening. Industrial development must provide service, delivery, and screening features as follows: 
(a)  Above grade and on-grade electrical and mechanical equipment such as transformers, heat pumps and air conditioners must be screened with sight obscuring fences, walls or landscaping; 
(b)  Outdoor storage must be screened with a sight obscuring fence, wall, berm or dense evergreen landscaping; and 
(c)  Above ground pumping stations, pressure reading stations, water reservoirs; electrical substations, and above ground natural gas pumping stations must be screened with sight-obscuring fences or walls and landscaping. 
(6)  Adjacent to Transit. Industrial development adjacent to transit must comply with the following: 
(a)  Development on a transit street designated in TDC Chapter 11 (Figure 11-5) must provide either a transit stop pad on-site, or an on-site or public sidewalk connection to a transit stop along the subject property's frontage on the transit street; and 
(b)  Development abutting major transit stops as designated in TDC Chapter 11 (Figure 11-5) must: 
(i)  Locate any portion of a building within 20 feet of the major transit stop or provide a pedestrian plaza at the transit stop; 
(ii)  Provide a reasonably direct pedestrian connection between the major transit stop and a building entrance on the site; 
(iii)  Provide a transit passenger landing pad accessible to disabled persons; 
(iv)  Provide an easement or dedication for a passenger shelter as determined by the City; and 
(v)  Provide lighting at the major transit stop. 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 19, 6-22-20) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 19, adopted June 22, 2020, renumbered § 73A-400 as § 73A-500.  
INSTITUTIONAL DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
TDC 73A.600. - Institutional Design Standards. 
The following standards are minimum requirements for institutional development in all zones: 
(1)  Walkways. Institutional development must provide walkways as follows: 
(a)  Walkways must be a minimum of six feet in width; 
(b)  Walkways must be constructed of asphalt, concrete, or a pervious surface such as pavers or grasscrete (not gravel or woody material); 
(c)  Walkways must meet ADA standards applicable at time of construction or alteration; 
(d)  Walkways must be provided between the main building entrances and other on-site buildings, accessways, and sidewalks along the public right-of-way; 
(e)  Walkways through parking areas, drive aisles, and loading areas must be visibly raised and of a different appearance than the adjacent paved vehicular areas; 
(f)  Bikeways must be provided that link building entrances and bike facilities on the site with adjoining public right-of-way and accessways; and 
(g)  Outdoor Recreation Access Routes must be provided between the development's walkway and bikeway circulation system and parks, bikeways and greenways where a bike or pedestrian path is designated. 
(2)  Accessways. 
(a)  When Required. Accessways are required to be constructed when a common wall development is adjacent to any of the following: 
(i)  Residential property; 
(ii)  Commercial property; 
(iii)  Areas intended for public use, such as schools and parks; and 
(iv)  Collector or arterial streets where transit stops or bike lanes are provided or designated. 
(b)  Design Standard. Accessways must meet the following design standards: 
(i)  Accessways must be a minimum of eight feet in width; 
(ii)  Public accessways must be constructed in accordance with the Public Works Construction Code; 
(iii)  Private accessways must be constructed of asphalt, concrete or a pervious surface such as pervious asphalt or concrete, pavers or grasscrete, but not gravel or woody material; 
(iv)  Accessways must meet ADA standards applicable at time of construction or alteration; 
(v)  Accessways must be provided as a connection between the development's walkway and bikeway circulation system; 
(vi)  Accessways must not be gated to prevent pedestrian or bike access; 
(vii)  Outdoor Recreation Access Routes must be provided between the development's walkway and bikeway circulation system and parks, bikeways, and greenways where a bike or pedestrian path is designated; and 
(viii)  Must be constructed, owned and maintained by the property owner. 
(c)  Exceptions. The Accessway standard does not apply to the following: 
(i)  Where a bridge or culvert would be necessary to span a designated greenway or wetland to provide a connection, the City may limit the number and location of accessways to reduce the impact on the greenway or wetland; and 
(ii)  Accessways to undeveloped parcels or undeveloped transit facilities need not be constructed at the time the subject property is developed. In such cases the applicant for development must enter into a written agreement with the City guaranteeing future performance by the applicant and any successors in interest of the property being developed to construct an accessway when the adjacent undeveloped parcel is developed. The agreement recorded is subject to the City's review and approval. 
(3)  Safety and Security. Institutional development must provide safety and security features as follows: 
(a)  Locate windows and provide lighting in a manner that enables tenants, employees, and police to watch over pedestrian, parking, and loading areas; 
(b)  Locate windows and interior lighting to enable surveillance of interior activity from the public right-of-way; 
(c)  Locate, orient, and select exterior lighting to facilitate surveillance of on-site activities from the public right-of-way without shining into public rights-of-way or fish and wildlife habitat areas; 
(d)  Provide an identification system which clearly locates buildings and their entries for patrons and emergency services; and 
(e)  Above ground sewer or water pumping stations, pressure reading stations, water reservoirs, electrical substations, and above ground natural gas pumping stations must provide a minimum six foot tall security fence or wall. 
(4)  Service, Delivery, and Screening. Institutional development must provide service, delivery, and screening features as follows: 
(a)  Above grade and on-grade electrical and mechanical equipment such as transformers, heat pumps and air conditioners must be screened with sight obscuring fences, walls or landscaping; 
(b)  Outdoor storage must be screened with a sight obscuring fence, wall, berm or dense evergreen landscaping; and 
(c)  Above ground pumping stations, pressure reading stations, water reservoirs; electrical substations, and above ground natural gas pumping stations must be screened with sight-obscuring fences or walls and landscaping. 
(5)  Adjacent to Transit. Institutional development adjacent to transit must comply with the following: 
(a)  Development on a transit street designated in TDC Chapter 11 (Figure 11-5) must provide either a transit stop pad on-site, or an on-site or public sidewalk connection to a transit stop along the subject property's frontage on the transit street; and 
(b)  Development abutting major transit stops as designated in TDC Chapter 11 (Figure 11-5) must: 
(i)  Locate any portion of a building within 20 feet of the major transit stop or provide a pedestrian plaza at the transit stop; 
(ii)  Provide a reasonably direct pedestrian connection between the major transit stop and a building entrance on the site; 
(iii)  Provide a transit passenger landing pad accessible to disabled persons; 
(iv)  Provide an easement or dedication for a passenger shelter as determined by the City; and 
(v)  Provide lighting at the major transit stop. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 19, 6-22-20) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 20, adopted June 22, 2020, renumbered § 73A-500 as § 73A-600.  
CHAPTER 73B - LANDSCAPING STANDARDS 
 
TDC 73B.010. - Landscape Standards Purpose and Objectives. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish standards for landscaping within Tualatin in order to enhance the environmental and aesthetic quality of the City. 
(2)  Objectives. The objectives of this Chapter are to: 
(a)  Encourage the retention and protection of existing trees and requiring the planting of trees in new developments; 
(b)  Use trees and other landscaping materials to temper the effects of the sun, wind, noise, and air pollution. 
(c)  Use trees and other landscaping materials to define spaces and the uses of specific areas; and 
(d)  Use trees and other landscaping materials as a unifying element within the urban environment.  
TDC 73B.020. - Landscape Area Standards Minimum Areas by Use and Zone. 
The following are the minimum areas required to be landscaped for each use and zone: 
Zone 	Minimum Area Requirement* 	Minimum Area Requirement with dedication for a fish and wildlife habitat* 
(1) RL, RML, RMH, RH and RH/HR zones—Permitted Uses 	None 	None 
(2) RL, RML, RMH, RH and RH/HR zones—Conditional Uses, except Small Lot Subdivisions 	25 percent of the total area to be developed 	20 percent of the total area to be developed 
(3) CO, CR, CC, CG, ML and MG zones except within the Core Area Parking District—All uses 	15 percent of the total area to be developed 	12.5 percent of the total area to be developed 
(4) CO, CR, CC, CG, MUC, ML and MG zones within the Core Area Parking District—All uses 	10 percent of the total area to be developed 	7.5 percent of the total area to be developed 
(5) IN, CN, CO/MR, MC and MP zones—All uses 	25 percent of the total area to be developed 	22.5 percent of the total area to be developed 
(6) Industrial Business Park Overlay District and MBP—must be approved through Industrial Master Plans 	20 percent of the total area to be developed 	Not applicable 
* For properties within the Hedges Creek Wetland Protection District which have signed the "Wetlands Mitigation Agreement," the improved or unimproved wetland buffer area may reduce the required landscaping to 12.5 percent as long as all other landscape requirements are met. 
 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 21, 6-22-20)  
TDC 73B.030. - Additional Minimum Landscaping Requirements for Common Wall Residential Uses. 
(1)  General. In addition to requirements in TDC 73B.020, Common Wall Uses must comply with the following additional standards: 
(a)  All areas not occupied by buildings, parking spaces, driveways, drive aisles, pedestrian areas, or undisturbed natural areas must be landscaped. 
(i)  This standard does not apply to areas subject to the Hedges Creek Wetlands Mitigation Agreement. 
(b)  Duplex and Townhouse developments may include hard surfaces in outdoor areas such as patios and storage areas as determined in the Architectural Review process.  
TDC 73B.040. - Additional Minimum Landscaping Requirements for Commercial Uses. 
(1)  General. In addition to requirements in TDC 73B.020, commercial uses, except those located in the Mixed-Use Commercial (MUC) zone, must comply with the following: 
(a)  All areas not occupied by buildings, parking spaces, driveways, drive aisles, pedestrian areas, or undisturbed natural areas must be landscaped. 
(i)  This standard does not apply to areas subject to the Hedges Creek Wetlands Mitigation Agreement. 
(b)  Minimum 5-foot-wide landscaped area must be located along all building perimeters viewable by the general public from parking lots or the public right-of-way, but the following may be used instead of the 5-foot-wide landscaped area requirement: 
(i)  Pedestrian amenities such as landscaped plazas and arcades; and 
(ii)  Areas developed with pavers, bricks, or other surfaces, for exclusive pedestrian use and contain pedestrian amenities, such as benches, tables with umbrellas, children's play areas, shade trees, canopies. 
(c)  Five-foot wide landscaped area requirement does not apply to: 
(i)  Loading areas; 
(ii)  Bicycle parking areas; 
(iii)  Pedestrian egress/ingress locations; and 
(iv)  Where the distance along a wall between two vehicle or pedestrian access openings (such as entry doors, garage doors, carports and pedestrian corridors) is less than eight feet. 
(d)  Development that abuts an RL or MP Zone must have landscaping approved through Architectural Review and must provide and perpetually maintain dense, evergreen landscaped buffers between allowed uses and the adjacent RL and MP zones. 
(2)  Manufacturing Park (MP)—Wetland Buffer. Wetland buffer areas up to 50 feet in width may be counted toward the required percentage of site landscaping, subject to the following: 
(a)  Area counted as landscaping is limited to a maximum of two and one-half percent (of the total land area to be developed; 
(b)  Area to be counted as landscape must be within the boundaries of the subject property; 
(c)  No credit may be claimed for wetland buffer areas lying outside the lot lines of the subject parcel; 
(d)  Where wetlands mitigation in the buffer has not yet occurred at the time of development, the developer must perform, or bear the cost of, all necessary mitigation work in the course of site development, in accordance with a Removal/Fill Permit or permits issued by the Oregon Division of State Lands and the US Army Corps of Engineers and the Unified Sewerage Agency; and 
(e)  Where wetlands mitigation in the buffer has already been performed in accordance with a Removal/Fill Permit or permits issued by the Oregon Division of State Lands and the US Army Corps of Engineers, the developer must include an enhanced mitigation plan approved by the Oregon Division of State Lands and the Unified Sewerage Agency as part of the Architectural Review submittal. The developer must complete all work required by the enhanced wetland mitigation plan in conjunction with development of the site. 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 22, 6-22-20)  
TDC 73B.050 - Additional Minimum Landscaping Requirements for all uses in the Mixed Use Commercial Zone. 
(1)  General. In addition to requirements in TDC 73B.020, all uses within the Mixed-Use Commercial (MUC) zone, must comply with the following: 
(a)  All areas not occupied by buildings, parking spaces, driveways, drive aisles, pedestrian areas, or undisturbed natural areas must be landscaped: 
(i)  This standard does not apply to areas subject to the Hedges Creek Wetlands Mitigation Agreement. 
(b)  A landscape area may be occupied by utilities, screening, sidewalks, bikeways; and 
(c)  Landscape screening provisions are superseded by the vision clearance requirements of Figure 73-2. 
(2)  Standards. The matrices in Tables 73B-1 and 73B-2 must be used in calculating widths of landscape buffer areas, as well as screening improvements to be installed between proposed uses and abutting uses. Landscape buffers are not required between abutting uses that are of a different type when the uses are separated by a street. 
(a)  Buffer. The minimum improvements within a buffer area must include landscaping and screening specified in Tables 73B-1 and 73B-2. Landscape improvements must meet the following specifications: 
(i)  At least one row of trees must be planted. Deciduous trees must be a minimum of two-inch caliper at four feet in height and evergreen trees must be a minimum height of five feet high at the time of planting. Spacing for trees must be as follows: 
(A)  Small or narrow-stature trees, under 25 feet tall or less than 16 feet wide at maturity must be spaced not more than 15 feet apart; 
(B)  Medium-sized trees between 25 feet to 40 feet tall and with 16 feet to 35 feet wide branching at maturity must be spaced not more than 30 feet apart; 
(C)  Large trees, over 40 feet tall and with more than 35 feet wide branching at maturity, must be spaced not more than 30 feet apart. 
(ii)  At least ten five-gallon shrubs or 20 one-gallon shrubs must be planted for each 1,000 square feet of required buffer area; 
(iii)  The remaining area must be planted in lawn or other living ground cover. 
(b)  Screening. Where screening is specified in Tables 73B-1 and 73B-2, the following standards apply, in addition to those required for buffering: 
(i)  The prescribed heights of required screening must be measured from the actual adjoining level of finished grade, except that where parking, loading, storage or similar areas are located above finished grade, the height of fences, walls or landscaping required to screen such areas or space shall be measured from the level of such improvements. When the use to be screened is located downhill from the adjoining use, the prescribed heights of required fences, walls, or landscape screening must be measured from the actual grade of the adjoining property. In this case, fences and walls may exceed the permitted six foot height at the discretion of the City Manager, as a condition of approval. When steep grades make the installation of walls, fences, or landscaping to the required height impractical, a detailed landscape/screening plan must be submitted for approval; 
(ii)  A hedge of narrow or broad leaf evergreen shrubs must be planted which will form a four-foot high continuous screen within two years of planting; or 
(iii)  An earthen berm planted with narrow or broad leaf evergreen shrubs must be provided which will form a continuous screen of the height specified in Table 73B-2 within two years. The unplanted portion of the berm shall be planted in lawn or other living ground cover: or 
(iv)  A fence or wall of the height specified in Table 73B-2 must be constructed of materials commonly used in the construction offences and walls such as wood, stone, rock or brick, or as determined in the Architectural Review process and provide a continuous sight obscuring screen. 
(A)  Walls must be a minimum of six inches thick. 
(B)  Fence or wall height may not exceed three feet in height in a required front yard or six feet in height in required front yards adjacent to designated arterial or collector streets. 
(C)  An evergreen hedge or other dense evergreen landscaping may satisfy a requirement for a sight-obscuring fence where required. 
(D)  An earthen berm and fence or wall combination must not exceed six-feet in height. 
Table 73B-1R 
Required Landscape Buffer Between Uses 
		Proposed Improvement 
Abutting 		Residential 	Commercial 	Institutional 	Parking Lots 
4—50 spaces 	Parking Lots 
50+ spaces 
	Residential 	— 	D 	D 	C 	D 
	Commercial 	C 	— 	D 	— 	— 
	Industrial 	D 	A 	D 	— 	— 
	Parking Lots 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 
	Arterial Streets 	A 	— 	A 	— 	— 
 
	Options 	Width (feet) 	Trees (per linear feet of buffer) 	Shrubs or Groundcover 	Screening 
A 	— 	10 	— 	Lawn/living groundcover 	— 
B 	— 	10 	20 feet min/30 feet max spacing 	Lawn/living groundcover 	— 
C 	1 	10 	15 feet min/30 feet max spacing 	Shrubs 	4 feet hedges 
	2 	8 		Shrubs 	5 feet fence 
	3 	6 		Shrubs 	6 feet wall 
D 	1 	20 	10 feet min/20 feet max spacing 	Shrubs 	6 feet hedge 
	2 	15 		Shrubs 	6 feet fence 
	3 	10 		Shrubs 	6 feet wall 
 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 23, 6-22-20)  
TDC 73B.060. - Additional Minimum Landscaping Requirements for Industrial Uses. 
(1)  General. In addition to requirements in TDC 73B.020, industrial uses must comply with the following: 
(a)  All areas not occupied by buildings, parking spaces, driveways, drive aisles, pedestrian areas, or undisturbed natural areas must be landscaped. 
(i)  This standard does not apply to areas subject to the Hedges Creek Wetlands Mitigation Agreement. 
(b)  Minimum 5-foot-wide landscaped area must be located along all building perimeters viewable by the general public from parking lots or the public right-of-way, but the following may be used instead of the 5-foot-wide landscaped area requirement: 
(i)  Pedestrian amenities such as landscaped plazas and arcades; and 
(ii)  Areas developed with pavers, bricks, or other surfaces, for exclusive pedestrian use and contain pedestrian amenities, such as benches, tables with umbrellas, children's play areas, shade trees, canopies. 
(c)  Five-foot-wide landscaped area requirement does not apply to: 
(i)  Loading areas, 
(ii)  Bicycle parking areas, 
(iii)  Pedestrian egress/ingress locations, and 
(iv)  Where the distance along a wall between two vehicle or pedestrian access openings (such as entry doors, garage doors, carports and pedestrian corridors) is less than eight feet. 
(d)  Development that abuts an RL or MP Zone must have landscaping approved through Architectural Review and must provide and perpetually maintain dense, evergreen landscaped buffers between allowed uses and the adjacent RL and MP zones. 
(2)  MP Area—Wetland Buffer. Wetland buffer areas up to 50 feet in width may be counted toward the required percentage of site landscaping, subject to the following: 
(a)  Area counted as landscaping is limited to a maximum of two and one-half percent of the total land area to be developed; 
(b)  Area to be counted as landscape must be within the boundaries of the subject property; 
(c)  No credit may be claimed for wetland buffer areas lying outside the lot lines of the subject parcel; 
(d)  Where wetlands mitigation in the buffer has not yet occurred at the time of development, the developer must perform, or bear the cost of, all necessary mitigation work in the course of site development, in accordance with a Removal/Fill Permit or permits issued by the Oregon Division of State Lands and the US Army Corps of Engineers and the Clean Water Services; and 
(e)  Where wetlands mitigation in the buffer has already been performed in accordance with a Removal/Fill Permit or permits issued by the Oregon Division of State Lands and the US Army Corps of Engineers, the developer must include an enhanced mitigation plan approved by the Oregon Division of State Lands and Clean Water Services, as part of the Architectural Review submittal. The developer must complete all work required by the enhanced wetland mitigation plan in conjunction with development of the site. 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 24, 6-22-20) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 24, adopted June 22, 2020, renumbered §§ 73B-050—73B-080 as §§ 73B-060—73B-090.  
TDC 73B.070. - Additional Minimum Landscaping Requirements for Institutional Uses. 
(1)  General. In addition to the requirements in TDC 73B.020, institutional uses comply with the following: 
(a)  All areas not occupied by buildings, parking spaces, driveways, drive aisles, pedestrian areas, or undisturbed natural areas must be landscaped. 
(i)  This standard does not apply to areas subject to the Hedges Creek Wetlands Mitigation Agreement. 
(b)  Minimum 5-foot-wide landscaped area must be located along all building perimeters viewable by the general public from parking lots or the public right-of-way, but the following may be used instead of the 5-foot-wide landscaped area requirement: 
(i)  Pedestrian amenities such as landscaped plazas and arcades; and 
(ii)  Areas developed with pavers, bricks, or other surfaces, for exclusive pedestrian use and contain pedestrian amenities, such as benches, tables with umbrellas, children's play areas, shade trees, canopies. 
(c)  Five-foot-wide landscaped area requirement does not apply to: 
(i)  Loading areas, 
(ii)  Bicycle parking areas, 
(iii)  Pedestrian egress/ingress locations, and 
(iv)  Where the distance along a wall between two vehicle or pedestrian access openings (such as entry doors, garage doors, carports and pedestrian corridors) is less than eight feet. 
(d)  Development that abuts an RL or MP Zone must have landscaping approved through Architectural Review and must provide and perpetually maintain dense, evergreen landscaped buffers between allowed uses and the adjacent RL and MP zones. 
(2)  MP Area—Wetland Buffer. Wetland buffer areas up to 50 feet in width may be counted toward the required percentage of site landscaping, subject to the following: 
(a)  Area counted as landscaping is limited to a maximum of two and one-half percent of the total land area to be developed; 
(b)  Area to be counted as landscape must be within the boundaries of the subject property; 
(c)  No credit may be claimed for wetland buffer areas lying outside the lot lines of the subject parcel; 
(d)  Where wetlands mitigation in the buffer has not yet occurred at the time of development, the developer must perform, or bear the cost of, all necessary mitigation work in the course of site development, in accordance with a Removal/Fill Permit or permits issued by the Oregon Division of State Lands and the US Army Corps of Engineers and Clean Water Services; and 
(e)  Where wetlands mitigation in the buffer has already been performed in accordance with a Removal/Fill Permit or permits issued by the Oregon Division of State Lands and the US Army Corps of Engineers, the developer must include an enhanced mitigation plan approved by the Oregon Division of State Lands and Clean Water Services as part of the Architectural Review submittal. The developer must complete all work required by the enhanced wetland mitigation plan in conjunction with development of the site. 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 25, 6-22-20) 
Editor's note— See editor's note, § 73B-060.  
TDC 73B.080. - Minimum Landscaping Standards for All Zones. 
The following are minimum standards for landscaping for all zones. 
(1) Required Landscape Areas 	 • Must be designed, constructed, installed, and maintained so that within three years the ground must be covered by living grass or other plant materials. 
 • The foliage crown of trees cannot be used to meet this requirement. 
 • A maximum of ten percent of the landscaped area may be covered with un-vegetated areas of bark chips, rock or stone. 
 • Must be installed in accordance with the provisions of the American National Standards Institute ANSI A300 (Part 1) (Latest Edition). 
 • Must be controlled by pruning, trimming, or otherwise so that: 
 • It will not interfere with designated pedestrian or vehicular access; and 
 • It will not constitute a traffic hazard because of reduced visibility. 
(2) Fences 	• Landscape plans that include fences must integrate any fencing into the plan to guide wild animals toward animal crossings under, over, or around transportation corridors. 
(3) Tree Preservation 	 • Trees and other plant materials to be retained must be identified on the landscape plan and grading plan. 
 • During construction: 
  ◦ Must provide above and below ground protection for existing trees and plant materials identified to remain; 
  ◦ Trees and plant materials identified for preservation must be protected by chain link or other sturdy fencing placed around the tree at the drip line; 
  ◦ If it is necessary to fence within the drip line, such fencing must be specified by a qualified arborist; 
  ◦ Top soil storage and construction material storage must not be located within the drip line of trees designated to be preserved; 
  ◦ Where site conditions make necessary a grading, building, paving, trenching, boring, digging, or other similar encroachment upon a preserved tree's drip-line area, such grading, paving, trenching, boring, digging, or similar encroachment must only be permitted under the direction of a qualified arborist. Such direction must assure that the health needs of trees within the preserved area can be met; and 
  ◦ Tree root ends must not remain exposed. 
 • Landscaping under preserved trees must be compatible with the retention and health of the preserved tree. 
 • When it is necessary for a preserved tree to be removed in accordance with TDC 33.110 (Tree Removal Permit) the landscaped area surrounding the tree or trees must be maintained and replanted with trees that relate to the present landscape plan, or if there is no landscape plan, then trees that are complementary with existing, landscape materials. Native trees are encouraged 
 • 100 percent of the area preserved under any tree or group of trees (Except for impervious surface areas) retained in the landscape plan must apply directly to the percentage of landscaping required for a development 
(4) Grading 	 • After completion of site grading, top-soil is to be restored to exposed cut and fill areas to provide a suitable base for seeding and planting. 
 • All planting areas must be graded to provide positive drainage. 
 • Soil, water, plant materials, mulch, or other materials must not be allowed to wash across roadways or walkways. 
 • Impervious surface drainage must be directed away from pedestrian walkways, dwelling units, buildings, outdoor private and shared areas and landscape areas except where the landscape area is a water quality facility. 
(5) Irrigation 	 • Landscaped areas must be irrigated with an automatic underground or drip irrigation system 
 • Exceptions: 
  ◦ Irrigation requirement does not apply to duplexes and townhouses. 
(6) Re-vegetation in Un-landscaped 
Areas 	 • Vegetation must be replanted in all areas where vegetation has been removed or damaged in areas not affected by the landscaping requirements and that are not to be occupied by structures or other improvements. 
 • Plant materials must be watered at intervals sufficient to ensure survival and growth for a minimum of two growing seasons. 
 • The use of native plant materials is encouraged to reduce irrigation and maintenance demands. 
 • Disturbed soils should be amended to an original or higher level of porosity to regain infiltration and stormwater storage capacity. 
 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 26, 6-22-20) 
Editor's note— See editor's note, § 73B-060.  
TDC 73B.090. - Minimum Standards Trees and Plants. 
The following minimum standards apply to the types of landscaping required to be installed for all zones. 
(1) Deciduous Shade Trees 	 • One and on-half inch caliper measured six inches above ground; 
 • Balled and burlapped; bare root trees will be acceptable to plant during their dormant season; 
 • Reach a mature height of 30 feet or more; 
 • Cast moderate to dense shade in summer; 
 • Live over 60 years; 
 • Do well in urban environments, tolerant of pollution and heat, and resistant to drought; 
 • Require little maintenance and mechanically strong; 
 • Insect- and disease-resistant; 
 • Require little pruning; and 
 • Barren of fruit production. 
(2) Deciduous Ornamental Trees 	 • One and on-half inch caliper measured six inches above ground; 
 • balled and burlapped; bare root trees will be acceptable to plant during their dormant season; and 
 • Healthy, disease-free, damage-free, well-branched stock, characteristic of the species 
(3) Coniferous Trees 	 • Five feet in height above ground; 
 • Balled and burlapped; bare root trees will be acceptable to plant during their dormant season; and 
 • Healthy, disease-free, damage-free, well-branched stock, characteristic of the species. 
(4) Evergreen and Deciduous Shrubs 	 • One to five gallon size; 
 • Healthy, disease-free, damage-free, well-branched stock, characteristic of the species; and 
 • Side of shrub with best foliage must be oriented to public view. 
(5) Groundcovers 	 • Fully rooted; 
 • Well branched or leafed; 
 • Healthy, disease-free, damage-free, well-branched stock, characteristic of the species; and 
 • English ivy (Hedera helix) is prohibited. 
(6) Lawns 	 • Consist of grasses, including sod, or seeds of acceptable mix within the local landscape industry; 
 • 100 percent coverage and weed free; and 
 • Healthy, disease-free, damage-free, characteristic of the species. 
 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 27, 6-22-20) 
Editor's note— See editor's note, § 73B-060.  
CHAPTER 73C - PARKING STANDARDS 
In General 
Parking Lot Landscaping  
IN GENERAL 
 
TDC 73C.010. - Off-Street Parking and Loading Applicability and General Requirements. 
(1)  Applicability. Off-street parking and loading is required to be provided by the owner and/or developer, in all zones, whenever the following occurs: 
(a)  Establishment of a new structure or use; 
(b)  Change in use; or 
(c)  Change in use of an existing structure. 
(2)  General Requirements. Off-street parking spaces, off-street vanpool and carpool parking spaces, off-street bicycle parking, and off-street loading berths must be as provided as set forth in TDC 73C.100, unless greater requirements are otherwise established by the conditional use permit or the Architectural Review process. 
(a)  The following apply to property and/or use with respect to the provisions of TDC 73C.100: 
(i)  The requirements apply to both the existing structure and use, and enlarging a structure or use; 
(ii)  The floor area is measured by gross floor area of the building primary to the function of the particular use of the property other than space devoted to off-street parking or loading; 
(iii)  Where employees are specified, the term applies to all persons, including proprietors, working on the premises during the peak shift; 
(iv)  Calculations to determine the number of required parking spaces and loading berths must be rounded to the nearest whole number; 
(v)  If the use of a property changes, thereby increasing off-street parking or loading requirements, the increased parking/loading area must be provided prior to commencement of the new use; 
(vi)  Parking and loading requirements for structures not specifically listed herein must be determined by the City Manager, based upon requirements of comparable uses listed; 
(vii)  When several uses occupy a single structure, the total requirements for off-street parking may be the sum of the requirements of the several uses computed separately or be computed in accordance with TDC 73.370(1)(m), Joint Use Parking; 
(viii)  Off-street parking spaces for dwellings must be located on the same lot with the dwelling. Other required parking spaces may be located on a separate parcel, provided the parcel is not greater than five hundred (500) feet from the entrance to the building to be served, measured along the shortest pedestrian route to the building. The applicant must prove that the parking located on another parcel is functionally located and that there is safe vehicular and pedestrian access to and from the site. The parcel upon which parking facilities are located must be in the same ownership as the structure; 
(ix)  Required parking spaces must be available for the parking of operable passenger automobiles of residents, customers, patrons and employees and must not be used for storage of vehicles or materials or for the parking of trucks used in conducting the business; 
(x)  Institution of on-street parking, where none is previously provided, must not be done solely for the purpose of relieving crowded parking lots in commercial or industrial zones; and 
(xi)  Required vanpool and carpool parking must meet the 9-foot parking stall standards in Figure 73-1 and be identified with appropriate signage.  
TDC 73C.020. - Parking Lot Design Standards. 
A parking lot, whether an accessory or principal use, intended for the parking of automobiles or trucks, must comply with the following: 
(1)  Off-street parking lot design must comply with the dimensional standards set forth in Figure 73-1; 
(a)  Exception: Parking structures and underground parking where stall length and width requirements for a standard size stall must be reduced by .5 feet and vehicular access at the entrance if gated must be a minimum of 18 feet in width. 
(2)  Parking lot drive aisles must be constructed of asphalt, concrete, or pervious concrete; 
(3)  Parking stalls must be constructed of asphalt, concrete, previous concrete, or a pervious surface such as pavers or grasscrete, but not gravel or woody material. Pervious surfaces, are encouraged for parking stalls in or abutting the Natural Resource Protection Overlay District, Other Natural Areas, or in a Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor; 
(4)  Parking lots must be maintained adequately for all-weather use and drained to avoid water flow across sidewalks; 
(5)  Parking bumpers or wheel stops or curbing must be provided to prevent cars from encroaching on adjacent landscaped areas, or adjacent pedestrian walkways. 
(6)  Disability parking spaces and accessibility must meet ADA standards applicable at time of construction or alteration; 
(7)  Parking stalls for sub-compact vehicles must not exceed 35 percent of the total parking stalls required by TDC 73C.100. Stalls in excess of the number required by TDC 73C.100 can be sub-compact stalls; 
(8)  Groups of more than four parking spaces must be so located and served by driveways that their use will require no backing movements or other maneuvering within a street right-of-way other than an alley; 
(9)  Drives to off-street parking areas must be designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic, provide maximum safety of traffic access and egress, and maximum safety of pedestrians and vehicular traffic on the site; 
(10)  On-site drive aisles without parking spaces, which provide access to parking areas with regular spaces or with a mix of regular and sub-compact spaces, must have a minimum width of 22 feet for two-way traffic and 12 feet for one-way traffic; When 90 degree stalls are located on both sides of a drive aisle, a minimum of 24 feet of aisle is required. On-site drive aisles without parking spaces, which provide access to parking areas with only sub-compact spaces, must have a minimum width of 20 feet for two-way traffic and 12 feet for one-way traffic; 
(11)  Artificial lighting, must be deflected to not shine or create glare in a residential zones, street right-of-way, a Natural Resource Protection Overlay District, Other Natural Areas, or a Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor; 
(12)  Parking lot landscaping must be provided pursuant to the requirements of TDC 73C.200; and 
(13)  Except for parking to serve residential uses, parking areas adjacent to or within residential zones or adjacent to residential uses must be designed to minimize disturbance of residents.  
TDC 73C.030. - Shared Parking Requirements. 
Parking facilities may be shared by users on adjacent parcels if the following standards are met: 
(1)  One of the parcels has excess parking spaces, considering the present use of the property; the other parcel lacks sufficient area for required parking spaces; 
(2)  The total number of parking spaces meets the standards for the sum of the number of spaces required for each use; 
(3)  Legal documentation, to the satisfaction of the City Attorney, must be submitted verifying permanent use of the excess parking area on one lot by patrons of the uses deficient in required parking area; 
(4)  Physical access between adjoining lots must be such that functional and reasonable access is provided to uses on the parcel deficient in parking spaces; 
(5)  Adequate directional signs must be installed specifying the joint parking arrangement; and 
(6)  Areas in the Natural Resource Protection Overlay District, Other Natural Areas, or a Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor would be better protected.  
TDC 73C.040. - Joint Use Parking Requirements. 
(1)  Joint use of parking spaces may occur where adjacent developments or multiple uses in a development are able to jointly use some or all of the same required parking spaces because their parking demands occur at different times. 
(2)  Joint use of parking spaces may be allowed if the following standards are met: 
(a)  There must be no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the buildings or uses for which the joint use parking is proposed. Future change of use, such as expansion of a building or establishment of hours of operation which conflict with or affect a joint use parking agreement are prohibited, unless approval is obtained through the Architectural Review process; 
(b)  The joint use parking spaces must be located no more than 500 feet from a building or use to be served by the joint use parking; 
(c)  The number and location of parking spaces, hours of use and changes in operating hours of uses subject to joint use must be approved through the Architectural Review process; 
(d)  Legal documentation, to the satisfaction of the City Attorney, must be submitted verifying the joint use parking between the separate developments. Joint use parking agreements may include provisions covering maintenance, liability, hours of use and cross easements; 
(e)  The City Attorney approved legal documentation must be recorded by the applicant at the Washington or Clackamas County Recorder's Office and a copy of the recorded document must be submitted to the Planning Department prior to issuance of a building permit; and 
(f)  Areas in the Natural Resource Protection Overlay District or a Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor would be better protected. 
(Ord. 1427-19 , § 40, 11-25-19)  
TDC 73C.050. - Bicycle Parking Requirements and Standards. 
(1)  Requirements. Bicycle parking facilities must include: 
(a)  Long-term parking that consists of covered, secure stationary racks, lockable enclosures, or rooms in which the bicycle is stored; 
(i)  Long-term bicycle parking facilities may be provided inside a building in suitable secure and accessible locations. 
(b)  Short-term parking provided by secure stationary racks (covered or not covered), which accommodate a bicyclist's lock securing the frame and both wheels. 
(2)  Standards. Bicycle parking must comply with the following: 
(a)  Each bicycle parking space must be at least six feet long and two feet wide, with overhead clearance in covered areas must be at least seven feet; 
(b)  A five-foot-wide bicycle maneuvering area must be provided beside or between each row of bicycle parking. It must be constructed of concrete, asphalt, or a pervious hard surface such as pavers or grasscrete, and be maintained; 
(c)  Access to bicycle parking must be provided by an area at least three feet in width. It must be constructed of concrete, asphalt, or a pervious hard surface such as pavers or grasscrete, and be maintained; 
(d)  Bicycle parking areas and facilities must be identified with appropriate signing as specified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) (latest edition). At a minimum, bicycle parking signs must be located at the main entrance and at the location of the bicycle parking facilities; 
(e)  Bicycle parking must be located in convenient, secure, and well-lighted locations approved through the Architectural Review process. Lighting, which may be provided, must be deflected to not shine or create glare into street rights-of-way or fish and wildlife habitat areas; 
(f)  Required bicycle parking spaces must be provided at no cost to the bicyclist, or with only a nominal charge for key deposits, etc. This does not preclude the operation of private for-profit bicycle parking businesses; 
(g)  Bicycle parking may be provided within the public right-of-way in the Core Area Parking District subject to approval of the City Engineer and provided it meets the other requirements for bicycle parking; and 
(h)  The City Manager or the Architectural Review Board may approve a form of bicycle parking not specified in these provisions but that meets the needs of long-term and/or short-term parking pursuant to Architectural Review.  
TDC 73C.060. - Transit Facility Conversion. 
Parking on existing residential, commercial, and industrial development may be redeveloped as a transit facility as a way to encourage the development of transit supportive facilities such as bus stops and pullouts, bus shelters and park and ride stations. Parking spaces converted to such uses in conjunction with the transit agency and approved through the Architectural Review process will not be required to be replaced.  
TDC 73C.100. - Off-Street Parking Minimum/Maximum Requirements. 
(1)  The following are the minimum and maximum requirements for off-street motor vehicle parking in the City, except these standards do not apply in the Core Area Parking District. The Core Area Parking District standards are in TDC 73C.110. 
USE 	MINIMUM MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING 	MAXIMUM MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING 	BICYCLE PARKING 	PERCENTAGE OF BICYCLE PARKING TO BE COVERED 
(a) Residential Uses 
(i) Detached single-family dwelling, residential home, residential facilities (located in low density (RL) zones) Townhouse and Duplexes 	2.00 vehicle parking spaces per dwelling unit, residential home or residential facility (stalls or spaces within a residential garage not included, except as approved in Architectural Review). 	None 	None Required 	N/A 
(ii) Multi-family dwellings in subdivisions 	1.50 spaces per unit, in addition to garage 	None 	Developments with four or more units; none required if a garage is provided as an integral element of a unit; otherwise 1.00 space per unit 	100 
(iii) Multi-family dwellings in complexes with private internal driveways 	1.0 space/studio, 
1.25 space/1 bedroom, 
1.50 space/2 bedroom, 
1.75 space/3= bedroom 
in addition to garage 	None 	Developments with four or more units; none required if a garage is provided as an integral element of a unit; otherwise 1.00 space per unit 	100 
(iv) Retirement housing facility 	1.00 space per dwelling unit 	None 	0.50 space per unit 	50 
(v) Boarding house, lodging 	1.00 space per guest house accommodation 	None 	0.25 space per guest house accommodation 	50 
(vi) Congregate care, assisted living and residential care facilities 	0.50 space per dwelling unit 	None 	2, or 0.20 spaces per dwelling unit, whichever is greater 	50 
(vii) Residential facilities (located in other than low density residential zones) 	1.00 space per three beds, plus 1.00 space per employee 	None 	2, or 1.00 space for every six beds, whichever is greater 	50 
(viii) Dwelling units within the Central Design District except as specified in (d), (e), and (f) above 	1.50 space per dwelling unit, including garage 	None 	Developments with four or more units; none required if a garage is provided as an integral element of a unit; otherwise 1.00 space per unit 	100 
(b) Institutions 
(i) Convalescent home, nursing home or sanitarium 	1.00 space per 2 beds for patients or residents 	None 	2, or 1.00 space for every six beds, whichever is greater 	50 
(ii) Hospital 	1.00 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area 	None 	1 space per 1,000 gross square feet 	First ten spaces or 40 percent whichever is greater 
(c) Places of Public Assembly 
(i) Library, reading room 	1.00 space per 400 square feet of public area 	None 	2, or 1.5 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet, whichever is greater 	10 
(ii) Nursery, primary, elementary or middle school, child day care center 	2.00 spaces per employee 	None 	4, or 1.00 space per five students based on the design capacity of the facility, whichever is greater 	75 
(iii) Senior high school 	0.2 spaces per student and staff 	Zone A and 
Zone B: 0.3 spaces per student plus 1.00 space per staff 	4, or 1.00 space per five students based on the design capacity of the facility, whichever is greater 	25 
(iv) Other places of public assembly, including churches 	1.00 space per four seats or eight feet of bench length 	Zone A: 0.6 spaces per seat 
Zone B: 0.5 spaces per seat 	1.0 space per 40 seats or 80 feet of bench length 	35 
(d) Commercial Amusements 
(i) Theater 	1.00 space per four seats 	Zone A: 0.4 spaces per seat 
Zone B: 0.5 spaces per seat 	1.0 space per 30 seats 	10 
(ii) Bowling alley 	5.00 spaces per lane 	None 	4, or 0.50 spaces per lane, whichever is greater 	40 
(iii) Dance hall, skating rink 	4.3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	Zone A: 5.4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
Zone B: 6.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	2.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area 	50 
(iv) Racquet court, health club 	1.00 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	Zone A: 1.3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
Zone B: 1.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	2.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of exercise area 	50 
(e) Commercial 
(i) Retail shops (under 100,000 square feet of gross floor area) 	4.00 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	Zone A: 5.1 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
Zone B: 6.2 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	0.50 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	50 
(ii) Retail store handling exclusively bulky merchandise such as furniture or automobiles and service or repair shops 	1.00 space per 400 square feet of sales floor area 	Zone A: 5.1 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
Zone B: 6.2 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	2, or 0.20 space per 1,000 square feet of sales floor area, whichever is greater 	50 
(iii) Shopping center (over 100,000 square feet of gross floor area) 	4.1 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	Zone A: 5.1 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
Zone B: 6.2 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	0.50 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	50 
(iv) Banks/Savings and loans 	4.30 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	Zone A: 5.4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
Zone B: 6.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	2, or 0.33 spaces per 1,000 square feet, whichever is greater 	10 
(v) Medical & dental offices 	3.90 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	Zone A: 4.9 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
Zone B: 5.9 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	2, or 0.33 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet, whichever is greater 	First ten spaces or 40 percent, whichever is greater 
(vi) General office 	2.70 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	Zone A: 3.4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
Zone B: 4.1 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	2, or 0.50 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet, whichever is greater 	First ten spaces or 40 percent, whichever is greater 
(viii) Restaurant 	10.00 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	Zone A: 19.1 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
Zone B: 23.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	2.00 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet 	25 
(ix) Drive-up restaurant 	9.90 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	Zone A: 12.4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
Zone B: 14.9 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	2.00 spaces per 1,000 gross sq. ft 	25 
(x) Motel 	1.00 space per room 	None 	0.20 space per room 	10 
(xi) Mortuary 	1.00 space per four seats or an eight feet of bench length in chapels 	None 	1.0 space per 40 seats or 80 feet of bench length 	10 
(xii) Office furniture and office furniture sales 	1.00 space per 550 gross square feet 	None 	2, or 0.20 space per 1,000 square feet of sales floor area, whichever is greater 	10 
(xiii) Park and ride lots 	None 	None 	5 percent of auto spaces 	100 
(xiv) Major transit stops (not Park and Ride lots) 	None 	None 	4 	100 
(xv) Wireless communication facility 	1.0 space 	None 	N/A 	N/A 
(f) Industrial 
(i) Manufacturing 	1.60 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	None 	2, or 0.10 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet, whichever is greater 	First five spaces or 30 percent, whichever is greater 
(ii) Warehousing 	0.30 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	Zone A: 0.4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
Zone B: 0.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	2, or 0.10 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet, whichever is greater 	First five spaces or 30 percent, whichever is greater 
(iii) Wholesale establishment 	3.00 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	None 	2, or 0.50 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet, whichever is greater 	First five spaces or 30 percent, whichever is greater 
(g) Exempt Uses 
(i) Parking Structures 	Exempt 	Exempt 	Exempt 	Exempt 
(ii) Fleet Parking 	Exempt 	Exempt 	Exempt 	Exempt 
(iii) Parking for vehicles for sale, lease, or rent 	Exempt 	Exempt 	Exempt 	Exempt 
(iv) Car/Vanpool Parking 	Exempt 	Exempt 	Exempt 	Exempt 
(v) Dedicated Valet Parking 	Exempt 	Exempt 	Exempt 	Exempt 
(vi) User-Paid Parking 	Exempt 	Exempt 	Exempt 	Exempt 
 
(2)  In addition to the general parking requirements in subsection (1), the following are the minimum number of off-street vanpool and carpool parking for commercial, institutional, and industrial uses. 
Number of Required Parking Spaces 	Number of Vanpool or Carpool Spaces 
0 to 10 	1 
10 to 25 	2 
26 and greater 	1 for each 25 spaces 
  
TDC 73C.110. - Core Area Parking District Minimum Parking Requirements. 
Uses in the Core Area Parking District must comply with the following parking requirements: 
(1)  The following uses must provide 75 percent of the spaces required in TDC 73C.100(1), whether provided individually, in accordance with the Shared Parking in TDC 73C.030, or the Joint Use Parking in TDC 73C.040: 
(a)  Multi-Family dwellings in complexes with private internal driveways; 
(b)  Retirement housing facility; 
(c)  Boarding house, lodging; 
(d)  Congregate care, assisted living and residential care facilities; 
(e)  Residential facilities (located in other than low density residential planning districts); 
(f)  Library, reading room; 
(g)  Nursery, primary, elementary or middle school, and child day care center; 
(h)  Other places of public assembly, including churches; 
(i)  Theater; 
(j)  Bowling alley; 
(k)  Retail shops (under 100,000 square feet of gross floor area); 
(l)  Retail store handling exclusively bulky merchandise such as furniture or automobiles and service or repair shops; 
(m)  Mortuary; 
(n)  Office furniture and office furniture sales; and 
(o)  Major transit stops (not Park and Ride lots). 
(2)  At the time of enlargement of an existing structure or change in use, there must be no net loss of existing off-street parking, in addition to providing new off-street parking as required under TDC 73C.110. 
(3)  The following uses are exempt from providing off-street parking within the Core Area Parking District: 
(a)  The publicly-owned community center on Tract 8 of the Tualatin Commons; and 
(b)  Outdoor dining facilities.  
TDC 73C.120. - Off-Street Loading Facilities Minimum Requirements. 
(1)  The minimum number of off-street loading berths for commercial, industrial, and institutional uses is as follows: 
Use 	Square Feet of
Floor Area 	Number of
Berths 	Dimensions of
Berth 	Unobstructed
Clearance of Berth 
Commercial 	Less than 5,000 	0 	0 	0 
	5,000—25,000 	1 	12 feet × 25 feet 	14 feet 
	25,000—60,000 	2 	12 feet × 35 feet 	14 feet 
	60,000 and over 	3 	12 feet × 35 feet 	14 feet 
Industrial 	Less than 5,000 	0 	0 	0 
	5,000—25,000 	1 	12 feet × 60 feet 	14 feet 
	25,000—60,000 	2 	12 feet × 60 feet 	14 feet 
	60,000 and over 	3 	12 feet × 60 feet 	14 feet 
Institutional 	Less than 5,000 	0 	0 	0 
	5,000—25,000 	1 	12 feet × 25 feet 	14 feet 
	25,000—60,000 	2 	12 feet × 35 feet 	14 feet 
	60,000 and over 	3 	12 feet × 35 feet 	14 feet 
 
(2)  Loading berths must not use the public right-of-way as part of the required off-street loading area. 
(3)  Required loading areas must be screened from public view, public streets, and adjacent properties by means of sight-obscuring landscaping, walls or other means, as approved through the Architectural Review process. 
(4)  Required loading facilities must be installed prior to final building inspection and must be permanently maintained as a condition of use. 
(5)  The off-street loading facilities must in all cases be on the same lot or parcel as the structure they are intended to serve. In no case must the required off-street loading spaces be part of the area used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements. 
(6)  A driveway designed for continuous forward flow of passenger vehicles for the purpose of loading and unloading children must be located on the site of a school or child day care center having a capacity greater than 25 students.  
TDC 73C.130. - Parking Lot Driveway and Walkway Minimum Requirements. 
Parking lot driveways and walkways must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Residential Use. Minimum requirements for residential uses: 
(a)  Ingress and egress for single-family residential uses, including townhouses, and duplexes must be paved to a minimum width of ten feet. Maximum driveway widths must not exceed 26 feet for one and two car garages, and 37 feet for three or more car garages. For the purposes of this section, driveway widths must be measured at the right-of-way line. 
(b)  Ingress and egress for multi-family residential uses must not be less than the following: 
Dwelling Units 	Minimum Number 
Required	Minimum Width 	Walkways, etc. 
2 	1 	16 feet 	No walkways or curbs required 
3-19 	1 	24 feet 	No walkways or curbs required 
20-49 	1 
or 
2 	24 feet 
  
16 feet (one way) 	6-foot walkway, 1 side only; curbs required 
50-499 	1 
or 
2 	32 feet 
  
24 feet 	6-foot walkway, 1 side only; curbs required 
Over 500 	As required by 
City Manager 	As required by 
City Manager 	As required by 
City Manager 
 
(2)  Commercial Uses. Ingress and egress for commercial and institutional uses must not be less than the following: 
Required Parking
Spaces 	Minimum Number
Required 	Minimum Pavement
Width 	Minimum Pavement
Walkways, etc. 
1-99 	1 	32 feet for first 50 feet from ROW, 24 feet thereafter 	Curbs required; walkway 1 side only 
100-249 	2 	32 feet for first 50 feet from ROW, 24 feet thereafter 	Curbs required; walkway 1 side only 
Over 250 	As required by 
City Manager 	As required by 
City Manager 	As required by 
City Manager 
 
(3)  Industrial Use. Ingress and egress for industrial uses must not be less than the following: 
Required Parking
Spaces 	Minimum Number
Required 	Minimum Pavement
Width 	Minimum Pavement
Walkways, etc. 
1-250 	1 	36 feet for first 50' from ROW, 24 feet thereafter 	No curbs or walkway required 
Over 250 	As required by 
City Manager 	As required by 
City Manager 	As required by 
City Manager 
 
(4)  Institutional Uses. Ingress and egress must not be less than 24 feet. In all other cases, ingress and egress for institutional uses must not be less than the following: 
Required Parking
Spaces 	Minimum Number
Required 	Minimum Pavement
Width 	Minimum Pavement
Walkways, etc. 
1-99 	1 	32 feet for first 50 feet from ROW, 24 feet thereafter 	Curbs required; walkway 1 side only 
100-249 	2 	32 feet for first 50 feet from ROW, 24 feet thereafter 	Curbs required; walkway 1 side only 
Over 250 	As required by 
City Manager 	As required by 
City Manager 	As required by 
City Manager 
 
(5)  One-way Ingress or Egress. When approved through the Architectural Review process, one-way ingress or egress may be used to satisfy the requirements. However, the hard surfaced pavement of one-way drives must not be less than 16 feet for multi-family residential, commercial, or industrial uses. 
(6)  Maximum Driveway Widths and Other Requirements. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, maximum driveway widths for Commercial, Industrial, and Institutional uses must not exceed 40 feet. 
(b)  Driveways must not be constructed within five feet of an adjacent property line, unless the two adjacent property owners elect to provide joint access to their respective properties, as provided by TDC73C.040. 
(c)  The provisions of subsection (b) do not apply to townhouses and duplexes, which are allowed to construct driveways within five feet of adjacent property lines. 
(d)  There must be a minimum distance of 40 feet between any two adjacent driveways on a single property unless a lesser distance is approved by the City Manager. 
(e)  Must comply with the distance requirements for access as provided in TDC 75. 
(f)  Must comply with vision clearance requirements in TDC 75.  
PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING 
 
TDC 73C.200. - Parking Lot Landscaping Standards Purpose and Applicability. 
(1)  Purpose. The goals of the off-street parking lot standards are to create shaded areas in parking lots, to reduce glare and heat buildup, provide visual relief within paved parking areas, emphasize circulation patterns, reduce the total number of spaces, reduce the impervious surface area and stormwater runoff, and enhance the visual environment. The design of the off-street parking area must be the responsibility of the developer and should consider visibility of signage, traffic circulation, comfortable pedestrian access, and aesthetics. 
(2)  Applicability. Off-street parking lot landscaping standards apply to any surface vehicle parking or circulation area.  
TDC 73C.210. - Common Wall Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements. 
Common wall residential uses must comply with the following landscaping requirements for parking lots in all zones: 
(1)  General. Locate landscaping or approved substitute materials in all areas not necessary for vehicular parking and maneuvering. 
(2)  Clear Zone. Clear zone must be provided for the driver at ends of on-site drive aisles and at driveway entrances, vertically between a maximum of 30 inches and a minimum of eight feet as measured from the ground level. 
(a)  Exceptions: does not apply to parking structures and underground parking. 
(3)  Setback. Minimum 10-foot landscape setback must be provided between the property lines and parking areas and must comply with the following: 
(a)  Must be planted with deciduous trees an average of not more than 30 feet on center and shrubs at least 30 inches in height which provide screening of vehicular headlights; 
(b)  Native trees and shrubs are encouraged; and 
(c)  Exceptions: Minimum 10-foot landscape setback does not apply to Duplexes and Townhouses. 
(4)  Perimeter. Minimum five feet in width in all off-street parking and vehicular circulation areas, including loading areas and must comply with the following: 
(a)  Deciduous trees located not more than 30 feet apart on average as measured on center; 
(b)  Shrubs or ground cover, planted so as to achieve 90 percent coverage within three years; 
(c)  Plantings which reach a mature height of 30 inches in three years which provide screening of vehicular headlights year round; 
(d)  Native trees and shrubs are encouraged; and 
(e)  Exceptions: 
(i)  Not required where off-street parking areas on separate lots are adjacent to one another and connected by vehicular access. 
(ii)  Minimum of ten feet in width for all conditional uses in residential zones. However perimeter landscaping does not apply to small lot subdivisions. 
(5)  Transition. Minimum 10-foot landscaped transition area between parking and vehicle circulation areas and buildings and shared outdoor areas and must comply with the following: 
(a)  Deciduous shade trees located at not less than 30 feet on center must be located in this transition area; 
(b)  Groundcover plants mixed with low shrubs must completely cover the remainder of this area within three years; 
(c)  Native trees and shrubs are encouraged; and 
(d)  Exceptions: Minimum 10-foot landscaped transition area does not apply to Duplexes and Townhouses. 
(6)  Landscape Island. Minimum 25 square feet per parking stall must be improved with landscape island areas and must comply with the following: 
(a)  May be lower than the surrounding parking surface to allow them to receive stormwater run-off and function as water quality facilities as well as parking lot landscaping; 
(b)  Must be protected from vehicles by curbs, but the curbs may have spaces to allow drainage into the islands; 
(c)  Landscape separation required for every eight continuous spaces in a row; 
(d)  Must be planted with one deciduous shade trees for every four parking spaces. Required trees must be evenly dispersed throughout the parking lot; 
(e)  Must be planted with groundcover or shrubs; 
(f)  Native plant materials are encouraged; 
(g)  Landscape island areas with trees must be a minimum of five feet in width (from inside of curb to curb); 
(h)  Required plant material in landscape islands must achieve 90 percent coverage within three years; and 
(i)  Exceptions: 
(i)  Landscape island requirements do not apply to Duplexes and Townhouses; and 
(ii)  Landscape square footage requirements do not apply to parking structures and underground parking.  
TDC 73C.220. - Commercial Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements. 
Commercial uses must comply with the following landscaping requirements for parking lots in all zones: 
(1)  General. Locate landscaping or approved substitute materials in all areas not necessary for vehicular parking and maneuvering. 
(2)  Clear Zone. Clear zone required for the driver at ends of on-site drive aisles and at driveway entrances, vertically between a maximum of 30 inches and a minimum of eight feet as measured from the ground level. 
(a)  Exception: does not apply to parking structures and underground parking. 
(3)  Perimeter. Minimum five feet in width in all off-street parking and vehicular circulation areas, including loading areas and must comply with the following. 
(a)  Deciduous trees located not more than 30 feet apart on average as measured on center; 
(b)  Shrubs or ground cover, planted so as to achieve 90 percent coverage within three years; 
(c)  Plantings which reach a mature height of 30 inches in three years which provide screening of vehicular headlights year round; 
(d)  Native trees and shrubs are encouraged; and 
(e)  Exception: Not required where off-street parking areas on separate lots are adjacent to one another and connected by vehicular access. 
(4)  Landscape Island. Minimum 25 square feet per parking stall must be improved with landscape island areas and must comply with the following. 
(a)  May be lower than the surrounding parking surface to allow them to receive stormwater run-off and function as water quality facilities as well as parking lot landscaping; 
(b)  Must be protected from vehicles by curbs, but the curbs may have spaces to allow drainage into the islands; 
(c)  Islands must be utilized at aisle ends to protect parked vehicles from moving vehicles and emphasize vehicular circulation patterns; 
(d)  Landscape separation required for every eight continuous spaces in a row. 
(e)  Must be planted with one deciduous shade trees for every four parking spaces; Required trees must be evenly dispersed throughout the parking lot; 
(f)  Must be planted with groundcover or shrubs; 
(g)  Native plant materials are encouraged; 
(h)  Landscape island areas with trees must be a minimum of five feet in width (from inside of curb to curb); 
(i)  Required plant material in landscape islands must achieve 90 percent coverage within three years; and 
(j)  Exceptions: 
(i)  Landscape island requirements do not apply to Duplexes and Townhouses; and 
(ii)  Landscape square footage requirements do not apply to parking structures and underground parking. 
(5)  Driveway Access. For lots with 12 or more parking spaces, site access from the public street must be defined by: 
(a)  Landscape area at least five feet in width on each side of the site access; 
(b)  Landscape area must extend 25 feet from the right-of-way line; and 
(c)  Exceptions: Does not apply to parking structures and underground parking which must be determined through the Architectural Review process.  
TDC 73C.230. - Mixed Use Commercial Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements. 
Uses located within the Mixed Use Commercial zone must comply with the following landscaping requirements for parking lots in addition to those listed in TDC 73C.220. 
(1)  Screening. Additional specifications for parking and loading area screening are as follows: 
(a)  Landscaped parking areas must include special design features that effectively screen the parking lot areas from public right-of-way view. These design features may include the use of landscaped berms, decorative walls and raised planters; and 
(b)  Trees must be planted in landscaped islands in all parking areas, and must be equally distributed and on the basis of one tree for each seven parking spaces in order to provide a canopy effect. 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 27, 6-22-20)  
TDC 73C.240. - Industrial Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements. 
Industrial uses must comply with the following landscaping requirements for parking lots in all zones. 
(1)  General. Locate landscaping or approved substitute materials in all areas not necessary for vehicular parking and maneuvering. 
(2)  Clear Zone. Clear zone required for the driver at ends of on-site drive aisles and at driveway entrances, vertically between a maximum of 30 inches and a minimum of eight feet as measured from the ground level. 
(a)  Exception: does not apply to parking structures and underground parking. 
(3)  Perimeter. Minimum five feet in width in all off-street parking and vehicular circulation areas, including loading areas and must comply with the following: 
(a)  Deciduous trees located not more than 30 feet apart on average as measured on center; 
(b)  Shrubs or ground cover, planted so as to achieve 90 percent coverage within three years; 
(c)  Plantings which reach a mature height of 30 inches in three years which provide screening of vehicular headlights year round; 
(d)  Native trees and shrubs are encouraged; and 
(e)  Exception: Not required where off-street parking areas on separate lots are adjacent to one another and connected by vehicular access. 
(4)  Landscape Island. Minimum 25 square feet per parking stall must be improved with landscape island areas and must comply with the following. 
(a)  May be lower than the surrounding parking surface to allow them to receive stormwater run-off and function as water quality facilities as well as parking lot landscaping; 
(b)  Must be protected from vehicles by curbs, but the curbs may have spaces to allow drainage into the islands; 
(c)  Islands must be utilized at aisle ends to protect parked vehicles from moving vehicles and emphasize vehicular circulation patterns; 
(d)  Landscape separation required for every eight continuous spaces in a row; 
(e)  Must be planted with one deciduous shade trees for every four parking spaces; Required trees must be evenly dispersed throughout the parking lot; 
(f)  Must be planted with groundcover or shrubs; 
(g)  Native plant materials are encouraged; 
(h)  Landscape island areas with trees must be a minimum of five feet in width (from inside of curb to curb); 
(i)  Required plant material in landscape islands must achieve 90 percent coverage within three years; and 
(j)  Exception: Landscape square footage requirements do not apply to parking structures and underground parking. 
(5)  Landscaping Along Driveway Access. For lots with 12 or more parking spaces: 
(a)  Landscape area at least five (5) feet in width on each side of an accessway; 
(b)  Landscape area must extend 30 feet back from the property line; and 
(c)  Exceptions: does not apply to parking structures and underground parking which must be determined through the Architectural Review process. 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 29, 6-22-20) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 29, adopted June 22, 2020, renumbered §§ 73C-230, 73C-240 as §§ 73C-240—73C-250.  
TDC 73C.250. - Institutional Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements. 
Institutional uses must comply with the following landscaping requirements for parking lots in all zones. 
(1)  General. Locate landscaping or approved substitute materials in all areas not necessary for vehicular parking and maneuvering. 
(2)  Clear Zone. Clear zone required for the driver at ends of on-site drive aisles and at driveway entrances, vertically between a maximum of 30 inches and a minimum of eight feet as measured from the ground level. 
(a)  Exception: does not apply to parking structures and underground parking. 
(3)  Perimeter. Minimum five feet in width in all off-street parking and vehicular circulation areas, including loading areas and must comply with the following: 
(a)  Deciduous trees located not more than 30 feet apart on average as measured on center; 
(b)  Shrubs or ground cover, planted so as to achieve 90 percent coverage within three years; 
(c)  Plantings which reach a mature height of 30 inches in three years which provide screening of vehicular headlights year round; 
(d)  Native trees and shrubs are encouraged; and 
(e)  Exception: Not required where off-street parking areas on separate lots are adjacent to one another and connected by vehicular access. 
(4)  Landscape Island. Minimum 25 square feet per parking stall must be improved with landscape island areas and must comply with the following: 
(a)  May be lower than the surrounding parking surface to allow them to receive stormwater run-off and function as water quality facilities as well as parking lot landscaping; 
(b)  Must be protected from vehicles by curbs, but the curbs may have spaces to allow drainage into the islands; 
(c)  Islands must be utilized at aisle ends to protect parked vehicles from moving vehicles and emphasize vehicular circulation patterns; 
(d)  Landscape separation required for every eight continuous spaces in a row; 
(e)  Must be planted with one deciduous shade trees for every four parking spaces; Required trees must be evenly dispersed throughout the parking lot; 
(f)  Must be planted with groundcover or shrubs; 
(g)  Native plant materials are encouraged; 
(h)  Landscape island areas with trees must be a minimum of five feet in width (from inside of curb to curb); 
(i)  Required plant material in landscape islands must achieve 90 percent coverage within three years; and 
(j)  Exception: Landscape square footage requirements do not apply to parking structures and underground parking. 
(5)  Driveway Access. For lots with 12 or more parking spaces, site access from the public street must be defined by: 
(a)  Landscape area at least five feet in width on each side of the site access; 
(b)  Landscape area must extend 25 feet from the right-of-way line; and 
(c)  Exceptions: Does not apply to parking structures and underground parking which must be determined through the Architectural Review process. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 30, 6-22-20) 
Editor's note— See editor's note, § 73C-240.  
CHAPTER 73D - WASTE AND RECYCLABLES MANAGEMENT STANDARDS 
 
TDC 73D.010. - Applicability and Objectives. 
(1)  Applicability. The requirements of this Chapter apply to all new or expanded: 
(a)  Common wall residential developments containing five or more units; 
(b)  Commercial developments; 
(c)  Industrial developments; and 
(d)  Institutional developments. 
(2)  Objectives. Mixed solid waste and source separated recyclable storage areas should be designed to the maximum extent practicable to: 
(a)  Screen elements such as garbage and recycling containers from view; 
(b)  Ensure storage areas are centrally located and easy to use; 
(c)  Meet dimensional and access requirements for haulers; 
(d)  Designed to mitigate the visual impacts of storage areas; 
(e)  Provide adequate storage for mixed solid waste and source separated recyclables; and 
(f)  Improve the efficiency of collection of mixed solid waste and source separated recyclables.  
TDC 73D.020. - Design Methods. 
An applicant required to provide mixed solid waste and source separated recyclables storage areas must comply with one of following methods: 
(1)  The minimum standards method in TDSC 73D.030; 
(2)  The waste assessment method in TDC 73D.040; 
(3)  The comprehensive recycling plan method in TDC 73D.050; or 
(4)  The franchised hauler review method in TDC 73D.060.  
TDC 73D.030. - Minimum Standards Method. 
This method specifies a minimum storage area requirement based on the size and general use category of the new or expanded development. This method is most appropriate when specific use of a new or expanded development is not known. It provides specific dimensional standards for the minimum size of storage areas by general use category. 
(1)  The size and location of the storage area(s) must be indicated on the site plan. Requirements are based on an assumed storage area height of four feet for mixed solid waste and source separated recyclables. Vertical storage higher than four feet, but no higher than seven feet may be used to accommodate the same volume of storage in a reduced floor space (potential reduction of 43 percent of specific requirements). Where vertical or stacked storage is proposed, submitted plans must include drawings to illustrate the layout of the storage area and dimensions for containers. 
(2)  The storage area requirement is based on uses. If a building has more than one use and that use occupies 20 percent or less of the gross leasable area (GLA) of the building, the GLA occupied by that use must be counted toward the floor area of the predominant use(s). If a building has more than one use and that use occupies more than 20 percent of the GLA of the building, then the storage area requirement for the whole building must be the sum of the area of each use. Minimum storage area requirements by use is as follows: 
(a)  Common wall residential five to ten units must provide 50 square feet. 
(b)  Common wall residential greater than ten units must provide 50 square feet plus an (additional five square feet per unit above ten. 
(c)  Commercial, industrial, and institutional developments must provide a minimum storage area of ten square feet plus: 
(i)  Office—Four square feet/1,000 square feet gross leasable area (GLA); 
(ii)  Retail—Ten square feet/1,000 square feet GLA; 
(iii)  Wholesale/Warehouse/Manufacturing—Six square feet/1,000 square feet GLA; 
(iv)  Educational and Institutional—Four square feet/1,000 square feet GLA; and 
(v)  All other uses—Four square feet/1,000 square feet GLA. 
(3)  Mixed solid waste and source separated recyclables storage areas for multiple tenants on a single site may be combined and shared.  
TDC 73D.040. - Waste Assessment Method. 
This method tailors the storage area size to a waste assessment and management program for the specific user of a new or expanded building. It is most appropriate when the specific use of a building is known and the type and volume of mixed solid waste to be generated can be estimated. 
(1)  A waste assessment form must be obtained from the City Manager. The form must be used to estimate the volumes of both mixed solid waste and source separated recyclables generated. 
(2)  Techniques such as a compactor or cardboard baler may be implemented to minimize the square footage of the storage area. 
(3)  The plans must identify the size and location of interior, or exterior storage area(s) or both, specialized equipment to be used, and collection schedule required to accommodate the volumes of waste projected in the waste assessment. 
(4)  The application must demonstrate that the mixed solid waste and source separated recyclable volumes expected to be generated can be stored in less space than required by the Minimum Standards Method. If the application does not demonstrate that the waste assessment method requires less space, the minimum standards method will be required.  
TDC 73D.050. - Comprehensive Recycling Plan Method. 
This method may be used when a comprehensive recycling plan has been developed for a specific development. It is most suited to uses such as hospitals, schools, and industrial developments. 
(1)  The applicant must submit plans and text that show how mixed solid waste and source separated recyclables generated by the proposed development will be served under a comprehensive recycling plan. 
(2)  The application must demonstrate that the mixed solid waste and source separated recyclable volumes expected to be generated can be stored in less space than required by the Minimum Standards Method. If the application does not demonstrate that the waste assessment method requires less space, the minimum standards method will be required.  
TDC 73D.060. - Franchised Hauler Review Method. 
This method can be used when there are unique conditions associated with the site, use, or waste stream that make compliance with any of the three other methods impracticable. The objective of this method is to match a specific hauler program (types of equipment, frequency of collection, etc.) to the unique characteristic(s) of the site or development. 
(1)  The applicant must coordinate with the franchised hauler to develop a plan for storage and collection of mixed solid waste and source separated recyclables to be generated. The plan must include: 
(a)  Site plan and architectural drawings showing the size and location of storage area(s) required to accommodate anticipated volumes; 
(b)  A letter from the franchised hauler that describes the level of service to be provided by the hauler, including any special equipment and collection frequency, which will keep the storage area from exceeding its capacity; and 
(c)  A narrative describing how the proposed site meets one or more unique conditions: 
(i)  Use of either of the three other methods of compliance would interfere with the use of the proposed development by reducing the productive space of the proposed development, or make it impossible to comply with the minimum off-street parking requirements of the underlying zone, or 
(ii)  The site is of an irregular shape or possesses steep slopes that do not allow for access by collection vehicles typically used by the franchised hauler to serve uses similar in size and scope to the proposed use, or 
(iii)  The proposed use will generate unique wastes that can be stacked, folded, or easily consolidated without the need for specialized equipment, such as a compactor. 
(2)  The application must demonstrate that the mixed solid waste and source separated recyclable volumes expected to be generated can be stored in less space than required by the Minimum Standards Method. If the application does not demonstrate that the waste assessment method requires less space, the minimum standards method will be required.  
TDC 73D.070. - Location, Design and Access Standards. 
The following location, design, and access standards are applicable to all storage areas: 
(1)  Location Standards. 
(a)  The storage area for source separated recyclables may be collocated with the storage area for mixed solid waste. 
(b)  Storage area space requirements can be satisfied with a single location or multiple locations, and can combine both interior and exterior locations. 
(c)  Exterior storage areas must: 
(i)  Be located in central and visible locations on the site to enhance security for users; 
(ii)  Be located in a parking area; and 
(iii)  Not be located within a required front yard setback or in a yard adjacent to a public or private street. 
(2)  Design Standards. 
(a)  The dimensions of the storage area must accommodate containers consistent with current methods of local collection at time of construction or alteration. 
(b)  Indoor and outdoor storage areas must comply with Oregon Building and Fire Code requirements. 
(c)  Exterior storage areas must be enclosed by a sight obscuring fence or wall at least six feet in height. 
(d)  Evergreen plants must be placed around the enclosure walls, excluding the gate or entrance openings for common wall, commercial, and institutional developments. 
(e)  Gate openings for haulers must be a minimum of ten feet wide and must be capable of being secured in a closed and open position. 
(f)  Horizontal clearance must be a minimum of ten feet and a vertical clearance of eight feet is required if the storage area is covered. 
(g)  A separate pedestrian access must also be provided in common wall, commercial, and institutional developments. 
(h)  Exterior storage areas must have either a concrete or asphalt floor surface. 
(i)  Storage areas and containers must be clearly labeled to indicate the type of material accepted. 
(3)  Access Standards. 
(a)  Storage areas must be accessible to users at convenient times of the day, and to hauler personnel on the day and approximate time they are scheduled to provide hauler service. 
(b)  Storage areas must be designed to be easily accessible to hauler trucks and equipment, considering paving, grade, gate clearance and vehicle access. 
(c)  Storage areas must be accessible to hauler trucks without requiring backing out of a driveway onto a public street. If only a single access point is available to the storage area, adequate turning radius must be provided to allow hauler trucks to safely exit the site in a forward motion. 
(d)  Storage areas must located so that pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement are not obstructed on site or on public streets adjacent to the site. 
(e)  The following is an exception to the access standard: 
(i)  Access may be limited for security reasons.  
CHAPTER 73E - CENTRAL DESIGN DISTRICT DESIGN GUIDELINES 
 
TDC 73E.010. - Central Design District Standards for Uses. 
The Central Design District is as provided in Map 73-4. Development in the Central Design District is approved through the architectural review process, and all development must be consistent with the requirements of this Chapter.  
TDC 73E.020. - Central Design District Design Guidelines Purpose and Applicability. 
(1)  Purpose. The "Central Tualatin Concept Plan and Design Guidelines, October 2001" were developed for the Tualatin Commons Enhancement Strategy Work Plan and are intended to enhance the identity of the Tualatin Commons area. The purpose of the Guidelines is to: 
(a)  Provide prospective developers and designers with a checklist of items that must be addressed in Central Design District proposals; 
(b)  Provide the City of Tualatin with an overall conceptual approach that will enable determinations on proposals that are in concert with and add to the Central Tualatin Concept Plan; and 
(c)  Provide the City of Tualatin with a method of evaluating public and private development or redevelopment on a consistent basis. 
(2)  Applicability. The Design Guidelines apply to the Central Design District as shown on TDC Figure 73-4. The Design Guidelines are structured into four topic areas: 
(a)  Central Tualatin Concept; 
(b)  City Connections; 
(c)  Spaces and Landscapes; and 
(d)  Buildings.  
TDC 73E.030. - Central Design Standards Design Guidelines. 
All development in the Central Design District should strive to meet the following guidelines to the maximum extent practicable. Architects and developers must consider these guidelines and the provisions of TDC 73.050(1) in designing new development in Central Design District and must include in the Architectural Review application a narrative explaining how the development considered each of the Design Guidelines and how the guidelines are balanced. Consideration of the guidelines includes an evaluation of how the proposal is or is not consistent with each guideline. In case of conflicts between guidelines or between guidelines and other objectives in TDC Chapter 73A through 73G, the proposal should provide a balance. To the maximum extent practicable, development in the Central Design District should be designed to: 
(1)  Central Tualatin Concept. 
(a)  Draw People and Activity Into Central Tualatin. Central Tualatin is strategically situated to be both a local and regional focal point. Developments should lend themselves to attracting a variety of pedestrian activities at the core of Central Tualatin. Entry points into Central Tualatin should establish a sense of arrival. 
(b)  Encourage Further Development. Buildings and spaces should reflect an analysis of historic and existing design principles, as well as create design opportunities for new adjunct development. 
(c)  All Seasons City. Building uses and exterior spaces should lend themselves to use throughout all four seasons. Designs should include protected spaces and pathways to enable year-round use by visitors and inhabitants. 
(d)  24-Hour/Seven-Day City. Developments should foster the idea of extended hours of use throughout the week. Where uses are subject to "business hour" operation, the development should include amenities that provide for external enjoyment of buildings at all times of day. 
(e)  Heart of a Great City. Buildings and spaces between them should be carefully designed and crafted to reinforce each other. This reinforcing design should be of high importance for buildings which front public improvements and major circulation systems. 
(f)  Sustainable Design. New development should embody current "green" building techniques wherever possible. Energy efficient design options should be explored as well as alternative building products which have less impact on the local as well as world environment. 
(g)  Buildings as Good Neighbors. Each building should be designed to fit into the evolving context of Central Tualatin and should contribute and enhance the public experience, not only of itself, but of the buildings that provide its context. Undesirable elements of buildings should either be screened or hidden from view. 
(h)  A Place of Multiple Activities. When practicable, include multiple uses in building structures, as well as flexibility in the use of exterior spaces. 
(i)  Scale of the Street. Building heights adjacent to a street edge should be at least as tall as half the width of the right-of-way. Street trees can also be used in meeting the height goal. A combination of buildings and trees are generally the best solution to create the framework of the street. 
(j)  Pedestrian Interaction. Buildings and exterior space should foster activity and interaction of citizens at a pedestrian scale. Encourage a variety of uses within walking distance for residents, employees, and visitors. 
(k)  Building Setbacks. Buildings within Central Tualatin must meet zoning regulations but should be encouraged to front the street edge. In addition, buildings placed close to side and rear property lines should be designed with sensitivity to future development on adjacent properties. 
(2)  City Connections. 
(a)  Visual Linkages. Design interior and exterior spaces that recognize and promote visual linkages to other defining elements, such as monuments, civic spaces, and other natural and urban landmarks that orient the user. 
(b)  Clustering of Attractors. Connections between major downtown attractors should be strengthened in order to create an easily walkable and friendly atmosphere. Reinforcement of connections could include new signage, landscaping and visual cues. 
(c)  Axial Relationships and Monuments. Recognize existing and potential axial relationships of places and buildings and incorporate, in building form or in monuments, extensions or terminations of these relationships. 
(d)  Places and Connections. Provide a safe, inviting series of interconnected "places," both interior and exterior to the building structures. Provide linkages to adjacent neighborhoods for pedestrians, bicycles, and automobiles. 
(e)  Transit Dynamics. Public transit is fundamental to the future of Central Tualatin and its connection to the region. Both existing and future public transit expansion should be considered in any new development plans. 
(f)  Driving and Parking. In the design of streets and parking areas, functional requirements of vehicular activity should not compromise, but should enhance, the pedestrian environment. 
(g)  Pedestrian Opportunities. Integrate pedestrian circulation systems with existing and planned systems, both indoor and outdoor, that connect public rights-of-way and spaces, activities and uses, utilizing furniture and landscaping that are convenient to use and in character with the public improvements. 
(h)  Connection to the River. The Tualatin River and Hedges Creek are valuable and unique community resources. Development should be sensitive to the natural character of the river and creekfront. Provide linkages from Central Tualatin to these resources for pedestrian and bicycle access. 
(i)  Green Streets. Promote creation of "green" streets and surface parking areas utilizing features like permeable paving, solar powered lighting, and native landscaping. City design standards should be flexible to allow designs that have a minimal impact on non-renewable natural resources. 
(j)  Connections through Buildings. Promote design that allows for public interaction with buildings. Encourage pedestrian walkways through, and elevated connections between, sections of the building. 
(3)  Spaces and Landscapes. 
(a)  Civic Rooms. Development of public spaces within and around Central Tualatin should contribute to the formation of "civic rooms." Within these rooms, specific commercial and public uses, circulation patterns, public art, and architectural character will be encouraged to reinforce the "room" and its linkage to the overall Central Tualatin area. 
(b)  Areas of Many Functions. Create pathways, open spaces and enclosed or sheltered public spaces to be flexible and to accommodate a number of functions, whether organized or casual. 
(c)  The Street. Define the street through delineation of right-of-way with the building edge, landscaping, lighting and signing appropriate to the function of the street and the area of Central Tualatin it serves. Street trees spaced at no more than 30 feet on center is critical to establishing the character of a street. 
(d)  The Intersections. Consider intersections as a "room" within the City. Maintain vehicular flow requirements while providing safe and convenient pedestrian access. When possible, focus the location of building entries, building details, street lighting, and signage at intersections. 
(e)  Courtyards and Plazas. In private development, design courtyards and plazas that provide a continuity of experience between the inside and outside of the building and between the public and private realm. 
(f)  Open Space Defined By Buildings. The spaces between buildings should enhance the public experience through building design, form and organization. 
(g)  Inside and Outside. Ground floor activities in buildings within Central Tualatin should present an interesting and enticing addition to the pedestrian experience. Exterior walls abutting public rights-of-way must have more than 50 percent of the surface in windows, showcases, displays, art or pedestrian access elements. 
(h)  Roofscaping. The rooftops of buildings within Central Tualatin present an opportunity for "green" design and upper level activities. New development should be encouraged to create eco-roofs and/or opportunities for places where activity could enhance the street. 
(i)  Street Trees. Selection of trees along street edges should create a unifying canopy for the street. Trees with strong vertical shapes should be used sparingly to avoid a discontinuous or "lollipop" appearance. 
(j)  Signage. Business identity signs, while conforming to other requirements of the sign ordinance, should add to the quality and character of the street. Signs should also relate to the building's character and provide identity and focus for the use. 
(4)  Buildings. 
(a)  Building Form. Single-purpose buildings should be treated as "stand-alone" structures with style and size appropriate to use. Mixed-use buildings should be designed to relate contextually to the surrounding buildings. In general, all new development should compliment adjacent buildings. 
(b)  Adaptable Design. As Central Tualatin evolves over time, the market will dictate changes in uses and densities. Design of buildings should consider flexibility in use and density over the life of the building. 
(c)  Active Buildings along Linkage Streets. Where linkage streets are identified within Central Tualatin, active uses should be developed to support them. A retail corridor along the major street edges would help to reinforce the pedestrian link between focal points or attractors. 
(d)  Solar Access. New development in Central Tualatin should be designed to provide solar access and to minimize the impact of shadows on neighboring buildings and spaces. The use of upper floor setbacks and sloping roofs is encouraged. 
(e)  The Outside Wall. The "outside wall," the building's presentation both to passers-by and to users, should invite participation. Upper levels of buildings facing the street should incorporate decks, balconies or other devices that activate the wall enclosing the street. 
(f)  Craft of Building. In designing buildings, recognize the "craft of building" as fundamental in creating appropriate building detail. Lasting materials are strongly encouraged and the way buildings are assembled is important to the final product and its relationship to Central Tualatin. 
(g)  Building Entrances. Building entrances should support and enhance the pedestrian oriented quality of Central Tualatin. Design entrances to give identity to buildings and uses therein. 
(h)  Parking Relationship to Building. Parking areas are to be integrated into the building design. Surface parking should be limited to one-half block areas. Delineate surface parking from pedestrian ways by low vertical elements, such as masonry walls, fences or landscaping. 
(i)  Service Areas. Since service access and trash holding areas are expected to be adjacent to road-ways and open spaces, care must be taken to avoid a backdoor appearance to the building faces adjacent to pedestrian areas and other buildings. Employ screening and landscaping to reduce the visual impact of service areas. 
(j)  Interior Working Environment. Interior design of buildings in Central Tualatin should recognize the need for quality work environments for all its users. Natural lighting and ventilation should be utilized to the maximum extent possible.  
TDC 73E.040. - Central Design Standards Residential Uses. 
For townhouses, duplexes, residential, and mixed use residential developments in the Central Design District for Common Wall Development, the AR decision must consider the standards in TDC 73A.300 (Common Wall Residential Design Standards) along with the Central Tualatin Concept Standards to determine the appropriate design standard. The design standards may be less than those provided in TDC 73A.300 (Common Wall Residential Design Standards).  
TDC 73E.050. - Central Design Standards Landscaping. 
All common wall residential, commercial, and institutional development in the Central Design District must meet the standards in TDC 73B (Landscape Standards) for landscaping to the maximum extent practicable. Landscape Architects and developers must consider the landscaping elements of TDC 73B (Landscape Standards) in designing new development.  
TDC 73E.060. - Central Design Standards Parking. 
All common wall residential, commercial, and institutional development in the Central Design District must consider the standards in TDC 73C (Parking Design Standards) along with the Central Tualatin Concept Standards to determine the appropriate design standard. The design standards may be less than those provided in TDC 73C (Parking Design Standards). 
(1)  Landscape islands and shade trees may be placed to frame views of the Tualatin Commons water feature or identified architectural focal elements. 
(2)  The City recognizes certain parking lots within the Central Design District are designed to frame views of the central water feature or identified architectural focal elements.  
TDC 73E.070. - Central Design Standards Waste and Recyclables. 
All common wall residential, commercial, and institutional development in the Central Design District must consider the standards in TDC 73D along with the Central Tualatin Concept Standards to determine the appropriate design standard. In the case of conflicts between the objectives in the Central Design District and those in 73D, the proposal must provide a desirable balance between the two.  
TDC 73E.080. - Central Design Standards Off-Street Loading Facilities. 
All common wall residential, commercial, and institutional development in the Central Design District must consider the standards in TDC 73C.120 (Off-Street Loading Facilities Standards) along with the Central Tualatin Concept Standards to determine the appropriate design standard. The design standards may be less than those provided in TDC 73C.120 (Off-Street Loading Facilities Standards). 
(1)  The City recognizes that where a dense mix of uses is desirable in close proximity, pedestrian circulation is strongly emphasized, and the orientation of structures around a central water feature virtually eliminates the possibility of reserving any side of a building solely for truck access. 
(2)  The City Manager or the Architectural Review Board may allow a loading area adjacent to or within a street right-of-way in the Central Design District where the loading and unloading operations meet all of the following criteria: 
(a)  Short in duration (i.e., less than one hour); 
(b)  Infrequent (fewer than three operations daily); 
(c)  Does not obstruct traffic during peak traffic hours; 
(d)  Does not interfere with emergency response services; 
(e)  Is acceptable to the applicable roadway authority; and 
(f)  The design standards for the abutting road allow on-street parking. 
(3)  Adjustments may include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  Reduction in the number of loading berths required; 
(b)  Adjustment of loading berth size specifications and right-of-way restrictions; 
(c)  Shared loading berths and maneuvering areas for use by more than one building; 
(d)  Alteration or elimination of screening requirements; and 
(e)  Requirements for maintenance of berths in a clean and visually appealing condition.  
TDC 73E.090. - Central Design Standards Access Standards. 
All common wall residential, commercial, and institutional development in the Central Design District must meet the Access Standards of TDC 73C.130 (Parking Lot Driveway Standards), except when driveway access is on local streets, not collectors or arterials and the building(s) on the property is(are) less than 5,000 square feet in gross floor area, or parking is the only use on the property, then: 
(1)  Ingress and egress must not be less than 24 feet; and 
(2)  Site access from the public street must be defined with a landscape area not less than five feet in width on each side and extend five (5) feet back from the property line.  
CHAPTER 73F - WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 
 
TDC 73F.010. - Purpose and Objectives. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of wireless communication facility design objectives and standards is to implement the purpose and objectives of TDC 73A.010 by focusing on the placement, design and relationship of proposed site elements such as support structure location, lighting, screening, fencing and landscaping. 
(2)  Objectives. All wireless communication facilities and attached facilities should strive to meet the following objectives to the maximum extent practicable. Architects and developers should consider these elements in designing new development. In the case of conflicts between objectives, the proposal must provide a desirable balance between the objectives. Site elements must be placed and designed, to the maximum extent practicable, to: Be aesthetically and architecturally designed and located to be compatible with the surrounding environment and analyze co-location before seeking new sites. 
(a)  Select colors in consideration of lighting conditions and the context under which the structure is viewed, the ability of the material to absorb, reflect or transmit light and the color's functional role, e.g., aesthetic reasons. 
(b)  Select platform and antenna designs which minimize their size and visual appearance to surrounding development. 
(c)  Provide a composition of structural material elements which is cohesive and responds to use needs, site context, land form, a sense of place and identity, safety, and climatic factors. 
(d)  Select materials which contribute to the project's form and function, as well as to the surrounding environment. 
(e)  Minimize disruption of natural site features such as topography, trees, and water features. 
(f)  Take into consideration the existing topography of the site and surrounding vicinity. 
(g)  Reduce the visual impact of the support structure by locating within stands of existing vegetation and trees. 
(h)  Screen elements such as mechanical and electrical equipment from view. 
(i)  Locate a wireless communication facility attached to existing rooftop mechanical equipment before placement on the exterior wall of a building. 
(j)  Co-locate wireless communication facility or attached facility. 
(k)  Construct wireless communication support structures at the minimum height necessary to serve the operational requirements of the system. 
(l)  Separate wireless communication support structures from each other.  
TDC 73F.020. - Maximum Height. 
The maximum height for a wireless communication facilities, support structures, and antennas is as follows: 
PLANNING DISTRICT 	MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT 
(1) Low Density Residential (RL) 	 • 35 feet 
(2) Medium-Low Density Residential (RML) 	 • 35 feet 
 • 120 feet (including antennas) if structure is within 300 feet of the centerline of I-5 
(3) Medium-High Density Residential (RMH) 	 • 35 feet 
 • 120 feet (including antennas) if structure is within 300 feet of the centerline of I-5 
(4) High Density Residential (RH) 	 • 35 feet 
 • 120 feet (including antennas) if structure is within 300 feet of the centerline of I-5 
(5) High Density/High-Rise Residential (RH/HR) 	 • 64 feet 
 • 120 feet (including antennas) if structure is within 300 feet of the centerline of I-5 
(6) Institutional (IN) 	 • 100 feet 
 • 120 feet (including antennas) if structure is within 300 feet of the centerline of I-5 
(7) Office Commercial (CO) 	 • 45 feet 
 • 120 feet (including antennas) if structure is within 300 feet of the centerline of I-5 
(8) Neighborhood Commercial (CN) 	N/A 
(9) Recreational Commercial (CR) 	 • 35 feet 
(10) Central Commercial (CC) 	 • 45 feet 
 • 120 feet (including antennas) if structure is within 300 feet of the centerline of I-5 
 • 125 feet maximum height if approved under TDC 53.310(1). 
(11) General Commercial (CG) 	 • 45 feet 
 • 60 feet if in the Leveton Tax Increment District 
 • 120 feet (including antennas) if structure is within 300 feet of the centerline of I-5 
 • Maximum structure height for specified portions of the Central Urban Renewal Plan area is: 
  ◦ 35 feet between the Tualatin Commons central water feature and the primary pedestrian corridor around the central water feature 
  ◦ 75 feet in Block 13, unless between the Tualatin Commons central water feature and the primary pedestrian corridor around the central water feature then 35 feet 
  ◦ 60 feet in Blocks 1, 2, 3, 5, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 and 22, unless between the Tualatin Commons central water feature and the primary pedestrian corridor around the central water feature then 35 feet 
(12) Mid-Rise/Office Commercial (CO/MR) 	 • 75 feet 
 • 120 feet (including antennas) if structure is within 300 feet of the centerline of I-5 
(13) Medical Center (MC) 	 • 100 feet 
 • Attached WCFs based on building height regulations in TDC 56.300 
(14) Mixed Use Commercial Overlay (MUCOD) 	 • 50 feet if within the Durham Quarry Area 
 • 50 feet if within 100 feet of the Durham Quarry Site Boundary, except that portion of the Boundary contiguous with the City of Tigard 
 • 70 feet if contiguous to the boundary with the City of Tigard 
 • 70 feet if greater than 100 feet from the Durham Quarry Site Boundary 
(15) Light Manufacturing (ML) 	 • 100 feet 
 • 120 feet (including antennas) if structure is within 300 feet of the centerline of I-5 
(16) General Manufacturing (MG) 	 • 100 feet 
 • 120 feet (including antennas) if structure is within 300 feet of the centerline of I-5 
(17) Manufacturing Park (MP) 	 • 100 feet 
(18) Manufacturing Business Park (MBP) 	 • 65 feet 
 • 85 feet if all yards adjacent to the structure are not less than a distance equal to one and one-half times the height of the structure 
 • 28 feet if a property line, street, or alley separates MBP land from land in a residential district 
(19) Industrial Business Park Overlay (IBP) 	 • 70 feet 
 • 100 feet if approved as a conditional use and all yards adjacent to the structure are not less than a distance equal to the height of the structure 
 • 28 feet if a property line, street, or alley separates IBP land from land in a residential district except as provided in TDC Chapter 32, in which case the maximum permitted structure height may be increased to 100 feet. 
 
(Ord. No. 1422-19 , § 2, 7-8-19)  
TDC 73F.030. - Site Design Standards. 
(1)  All Wireless Communication Facilities must comply with the following minimum design standards: 
(a)  A wireless communication facility attached must not be attached to buildings which are designed solely for single family residential use; 
(b)  Mechanical and electrical equipment and the bottom six feet of the support structure for a wireless communication facility must be screened from the public right-of-way and abutting property by the use of a minimum six foot tall security fence or wall consisting of chain link fencing with vinyl slats, solid wood fencing, concrete masonry unit block, or brick; 
(c)  Equipment shelters, buildings or cabinets to house radio electronics equipment must be concealed, camouflaged, screened by vegetative, or placed underground. 
(d)  A wireless communication facility must utilize existing site conditions such as surrounding vegetation and trees; 
(e)  A wireless communication facility support structure must be constructed to the minimum height necessary to serve the operational requirements of the facility; 
(f)  A wireless communication facility must be designed to allow co-location of facilities; 
(g)  Wireless communication support structure towers must be used in all zones, except when co-locating on an existing structure. 
(h)  Antennas and platforms must be designed to minimize their size and appearance to surrounding development; 
(i)  Obsolete or unused wireless communication support structures and associated equipment and antennas must be removed within 12 months of cessation of operations at a site; 
(j)  No new wireless communication support structure is permitted unless the applicant submits a co-location report showing whether or not any existing tower or support structure within one-half mile of the proposed site can accommodate the applicant's proposed antennae. The report must address the following: 
(i)  Do existing towers or support structures, or approved but not yet constructed towers or support structures, located within the geographic area meet the applicant engineering requirements; 
(ii)  Are existing towers or support structures of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
(iii)  Do existing towers or support structures have sufficient structural strength to support the applicants proposed antennae and related equipment; 
(iv)  Would the applicant's proposed antennae cause electromagnetic interference with the antennae on the existing tower or support structure, or would existing antennae cause interference with the applicant's proposed antennae; and 
(v)  Are there other limiting factors that render existing towers and support structures unsuitable or unavailable. 
(k)  The minimum distance between wireless communication support structure tower is 1,500 feet. Separation must be measured by following a straight line from one wireless communication support structure tower to the next. For purposes of this section, a wireless communication support structure tower includes wireless communication support structure tower for which the City has issued a development permit, or for which an application has been filed and not denied. 
(2)  In addition to complying with subsection (1), all Wireless Communication Facilities Attached must comply with the following: 
(a)  Wireless communication facility attached antennas must use existing rooftop mechanical equipment, and only if not practicable be placed on the exterior wall of a building; and 
(b)  Wireless communication facility attached antennas must be painted to match the color of the mechanical screen wall or building to which it is attached.  
TDC 73F.040. - Setback Requirements. 
Setbacks for all Wireless Communication Facilities are determined through the Architectural Review process, and must be consistent with the following: 
(1)  The minimum setback must be five feet, except as otherwise specified in (2), below; 
(2)  The minimum setback from an RL zone or from an RML zone with an approved small lot subdivision must be determined as follows: 
(a)  The setback must be no less than 175 feet for a monopole that is no more than 35 feet in height; 
(b)  The setback must increase five feet for each one foot increase in height up to 80 feet in height; and 
(c)  The setback must increase ten feet for each one foot increase in height above 80 feet. 
(3)  In making a determination of compliance with the setback requirements, the City Manager must consider the following factors: 
(a)  If the abutting property is in the Low Density Residential (RL) Zone or in the Medium-Low Density Residential (RML) Zone with an approved small lot subdivision, and if natural vegetation, such as evergreen trees, does not exist to act as a screen, then a greater setback than the minimum required may be appropriate. If such natural vegetation exists, then the minimum required setback may be appropriate; 
(b)  If the abutting property is in the Low Density Residential (RL) Zone or in the Medium-Low Density Residential (RML) Zone with an approved small lot subdivision, and it is vacant or its use is a single family dwelling, then a greater setback than the minimum required may be appropriate. If the use is not a single family dwelling, then the minimum required setback may be appropriate; and 
(c)  If the abutting property is in the Low Residential Density (RL) Zone or in the Medium-Low Density Residential (RML) Zone with an approved small lot subdivision, and it is vacant or its use is a single family dwelling and it is at a lower elevation than the subject property, then a greater setback than the minimum required may be appropriate.  
TDC 73F.050. - Variances. 
Variances to the provisions of this Chapter are as provided in TDC 33.120.  
CHAPTER 73G - MASONRY WALL STANDARDS 
 
TDC 73G.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of masonry wall design standards is to implement the community design objectives of TDC 10.020 to require a masonry wall in the RL and RML zones for access-restricted lot lines and property lines abutting major collectors, minor collectors, major arterials, minor arterials, expressway right-of-way, and interstate highways.  
TDC 73G.020. - Applicability. 
(1)  New Construction of Access-Restricted Lot Lines in the RL and RML Zones. A masonry wall is required to be installed for all properties in the RL and RML zones that meet either of the following: 
(a)  The property has access-restricted lot lines abutting the following streets for a distance greater than 60 feet: 
(i)  Major collectors; 
(ii)  Minor collectors; 
(iii)  Major arterials; 
(iv)  Minor arterials; 
(v)  Expressway right-of-way; or 
(vi)  Interstate highway. 
(b)  No existing masonry wall is located along an access restricted lot line and more than 50 percent of masonry walls are constructed along the abutting access restricted street to the nearest intersecting streets, or hypothetical extensions thereof on both sides of the subject property (See Figure 73-5 for illustration), meet the masonry wall standard, then any new masonry wall must be in conformance with the required design standards. 
(2)  Subdivisions and Partitions of Access-Restricted Lot Lines in the RL and RML Zones. A masonry wall is required to be installed for all subdivisions and partitions in the RL and RML zones that have access-restricted lot lines abutting the following streets for a distance greater than 60 feet: 
(a)  Major collectors; 
(b)  Minor collectors; 
(c)  Major arterials; 
(d)  Minor arterials, 
(e)  Expressway right-of-way; or 
(f)  Interstate highway. 
(3)  Replacement and Repair of Nonconforming Masonry Wall. 
(a)  Where a nonconforming masonry wall exists and 60 percent or more of the length of the masonry wall is removed, the entire length of the masonry wall must comply with current standards if more than 50 percent of masonry walls are constructed along the abutting access restricted street to the nearest intersecting streets, or hypothetical extensions thereof on both sides of the subject property (See Figure 73-6 for illustration). 
(b)  The repair or replacement of the masonry wall must be completed within six months from the date that any portion of the masonry wall is removed. 
(4)  Exceptions to Masonry Wall Location or Configuration. The following exceptions apply to the masonry wall location or configuration requirements: 
(a)  Where the City Manager determines that vehicular access is to be provided from the arterial/collector/expressway to a parcel or lot abutting the arterial/collector/expressway, the masonry wall is not required along the arterial/collector/expressway frontage of that particular parcel or lot. 
(b)  For public streets classified as an arterial/collector/expressway, where the City Manager determines that an opening or passage through the masonry wall must be provided, the masonry wall must include such required opening. The same must be provided in masonry walls along state-owned interstate highways when required by the state or Tualatin Valley Fire & Rescue or the City Manager. 
(c)  All vision clearance requirements must be met. 
(d)  The City Manager, in the case of public streets classified as an arterial/collector/expressway, or the state in the case of state-owned interstate highways, may require an alternate location or configuration of the masonry wall alignment to accommodate stormwater facilities, easements, or other requirements, such as, but not limited to, bicycle paths, multi-use paths, or for maintenance purposes. 
(e)  For state-owned interstate highways, where an area of vegetation at least 200 linear feet in width runs parallel to the interstate highway and forms a visual, esthetic or acoustic barrier, or land in a Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) district or other protected area as defined in TDC Chapter 72 runs parallel to the interstate highway, and such land is located between the interstate highway property line and the developable area of a property being developed in the RL or RML Planning District, a masonry wall is not required. Where the area of vegetation is less than 200 linear feet in width, the required masonry wall must be located entirely outside the vegetated, NRPO or other protected area and as close as physically possible to, approximately parallel with, the edge of said vegetated, NRPO or other protected area on the developable portion of the property being developed.  
TDC 73G.030. - Masonry Wall Design Standards. 
(1)  Masonry Wall Design. All masonry walls must comply with the following design standards. (See Figure 73-6 for illustration) 
(a)  Material and Color. All components of the masonry wall visible from the public vantage point must be constructed of stone, brick, stone-look or brick-look cast masonry or stone-look or brick-look cast vinyl or composite material. The color of the masonry wall must be that of natural stones, red clay brick, neutral brown-tones, or gray earth-tones. 
(b)  Finished Face. Masonry wall must be constructed such that the finished side of the masonry wall faces the public right-of-way or state-owned interstate highway, and any structural components (metal brackets, etc.) are not visible from the public or highway vantage point. 
(c)  Slopes. Masonry walls constructed on slopes must be installed using a stair-step method, whereby each masonry wall panel steps up or down the slope and remains level (zero-slope) rather than parallel to the grade of the underlying terrain. 
(d)  Height. For public streets classified as an arterial/collector/expressway, height of masonry wall panels must be six feet, and for interstate highways (I-5 or I-205) height of masonry wall panels must be a minimum of eight feet, measured from the underlying ground surface directly beneath the masonry wall panels to the top edge of the cornice cap. (Any masonry wall over six feet in height requires a building permit and engineered drawings.) 
(i)  For masonry walls constructed on slopes, the height of masonry wall measured at the up-slope end of each masonry wall panel must be six feet for public streets classified as an arterial/collector/expressway and a minimum of eight feet for interstate highways. (Any masonry wall over six feet in height requires a building permit and engineered drawings.) 
(ii)  Pilasters, excluding pilaster caps, must be no shorter than the shorter of the attached masonry wall panels, including the cornice cap, and must not extend more than six inches higher than the highest attached masonry wall panel, including the cornice cap. 
(e)  Ground Clearance. There must not be a ground clearance or gap visible between the bottom of the masonry wall panels and the underlying ground surface. Where a pre-cast panel system is used, any gaps that result beneath panels must be filled in with earth, rock, evergreen vegetation, or similar material. This provision does not prohibit the use of stormwater drainage holes. 
(f)  Pilasters. The horizontal run of masonry wall must be broken up by pilasters, which must be set at approximately regular intervals, no more than twenty feet apart on center. Pilasters must be installed perpendicular to a zero-slope plane. 
(g)  Panels. Panels must be 100 percent solid and opaque. The finished face must have the appearance of a stacked or mortared stone wall or brick wall. 
(h)  Cornice. A cornice cap must be installed on top of each of the masonry wall panels. Cornice caps must be masonry or brick in appearance, and must match or closely compliment the colors and materials used to construct the masonry wall panels and pilasters. 
(i)  Pilaster Caps. Decorative caps must be installed on top of all pilasters such that the cap completely covers the surface area of the pilaster end. Caps must be masonry or brick in appearance, and must match or closely compliment the colors and materials used to construct the masonry wall panels and pilasters. Illuminated pilaster caps are allowed, provided the lighting element is an integral internal component of the cap (i.e., no exposed light bulb) and the light is low-voltage or solar powered. Caps must be no taller than six inches, measured from the surface of the pilaster end to the highest point on the pilaster cap. 
(2)  Masonry Wall Location and Impacts. In addition to the general design standards, the masonry wall must comply with the following additional design standards: 
(a)  Must be located entirely outside of the public right-of-way; 
(b)  Must be parallel with, the property line or lot line abutting the right-of-way; and 
(c)  The required masonry wall must not alter drainage patters or storm flow rates in a manner detrimental to property or persons. 
(3)  Alternate Design Review. 
(a)  A masonry wall unable to meet one or more of the design standards may seek approval of an alternate design through the Architectural Review process in TDC Chapter 33. Approval or denial is based upon the criteria set forth in TDC 33.020(5), and the objectives and standards set forth in this Chapter. 
(b)  The variance process in TDC 33.120 is unavailable for masonry walls.  
CHAPTER 74 - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS 
In General 
Improvements 
Right-of-Way 
Easements and Tracts 
Utilities  
IN GENERAL 
 
TDC 74.010. - Purpose. 
The City's Community Plan sets forth the requirements for providing adequate transportation and utility systems to serve the community's present and future needs. Land development without adequate transportation and utility systems will adversely affect the overall economic growth of the City and cause undue damage to the public health and welfare of its citizens. Consequently, the City finds that it is in the public interest to require land development to meet the following improvement requirements. 
(Ord. 895-93, § 14, 5-24-93)  
TDC 74.020. - Authority. 
(1)  The City Manager may develop standard forms, including but not limited to deeds, easements, interim access agreements, escrow agreements, street improvement agreements, subdivision compliance agreements and agreements to dedicate right-of-way, to include the contents and warranties when they are submitted, and the procedure for implementation necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter. 
(2)  Easements submitted on a final plat or on a separate easement form must be subject to this chapter. 
(3)  Supervision of Planting. The City Manager has jurisdiction over all trees, plants and shrubs planted or growing in or upon the public rights-of-way of the City and their planting, removal, care, maintenance and protection. The City Manager is to enforce these provisions. 
(Ord. 635-84, § 40, 6-11-84 and Ord. 895-93, § 14, 5-24-93; Ord. 963-96, § 7, 6-24-96; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
IMPROVEMENTS 
 
TDC 74.110. - Phasing of Improvements. 
The applicant may build the development in phases. If the development is to be phased the applicant must submit a phasing plan to the City Manager for approval with the development application. The timing and extent or scope of public improvements and the conditions of development must be determined by the City Council on subdivision applications and by the City Manager on other development applications. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.120. - Public Improvements. 
(1)  Except as specially provided, all public improvements must be installed at the expense of the applicant. All public improvements installed by the applicant must be constructed and guaranteed as to workmanship and material as required by the Public Works Construction Code prior to acceptance by the City. Work must not be undertaken on any public improvement until after the construction plans have been approved by the City Manager and a Public Works Permit issued and the required fees paid. 
(2)  In accordance with the Tualatin Basin Program for fish and wildlife habitat the City intends to minimize or eliminate the negative impacts of public streets by modifying right-of-way widths and street improvements when appropriate. The City Manager is authorized to modify right-of-way widths and street improvements to address the negative impacts on fish and wildlife habitat. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 1224-06 § 35, 11-13-06; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.130. - Private Improvements. 
All private improvements must be installed at the expense of the applicant. The property owner must retain maintenance responsibilities over all private improvements. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.140. - Construction Timing. 
(1)  All the public improvements required under this chapter must be completed and accepted by the City prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy; or, for subdivision and partition applications, in accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision regulations. 
(2)  All private improvements required under this Chapter must be approved by the City prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy; or for subdivision and partition applications, in accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
RIGHT-OF-WAY 
 
TDC 74.210. - Minimum Street Right-of-Way Widths. 
The width of streets in feet must not be less than the width required to accommodate a street improvement needed to mitigate the impact of a proposed development. In cases where a street is required to be improved according to the standards of the TDC, the width of the right-of-way must not be less than the minimums indicated in TDC Chapter 74, Public Improvement Requirements, Figures 74-2A through 74-2G. 
(1)  For subdivision and partition applications, wherever existing or future streets adjacent to property proposed for development are of inadequate right-of-way width the additional right-of-way necessary to comply with TDC Chapter 74, Public Improvement Requirements, Figures 74-2A through 74-2G must be shown on the final subdivision or partition plat prior to approval of the plat by the City. This right-of-way dedication must be for the full width of the property abutting the roadway and, if required by the City Manager, additional dedications must be provided for slope and utility easements if deemed necessary. 
(2)  For development applications other than subdivisions and partitions, wherever existing or future streets adjacent to property proposed for development are of inadequate right-of-way width, the additional right-of-way necessary to comply with TDC Chapter 74, Public Improvement Requirements, Figures 74-2A through 74-2G of the Tualatin Community Plan must be dedicated to the City for use by the public prior to issuance of any building permit for the proposed development. This right-of-way dedication must be for the full width of the property abutting the roadway and, if required by the City Manager, additional dedications must be provided for slope and utility easements if deemed necessary. 
(3)  For development applications that will impact existing streets not adjacent to the applicant's property, and to construct necessary street improvements to mitigate those impacts would require additional right-of-way, the applicant must be responsible for obtaining the necessary right-of-way from the property owner. A right-of-way dedication deed form must be obtained from the City Manager and upon completion returned to the City Manager for acceptance by the City. On subdivision and partition plats the right-of-way dedication must be accepted by the City prior to acceptance of the final plat by the City. On other development applications the right-of-way dedication must be accepted by the City prior to issuance of building permits. The City may elect to exercise eminent domain and condemn necessary off-site right-of-way at the applicant's request and expense. The City Council must determine when condemnation proceedings are to be used. 
(4)  If the City Manager deems that it is impractical to acquire the additional right-of-way as required in subsections (1)—(3) of this section from both sides of the center-line in equal amounts, the City Manager may require that the right-of-way be dedicated in a manner that would result in unequal dedication from each side of the road. This requirement will also apply to slope and utility easements as discussed in TDC 74.320 and 74.330. The City Manager's recommendation must be presented to the City Council in the preliminary plat approval for subdivisions and partitions, and in the recommended decision on all other development applications, prior to finalization of the right-of-way dedication requirements. 
(5)  Whenever a proposed development is bisected by an existing or future road or street that is of inadequate right-of-way width according to TDC Chapter 74, Public Improvement Requirements, Figures 74-2A through 74-2G, additional right-of-way must be dedicated from both sides or from one side only as determined by the City Manager to bring the road right-of-way in compliance with this section. 
(6)  When a proposed development is adjacent to or bisected by a street proposed in TDC Chapter 11, Transportation Plan (Figure 11-3) and no street right-of-way exists at the time the development is proposed, the entire right-of-way as shown in TDC Chapter 74, Public Improvement Requirements, Figures 74-2A through 74-2G must be dedicated by the applicant. The dedication of right-of-way required in this subsection must be along the route of the road as determined by the City. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 933-94 § 50, 11-28-94; Ord. 979-97 § 52, 7-14-97; Ord. 1026-99 § 98, 8-9-99; Ord. 1354-13 § 17, 02-25-13; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.220. - Parcels Excluded from Development. 
On subdivision development applications which include land partitioned off or having adjusted property lines from the original parcel, but do not include the original parcel, the applicant must be responsible for obtaining any necessary right-of-way from the owner of the original parcel if the right-of-way is needed to accommodate street improvements required of the applicant. The applicant must submit a completed right-of-way dedication deed to the City Manager for acceptance. The right-of-way dedication must be accepted by the City prior to the City approving the final subdivision plat. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 933-94, § 49, 11-28-94; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
EASEMENTS AND TRACTS 
 
TDC 74.310. - Greenway, Natural Area, Bike, and Pedestrian Path Dedications and Easements. 
(1)  Areas dedicated to the City for Greenway or Natural Area purposes or easements or dedications for bike and pedestrian facilities during the development application process must be surveyed, staked and marked with a City approved boundary marker prior to acceptance by the City. 
(2)  For subdivision and partition applications, the Greenway, Natural Area, bike, and pedestrian path dedication and easement areas must be shown to be dedicated to the City on the final subdivision or partition plat prior to approval of the plat by the City; or 
(3)  For all other development applications, Greenway, Natural Area, bike, and pedestrian path dedications and easements must be submitted to the City Manager ; building permits must not be issued for the development prior to acceptance of the dedication or easement by the City. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 933-94 § 50, 11-28-94; Ord. 979-97 § 52, 7-14-97; Ord. 1026-99 § 98, 8-9-99; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018).  
TDC 74.320. - Slope Easements. 
(1)  The applicant must obtain and convey to the City any slope easements determined by the City Manager to be necessary adjacent to the proposed development site to support the street improvements in the public right-of-way or accessway or utility improvements required to be constructed by the applicant. 
(2)  For subdivision and partition applications, the slope easement dedication area must be shown to be dedicated to the City on the final subdivision or partition plat prior to approval of the plat by the City; or 
(3)  For all other development applications, a slope easement dedication must be submitted to the City Manager; building permits must not be issued for the development prior to acceptance of the easement by the City. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 933-94, § 51, 11-28-94; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.330. - Utility Easements. 
(1)  Utility easements for water, sanitary sewer and storm drainage facilities, telephone, television cable, gas, electric lines and other public utilities must be granted to the City. 
(2)  For subdivision and partition applications, the on-site public utility easement dedication area must be shown to be dedicated to the City on the final subdivision or partition plat prior to approval of the plat by the City; and 
(3)  For subdivision and partition applications which require off-site public utility easements to serve the proposed development, a utility easement must be granted to the City prior to approval of the final plat by the City. The City may elect to exercise eminent domain and condemn necessary off-site public utility easements at the applicant's request and expense. The City Council must determine when condemnation proceedings are to be used. 
(4)  For development applications other than subdivisions and partitions, and for both on-site and off-site easement areas, a utility easement must be granted to the City; building permits must not be issued for the development prior to acceptance of the easement by the City. The City may elect to exercise eminent domain and condemn necessary off-site public utility easements at the applicant's request and expense. The City Council must determine when condemnation proceedings are to be used. 
(5)  The width of the public utility easement must meet the requirements of the Public Works Construction Code. All subdivisions and partitions must have a 6-foot public utility easement adjacent to the street and a 5-foot public utility easement adjacent to all side and rear lot lines. Other easements may be required as determined by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 933-94, § 52, 11-28-94; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.340. - Watercourse Easements. 
(1)  Where a proposed development site is traversed by or adjacent to a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, the applicant must provide a storm water easement, drainage right-of-way, or other means of preservation approved by the City Manager, conforming substantially with the lines of the watercourse. The City Manager must determine the width of the easement, or other means of preservation, required to accommodate all the requirements of the Surface Water Management Ordinance, existing and future storm drainage needs and access for operation and maintenance. 
(2)  For subdivision and partition applications, any watercourse easement dedication area must be shown to be dedicated to the City on the final subdivision or partition plat prior to approval of the plat by the City; or 
(3)  For all other development applications, any watercourse easement must be executed on a dedication form submitted to the City Manager; building permits must not be issued for the development prior to acceptance of the easement by the City. 
(4)  The storm water easement must be sized to accommodate the existing water course and all future improvements in the drainage basin. There may be additional requirements as set forth in TDC Chapter 72, Greenway and Riverbank Protection District, and the Surface Water Management Ordinance. Water quality facilities may require additional easements as described in the Surface Water Management Ordinance. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 933-94, § 53, 11-28-94; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.350. - Maintenance Easement or Lots. 
A dedicated lot or easement will be required when access to public improvements for operation and maintenance is required, as determined by the City Manager. Access for maintenance vehicles must be constructed of an all-weather driving surface capable of carrying a 50,000-pound vehicle. The width of the lot or easement must be at least 15-feet in order to accommodate City maintenance vehicles. In subdivisions and partitions, the easement or lot must be dedicated to the City on the final plat. In any other development, the easement or lot must be granted to the City and recorded prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 933-94, § 54, 11-28-94; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.410. - Future Street Extensions. 
(1)  Streets must be extended to the proposed development site boundary where necessary to do any one of the following: 
(a)  Give access to, or permit future development of adjoining land; 
(b)  Provide additional access for emergency vehicles; 
(c)  Provide for additional direct and convenient pedestrian, bicycle and vehicle circulation; 
(d)  Eliminate the use of culs-de-sac except where topography, barriers such as railroads or freeways, existing development, or environmental constraints such as major streams and rivers prevent street extension; and 
(e)  Eliminate circuitous routes. The resulting dead end streets may be approved without a turnaround. A reserve strip may be required to preserve the objectives of future street extensions. 
(2)  Proposed streets must comply with the general location, orientation and spacing identified in the Functional Classification Plan (Figure 11-1), Local Streets Plan (TDC 11.630 and Figure 11-3) and the Street Design Standards (Figures 74-2A through 74-2G). 
(a)  Streets and major driveways, as defined in TDC 31.060, proposed as part of new residential or mixed residential/commercial developments must comply with the following standards: 
(i)  Full street connections with spacing of no more than 530 feet between connections, except where prevented by barriers; 
(ii)  Bicycle and pedestrian accessway easements where full street connections are not possible, with spacing of no more than 330 feet, except where prevented by barriers; 
(iii)  Limiting culs-de-sac and other closed-end street systems to situations where barriers prevent full street extensions; and 
(iv)  Allowing culs-de-sac and closed-end streets to be no longer than 200 feet or with more than 25 dwelling units, except for streets stubbed to future developable areas. 
(b)  Streets proposed as part of new industrial or commercial development must comply with TDC 11.630, Figure 11-1, and Figures 74-2A through 74-2G. 
(3)  During the development application process, the location, width, and grade of streets must be considered in relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and to the proposed use of the land to be served by the streets. The arrangement of streets in a subdivision must either: 
(a)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets into surrounding areas; or 
(b)  Conform to a street plan approved or adopted by the City to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance of or conformance to existing streets impractical. 
(4)  The City Manager may require the applicant to submit a street plan showing all existing, proposed, and future streets in the area of the proposed development. 
(5)  The City Manager may require the applicant to participate in the funding of future off-site street extensions when the traffic impacts of the applicant's development warrant such a condition. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 933-94 § 55, 11-28-94; Ord. 1026-99 § 99, 8-9-99; Ord. 1103-02, 3-25-02; Ord. 1354-13 § 18, 02-25-13; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.420. - Street Improvements. 
When an applicant proposes to develop land adjacent to an existing or proposed street, including land which has been excluded under TDC 74.220, the applicant should be responsible for the improvements to the adjacent existing or proposed street that will bring the improvement of the street into conformance with the Transportation Plan (TDC Chapter 11), TDC 74.425 (Street Design Standards), and the City' s Public Works Construction Code, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  For any development proposed within the City, roadway facilities within the right-of-way described in TDC 74.210 must be improved to standards as set out in the Public Works Construction Code. 
(2)  The required improvements may include the rebuilding or the reconstruction of any existing facilities located within the right-of-way adjacent to the proposed development to bring the facilities into compliance with the Public Works Construction Code. 
(3)  The required improvements may include the construction or rebuilding of off-site improvements which are identified to mitigate the impact of the development. 
(4)  Where development abuts an existing street, the improvement required must apply only to that portion of the street right-of-way located between the property line of the parcel proposed for development and the centerline of the right-of-way, plus any additional pavement beyond the centerline deemed necessary by the City Manager to ensure a smooth transition between a new improvement and the existing roadway (half-street improvement). Additional right-of-way and street improvements and off-site right-of-way and street improvements may be required by the City to mitigate the impact of the development. The new pavement must connect to the existing pavement at the ends of the section being improved by tapering in accordance with the Public Works Construction Code. 
(5)  If additional improvements are required as part of the Access Management Plan of the City, TDC Chapter 75, the improvements must be required in the same manner as the half-street improvement requirements. 
(6)  All required street improvements must include curbs, sidewalks with appropriate buffering, storm drainage, street lights, street signs, street trees, and, where designated, bikeways and transit facilities. 
(7)  For subdivision and partition applications, the street improvements required by TDC Chapter 74 must be completed and accepted by the City prior to signing the final subdivision or partition plat, or prior to releasing the security provided by the applicant to assure completion of such improvements or as otherwise specified in the development application approval. 
(8)  For development applications other than subdivisions and partitions, all street improvements required by this section must be completed and accepted by the City prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
(9)  In addition to land adjacent to an existing or proposed street, the requirements of this section must apply to land separated from such a street only by a railroad right-of-way. 
(10)  Streets within, or partially within, a proposed development site must be graded for the entire right-of-way width and constructed and surfaced in accordance with the Public Works Construction Code. 
(11)  Existing streets which abut the proposed development site must be graded, constructed, reconstructed, surfaced or repaired as necessary in accordance with the Public Works Construction Code and TDC Chapter 11, Transportation Plan, and TDC 74.425 (Street Design Standards). 
(12)  Sidewalks with appropriate buffering must be constructed along both sides of each internal street and at a minimum along the development side of each external street in accordance with the Public Works Construction Code. 
(13)  The applicant must comply with the requirements of the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT), Tri-Met, Washington County and Clackamas County when a proposed development site is adjacent to a roadway under any of their jurisdictions, in addition to the requirements of this chapter. 
(14)  The applicant must construct any required street improvements adjacent to parcels excluded from development, as set forth in TDC 74.220 of this chapter. 
(15)  Except as provided in TDC 74.430, whenever an applicant proposes to develop land with frontage on certain arterial streets and, due to the access management provisions of TDC Chapter 75, is not allowed direct access onto the arterial, but instead must take access from another existing or future public street thereby providing an alternate to direct arterial access, the applicant must be required to construct and place at a minimum street signage, a sidewalk, street trees and street lights along that portion of the arterial street adjacent to the applicant's property. The three certain arterial streets are S.W. Tualatin-Sherwood Road, S.W. Pacific Highway (99W) and S.W. 124th Avenue. In addition, the applicant may be required to construct and place on the arterial at the intersection of the arterial and an existing or future public non-arterial street warranted traffic control devices (in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition), pavement markings, street tapers and turning lanes, in accordance with the Public Works Construction Code. 
(16)  The City Manager may determine that, although concurrent construction and placement of the improvements in (14) and (15) of this section, either individually or collectively, are impractical at the time of development, the improvements will be necessary at some future date. In such a case, the applicant must sign a written agreement guaranteeing future performance by the applicant and any successors in interest of the property being developed. The agreement must be subject to the City's approval. 
(17)  Intersections should be improved to operate at a level of service of at least D and E for signalized and unsignalized intersections, respectively. 
(18)  Pursuant to requirements for off-site improvements as conditions of development approval, proposed multi-family residential, commercial, or institutional uses that are adjacent to a major transit stop will be required to comply with the City's Mid-Block Crossing Policy. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 933-94 § 56, 11-28-94; Ord. 1026-99 § 100, 8-9-99; Ord. 1103-02, 3-25-02; Ord. 1224-06 § 36, 11-13-06; Ord. 1354-13 § 19, 02-25-13;Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.425. - Street Design Standards. 
(1)  Street design standards are based on the functional and operational characteristics of streets such as travel volume, capacity, operating speed, and safety. They are necessary to ensure that the system of streets, as it develops, will be capable of safely and efficiently serving the traveling public while also accommodating the orderly development of adjacent lands. 
(2)  The proposed street design standards are shown in Figures 72A through 72G. The typical roadway cross sections comprise the following elements: right-of-way, number of travel lanes, bicycle and pedestrian facilities, and other amenities such as landscape strips. These figures are intended for planning purposes for new road construction, as well as for those locations where it is physically and economically feasible to improve existing streets. 
(3)  In accordance with the Tualatin Basin Program for fish and wildlife habitat it is the intent of Figures 74-2A through 74-2G to allow for modifications to the standards when deemed appropriate by the City Manager to address fish and wildlife habitat. 
(4)  All streets must be designed and constructed according to the preferred standard. The City Manager may reduce the requirements of the preferred standard based on specific site conditions, but in no event will the requirement be less than the minimum standard. The City Manager must take into consideration the following factors when deciding whether the site conditions warrant a reduction of the preferred standard: 
(a)  Arterials: 
(i)  Whether adequate right-of-way exists; 
(ii)  Impacts to properties adjacent to right-of-way; 
(iii)  Current and future vehicle traffic at the location; and 
(iv)  Amount of heavy vehicles (buses and trucks). 
(b)  Collectors: 
(i)  Whether adequate right-of-way exists; 
(ii)  Impacts to properties adjacent to right-of-way; 
(iii)  Amount of heavy vehicles (buses and trucks); and 
(iv)  Proximity to property zoned manufacturing or industrial. 
(c)  Local Streets: 
(i)  Local streets proposed within areas which have environmental constraints and/or sensitive areas and will not have direct residential access may utilize the minimum design standard. 
(ii)  When the minimum design standard is allowed, the City Manager may determine that no parking signs are required on one or both sides of the street. 
(Ord. 1354-13 § 35, 02-25-13; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.430. - Streets, Modifications of Requirements in Cases of Unusual Conditions. 
(1)  When, in the opinion of the City Manager, the construction of street improvements in accordance with TDC 74.420 would result in the creation of a hazard, or would be impractical, or would be detrimental to the City, the City Manager may modify the scope of the required improvement to eliminate such hazardous, impractical, or detrimental results. Examples of conditions requiring modifications to improvement requirements include but are not limited to horizontal alignment, vertical alignment, significant stands of trees, fish and wildlife habitat areas, the amount of traffic generated by the proposed development, timing of the development or other conditions creating hazards for pedestrian, bicycle or motor vehicle traffic. The City Manager may determine that, although an improvement may be impractical at the time of development, it will be necessary at some future date. In such cases, a written agreement guaranteeing future performance by the applicant in installing the required improvements must be signed by the applicant and approved by the City. 
(2)  When the City Manager determines that modification of the street improvement requirements in TDC 74.420 is warranted pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, the City Manager must prepare written findings of modification. The City Manager must forward a copy of said findings and description of modification to the applicant, or his authorized agent, as part of the Utility Facilities Review for the proposed development, as provided by TDC Chapter 32 (Procedures). The decision of the City Manager may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with TDC Chapter 32 (Procedures). 
(3)  To accommodate bicyclists on streets prior to those streets being upgraded to the full standards, an interim standard may be implemented by the City. These interim standards include reduction in motor vehicle lane width to ten feet (the minimum specified in AASHTO's A Policy on Geo-metric Design of Highways and Streets (1990)), a reduction of bike lane width to 4-feet (as measured from the longitudinal gutter joint to the centerline of the bike lane stripe), and a paint-striped separation two to four feet wide in lieu of a center turn lane. Where available roadway width does not provide for these minimums, the roadway can be signed for shared use by bicycle and motor vehicle travel. When width constraints occur at an intersection, bike lanes should terminate 50 feet from the intersection with appropriate signing. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 1124-02, 12-9-02; Ord. 1224-06 § 37, 11-13-06)  
TDC 74.440. - Streets, Traffic Study Required. 
(1)  The City Manager may require a traffic study to be provided by the applicant and furnished to the City as part of the development approval process as provided by this Code, when the City Manager determines that such a study is necessary in connection with a proposed development project in order to: 
(a)  Assure that the existing or proposed transportation facilities in the vicinity of the proposed development are capable of accommodating the amount of traffic that is expected to be generated by the proposed development; and/or 
(b)  Assure that the internal traffic circulation of the proposed development will not result in conflicts between on-site parking movements and/or on-site loading movements and/or on-site traffic movements, or impact traffic on the adjacent streets. 
(2)  The required traffic study must be completed prior to the approval of the development application. 
(3)  The traffic study must include, at a minimum: 
(a)  An analysis of the existing situation, including the level of service on adjacent and impacted facilities. 
(b)  An analysis of any existing safety deficiencies. 
(c)  Proposed trip generation and distribution for the proposed development. 
(d)  Projected levels of service on adjacent and impacted facilities. 
(e)  Recommendation of necessary improvements to ensure an acceptable level of service for roadways and a level of service of at least D and E for signalized and unsignalized intersections respectively, after the future traffic impacts are considered. 
(f)  The City Manager will determine which facilities are impacted and need to be included in the study. 
(g)  The study must be conducted by a registered engineer. 
(4)  The applicant must implement all or a portion of the improvements called for in the traffic study as determined by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 1103-02, 3-25-02; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.450. - Bikeways and Pedestrian Paths. 
(1)  Where proposed development abuts or contains an existing or proposed bikeway, pedestrian path, or multi-use path, as set forth in TDC Chapter 11, Transportation Figure 11-4, the City may require that a bikeway, pedestrian path, or multi-use path be constructed, and an easement or dedication provided to the City. 
(2)  Where required, bikeways and pedestrian paths must be provided as follows: 
(a)  Bike and pedestrian paths must be constructed and surfaced in accordance with the Public Works Construction Code. 
(b)  The applicant must install the striping and signing of the bike lanes and shared roadway facilities, where designated. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 933-94, § 57, 11-28-94; Ord. 1354-13 § 21, 02-25-13; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.460. - Accessways in Residential, Commercial and Industrial Subdivisions and Partitions. 
(1)  Accessways must be constructed by the applicant, dedicated to the City on the final residential, commercial or industrial subdivision or partition plat, and accepted by the City. 
(2)  Accessways must be located between the proposed subdivision or partition and all of the following locations that apply: 
(a)  Adjoining publicly-owned land intended for public use, including schools and parks. Where a bridge or culvert would be necessary to span a designated greenway or wetland to provide a connection, the City may limit the number and location of accessways to reduce the impact on the greenway or wetland; 
(b)  Adjoining arterial or collector streets upon which transit stops or bike lanes are provided or designated; 
(c)  Adjoining undeveloped residential, commercial or industrial properties; 
(d)  Adjoining developed sites where an accessway is planned or provided. 
(3)  In designing residential, commercial and industrial subdivisions and partitions, the applicant is expected to design and locate accessways in a manner which does not restrict or inhibit opportunities for developers of adjacent property to connect with an accessway. The applicant is to have reasonable flexibility to locate the required accessways. When developing a parcel which adjoins parcels where accessways have been constructed or approved for construction, the applicant must connect at the same points to provide system continuity and enhance opportunities for pedestrians and bicyclists to use the completed accessway. 
(4)  Accessways must be as short as possible, but in no case more than 600 feet in length. 
(5)  Accessways must be as straight as possible to provide visibility from one end to the other. 
(6)  Accessways must be located and improved within a right-of-way or tract of no less than eight feet. 
(7)  Where possible, accessways must be combined with utility easements. 
(8)  Accessways must be constructed in accordance with the Public Works Construction Code. 
(9)  Curb ramps must be provided wherever the accessway crosses a curb and must be constructed in accordance with the Public Works Construction Code. 
(10)  The Federal Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) applies to development in the City of Tualatin. Accessways must comply with the Oregon Structural Specialty Code's (OSSC) accessibility standards. 
(11)  Fences and gates which prevent pedestrian and bike access must not be allowed at the entrance to or exit from any accessway. 
(12)  Final design and location of accessways must be approved by the City. 
(13)  Outdoor Recreation Access Routes must be provided between a subdivision or partition and parks, bikeways and greenways where a bike or pedestrian path is designated. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 933-94, § 58, 11-28-94; Ord. 947-95, § 12 & 13, 7-24-95; Ord. 1008-98, § 7, 7-13-98; Ord. 1103-02, 3-25-02; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.470. - Street Lights. 
(1)  Street light poles and luminaries must be installed in accordance with the Public Works Construction Code. 
(2)  The applicant must submit a street lighting plan for all interior and exterior streets on the proposed development site prior to issuance of a Public Works Permit. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.475. - Street Names. 
(1)  A street name must not be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets in the Counties of Washington or Clackamas, except for extensions of existing streets. Street names and numbers must conform to the established pattern in the surrounding area. 
(2)  The City Manager must maintain the approved list of street names from which the applicant may choose. Prior to the creation of any street, the street name must be approved by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.480. - Street Signs. 
(1)  Street name signs must be installed at all street intersections in accordance with standards adopted by the City. 
(2)  Stop signs and other traffic control signs (speed limit, dead-end, etc.) may be required by the City. 
(3)  Prior to approval of the final subdivision or partition plat, the applicant must pay the City a non-refundable fee equal to the cost of the purchase and installation of street signs, traffic control signs and street name signs. The location, placement, and cost of the signs must be determined by the City. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 1192-05, 7-24-05; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.485. - Street Trees. 
(1)  Prior to approval of a residential subdivision or partition final plat, the applicant must pay the City a non-refundable fee equal to the cost of the purchase and installation of street trees. The location, placement, and cost of the trees must be determined by the City. This sum must be calculated on the interior and exterior streets as indicated on the final subdivision or partition plat. 
(2)  In nonresidential subdivisions and partitions street trees must be planted by the owners of the individual lots as development occurs. 
(3)  The Street Tree Ordinance specifies the species of tree which is to be planted and the spacing between trees. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 1192-05, 7-25-05; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
UTILITIES 
 
TDC 74.610. - Water Service. 
(1)  Water lines must be installed to serve each property in accordance with the Public Works Construction Code. Water line construction plans must be submitted to the City Manager for review and approval prior to construction. 
(2)  If there are undeveloped properties adjacent to the subject site, public water lines must be extended by the applicant to the common boundary line of these properties. The lines must be sized to provide service to future development, in accordance with the City's Water System Master Plan, TDC Chapter 12. 
(3)  As set forth is TDC Chapter 12, Water Service, the City has three water service levels. All development applicants must be required to connect the proposed development site to the service level in which the development site is located. If the development site is located on a boundary line between two service levels the applicant must be required to connect to the service level with the higher reservoir elevation. The applicant may also be required to install or provide pressure reducing valves to supply appropriate water pressure to the properties in the proposed development site. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 933-94, § 59, 11-28-94; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.620. - Sanitary Sewer Service. 
(1)  Sanitary sewer lines must be installed to serve each property in accordance with the Public Works Construction Code. Sanitary sewer construction plans and calculations must be submitted to the City Manager for review and approval prior to construction. 
(2)  If there are undeveloped properties adjacent to the proposed development site which can be served by the gravity sewer system on the proposed development site, the applicant must extend public sanitary sewer lines to the common boundary line with these properties. The lines must be sized to convey flows to include all future development from all up stream areas that can be expected to drain through the lines on the site, in accordance with the City's Sanitary Sewer System Master Plan, TDC Chapter 13. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 933-94, § 60, 11-28-94; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.630. - Storm Drainage System. 
(1)  Storm drainage lines must be installed to serve each property in accordance with City standards. Storm drainage construction plans and calculations must be submitted to the City Manager for review and approval prior to construction. 
(2)  The storm drainage calculations must confirm that adequate capacity exists to serve the site. The discharge from the development must be analyzed in accordance with the City's Storm and Surface Water Regulations. 
(3)  If there are undeveloped properties adjacent to the proposed development site which can be served by the storm drainage system on the proposed development site, the applicant must extend storm drainage lines to the common boundary line with these properties. The lines must be sized to convey expected flows to include all future development from all up stream areas that will drain through the lines on the site, in accordance with the Tualatin Drainage Plan in TDC Chapter 14. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 933-94, § 61, 11-28-94; Ord. 952-95, § 2, 10-23-95; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.640. - Grading. 
(1)  Development sites must be graded to minimize the impact of storm water runoff onto adjacent properties and to allow adjacent properties to drain as they did before the new development. 
(2)  A development applicant must submit a grading plan showing that all lots in all portions of the development will be served by gravity drainage from the building crawl spaces; and that this development will not affect the drainage on adjacent properties. The City Manager may require the applicant to remove all excess material from the development site. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.650. - Water Quality, Storm Water Detention and Erosion Control. 
The applicant must comply with the water quality, storm water detention and erosion control requirements in the Surface Water Management Ordinance. If required: 
(1)  On subdivision and partition development applications, prior to approval of the final plat, the applicant must arrange to construct a permanent on-site water quality facility and storm water detention facility and submit a design and calculations indicating that the requirements of the Surface Water Management Ordinance will be satisfied and obtain a Stormwater Connection Permit from Clean Water Services; or 
(2)  On all other development applications, prior to issuance of any building permit, the applicant must arrange to construct a permanent on-site water quality facility and storm water detention facility and submit a design and calculations indicating that the requirements of the Surface Water Management Ordinance will be met and obtain a Stormwater Connection Permit from Clean Water Services. 
(3)  For on-site private and regional non-residential public facilities, the applicant must submit a stormwater facility agreement, which will include an operation and maintenance plan provided by the City, for the water quality facility for the City's review and approval. The applicant must submit an erosion control plan prior to issuance of a Public Works Permit. No construction or disturbing of the site must occur until the erosion control plan is approved by the City and the required measures are in place and approved by the City. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 952-95, § 3, 10-23-95; Ord. 1070-01, 4-9-01; Ord. 1327-11 § 1; 6-27-11; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.660. - Underground. 
(1)  All utility lines including, but not limited to, those required for gas, electric, communication, lighting and cable television services and related facilities must be placed underground. Surface-mounted transformers, surface-mounted connection boxes and meter cabinets may be placed above ground. Temporary utility service facilities, high capacity electric and communication feeder lines, and utility transmission lines operating at 50,000 volts or above may be placed above ground. The applicant must make all necessary arrangements with all utility companies to provide the underground services. The City reserves the right to approve the location of all surface-mounted transformers. 
(2)  Any existing overhead utilities may not be upgraded to serve any proposed development. If existing overhead utilities are not adequate to serve the proposed development, the applicant must, at their own expense, provide an underground system. The applicant must be responsible for obtaining any off-site deeds and/or easements necessary to provide utility service to this site; the deeds and/or easements must be submitted to the City Manager for acceptance by the City prior to issuance of the Public Works Permit. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.670. - Existing Structures. 
(1)  Any existing structures requested to be retained by the applicant on a proposed development site must be connected to all available City utilities at the expense of the applicant. 
(2)  The applicant must convert any existing overhead utilities serving existing structures to underground utilities, at the expense of the applicant. 
(3)  The applicant must be responsible for continuing all required street improvements adjacent to the existing structure, within the boundaries of the proposed development site. 
(Ord. 895-93, 5-24-1993; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.700. - Removal, Destruction or Injury of Trees. 
It is unlawful for a person, without a written permit from the City Manager, to remove, destroy, break or injure a tree, plant or shrub, that is planted or growing in or upon a public right-of-way within the City, or cause, authorize, or procure a person to do so, authorize or procure a person to injure, misuse or remove a device set for the protection of any tree, in or upon a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 963-96, § 9, 6-24-96. Ord. 1079-01, § 1, 7-23-01; Ord. 1079-01, 7-23-01; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.705. - Street Tree Removal Permit. 
(1)  A person who desires to remove or destroy a tree, as defined in TDC 31.060, in or upon public right-of-way must make application to the Operations Director on City forms. 
(2)  The applicant must provide: 
(a)  The applicant's name and contact information and if applicable that of the applicant's contractor; 
(b)  The number and species of all street trees the applicant desires to remove; 
(c)  A clear description of the street trees' the applicant desires to remove; 
(d)  The date of removal; 
(e)  The reason(s) for removal; and 
(f)  Other information as the Operations Director deems necessary. 
(3)  Upon the City Manager approving the removal of a street tree, the applicant or designated contractor must replace each removed tree on a one-for-one basis by fulfilling the following requirements: 
(a)  Remove both the tree and stump prior to planting a replacement tree, or request the City to remove the tree and stump and pay the applicable fee(s) established in TDC 74.706; and 
(b)  Replace the removed tree by planting a species of street tree permitted by Table 74-1 within the time period specified in writing by the City Manager; or, the applicant may request within 60 days of the permit approval date that the City replace the street tree and pay the applicable fee(s) established in TDC 74.706. If an applicant opts for the City to plant the replacement tree, the City may plant the tree on its usual tree-planting schedule. Planting done by the applicant or designated contractor must comply with all applicable TDC sections and any additional requirements imposed by the City Manager. 
(c)  The applicant must comply with all applicable TDC sections and additional requirements imposed by the City Manager. The City Manager may waive the one-for-one replacement requirement if the City Manager determines that the replacement would: 
(i)  Conflict with public improvements or utility facilities, including, but not limited to, fire hydrants, water meters and pipes, lighting fixtures, traffic control signs; private improvements or utility facilities—including, but not limited to, driveways and power, gas, telephone, cable television lines; or, minimum vision clearance; 
(ii)  Interfere with the existing canopy of adjacent trees, the maturation of the crown of the proposed replacement tree, or both; 
(iii)  Cause a conflict by planting trees too close to each other, hurting their health; 
(iv)  Limit the selection of species from Table 74-1; and 
(v)  Direct how to plant replacement tree(s). 
(d)  A person who fails to comply with TDC 74.705 must pay an enforcement fee and a restoration fee to the City of Tualatin, as set forth in TDC 34.220(3), in addition to civil penalties in TDC 31.111. 
(Ord. 963-96, § 9, 6-24-96. Ord. 1079-01, § 2, 7-23-01; Ord. 1279-09 § 3, 3-23-09; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018; Ord. 1427-19 , § 41, 11-25-19)  
TDC 74.706. - Street Tree Fees. 
A person who applies to remove a street tree under TDC 74.705 must pay all costs incurred by the City as reflected in the applicable fees listed in the city of Tualatin Fee Schedule. City actions and associated fees include but are not limited to inspection of a street tree requested for removal, removal of a street tree, removal of a stump, planting of a street tree, and inspection(s) to determine if the applicant has fulfilled permit requirements. 
(Ord. 1279-09 § 4, 3-23-09)  
TDC 74.707. - Street Tree Voluntary Planting. 
A person who desires to plant a tree in or upon a public right-of-way may plant or have the City plant a species of street tree permitted by Table 74-1 without a City permit, if the tree is not a replacement for a tree that the person has removed. Such a person may submit a request to the City with payment of fee(s) so that the City may plant a street tree. If a stump exists where a street tree is to be planted, the person must remove the stump or pay a fee to the City as established in TDC 74.706 so that the City may remove the stump on behalf of the person. In all instances, a person who desires to plant a tree must comply with other applicable TDC sections and any additional requirements of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 1279-09 § 5, 3-23-09; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018; Ord. 1427-19 , § 42, 11-25-19)  
TDC 74.708. - Street Tree Emergencies. 
(1)  If emergency conditions occur that require the immediate cutting or removal of street trees to avoid danger or hazard to persons or property, the City Manager must issue emergency permits without payment of fees and formal applications. If the City Manager is unavailable, the adjacent property owners may proceed to cut the trees without permits to the extent necessary to eliminate the immediate danger or hazard. If a street tree is cut under this section without filing of an application with the City Manager, the person doing so must report the action to the City Manager within two City business days without payment of fee and must provide such information and evidence as may be reasonably required by the City Manager to explain and justify the removal. 
(2)  In all instances, a person who removes a street tree as a result of an emergency must replace it within 60 days of notifying the City Manager. The City reserves the right to waive this requirement. 
(3)  A person who fails to comply with TDC 74.708 must pay an enforcement fee and a restoration fee to the City of Tualatin, as set forth in TDC 34.220(3), in addition to civil penalties in TDC 31.111. 
(4)  If no emergency is found to exist, no person must cut or remove a street tree without complying with the requirement of the Tualatin Development Code. 
(Ord. 1279-09 § 6, 3-23-09; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.710. - Open Ground. 
When impervious material or substance is laid down or placed in or upon a public right-of-way near a tree, at least nine square feet of open ground for a tree up to three inches in diameter must be provided about the base of the trunk of each tree. 
(Ord. 963-96, § 9, 6-24-96; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.715. - Attachments to Trees. 
It is unlawful for a person to attach or keep attached a rope, wire, chain, sign or other device to a tree, plant or shrub in or upon a public right-of-way or to the guard or stake intended for the protection of such tree, except as a support for a tree, plant or shrub. 
(Ord. 963-96, § 9, 6-24-96; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.720. - Protection of Trees During Construction. 
(1)  During the erection, repair, alteration or removal of a building or structure, it is unlawful for the person in charge of such erection, repair, alteration or removal to leave a tree in or upon a public right-of-way in the vicinity of the building or structure without a good and sufficient guard or protectors to prevent injury to the tree arising out of or by reason of such erection, repair, alteration or removal. 
(2)  Excavations and driveways must not be placed within six feet of a tree in or upon a public right-of-way without written permission from the City Manager. During excavation or construction, the person must guard the tree within six feet and all building material or other debris must be kept at least four feet from any tree. 
(Ord. 963-96, § 9, 6-24-96; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.725. - Maintenance Responsibilities. 
Trees, shrubs or plants standing in or upon a public right-of-way, on public or private grounds that have branches projecting into the public street or sidewalk must be kept trimmed by the owner of the property adjacent to or in front of where such trees, shrubs or plants are growing so that: 
(1)  The lowest branches are not less than 12 feet above the surface of the street, and are not be less than 14 feet above the surface of streets designated as state highways. 
(2)  The lowest branches are not less than eight feet above the surface of a sidewalk or footpath. 
(3)  A plant, tree, bush or shrub must not be more than 24 inches in height in the triangular area at the street or highway corner of a corner lot, or the alley-street intersection of a lot, such an area defined by a line across the corner between the points on the street right-of-way line measured ten feet back from the corner, and extending the line to the street curbs or, if there are no curbs, then to that portion of the street or alley used for vehicular traffic. 
(4)  Newly planted trees may remain untrimmed if they do not interfere with street traffic or persons using the sidewalk or obstruct the light of a street electric lamp. 
(5)  Maintenance responsibilities of the property owner include repair and upkeep of the sidewalk in accordance with the City Sidewalk Maintenance Ordinance. 
(Ord. 963-96, § 9, 6-24-96; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.730. - Notice of Violation. 
When the owner, lessee, occupant or person in charge of private grounds neglects or refuses to trim a tree, shrub or plant as provided in TDC 74.725, the City Manager must cause a written notice to trim such tree or trees, shrubs or plants to be served upon such owner, lessee, occupant or person in charge, within ten days after the giving the notice; and if the owner, lessee or occupant or person in charge fails to do so, the person is guilty of violating this ordinance and subject to the penalties in TDC 74.760. The notice must be served upon the owner, lessee, occupant or person in charge either by "Certified Mail-Return Receipt Requested," or by posting the same notice on the property or near to the trees, shrubs or plants to be trimmed. 
(Ord. 963-96, § 9, 6-24-96. Ord. 1079-01, § 3, 7-23-01; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.735. - Trimming by City. 
If the owner, lessee, occupant or person in charge of the property fails and neglects to trim the trees, shrubs or plants within ten days after service of the notice in TDC 74.730, the City Manager may trim the trees, shrubs or plants. Such trimming by the City does not act to relieve such owner, lessee, occupant or person in charge of responsibility for violating this Chapter. 
(Ord. 963-96, § 9, 6-24-96. Ord. 1079-01, § 4, 7-23-01; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.740. - Prohibited Trees. 
It is unlawful for a person to plant a tree within the right-of-way of the City of Tualatin that is not in conformance with City standards, including Table 74-1. Any tree planted subsequent to adoption of this Chapter not in compliance with City standards, including Table 74-1, must be removed at the expense of the property owner. 
(Ord. 963-96, § 9, 6-24-96; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.745. - Cutting and Planting Specifications. 
The following regulations are established for the planting, trimming and care of trees in or upon the public right-of-way of the City. 
(1)  When trees are cut down, the stump must be removed to a depth of six inches below the surface of the ground or finish grade of the street, whichever is of greater depth. 
(2)  Trees must be planted in accordance with City standards, Table 74-1, except when a greater density is allowed under a special permit from the City Manager. 
(Ord. 963-96, § 9, 6-24-96. Ord. 1079-01, § 5, 7-23-01; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.750. - Removal or Treatment by City. 
The City Manager may remove or cause or order to be removed a tree, plant or shrub, planted or growing in or upon a public right-of-way which by its nature causes an unsafe condition or is injurious to sewers or public improvements, or is affected with an injurious fungus disease, insect or other pest. When, in the opinion of the City Manager, trimming or treatment of a tree or shrub located on private grounds, but having branches extending over a public right-of-way is necessary, the City Manager may trim or treat such a branch or branches, or cause or order branches to be trimmed or treated. 
(Ord. 963-96, § 9, 6-24-96; Ord. 1079-01, § 6, 7-23-01; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.755. - Appeal of Permit Denial. 
When application for a permit under this Chapter is denied by the City Manager, an order is issued by the City Manager directing certain trees, shrubs or plants to be trimmed or removed, or a permit is granted by the City Manager containing conditions which the applicant deems unreasonable, the applicant may appeal to the Council in writing and filed with the City Recorder within ten City business days after the denial of the permit sought or the making of the order the appellant deems unreasonable. After hearing, the Council may either grant or deny the application, rescind or modify the order from which the appeal was taken. 
(Ord. 963-96, § 9, 6-24-96. Ord. 1079-01, § 7, 7-23-01; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.760. - Penalties. 
A person who violates this ordinance or fails to trim a tree or shrub for which notice to do so was provided, must, upon conviction, be fined not more than $100.00. 
(Ord. 963-96, § 9, 6-24-96; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 74.765. - Street Tree Species and Planting Locations. 
All trees, plants or shrubs planted in the right-of-way of the City must conform in species and location and in accordance with the street tree plan and City standards, including Table 74-1. If the City Manager determines that none of the species in City standards, including Table 74-1 is appropriate or finds appropriate a species not listed, the City Manager may substitute an unlisted species. 
(Ord. 963-96, § 9, 6-24-96; Ord. 1279-09 § 7, 3-23-09; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018) 
Table 74-1 
Street Tree Species 
Species Common Names 	Planting Strip Width (feet) 	Power line 
compatible 	Spacing on center (feet) 
	4 	5 	6+ 		
Amur Maackia 	• 	• 	• 	• 	30 
Amur Maple 	• 	• 	• 	• 	30 
Armstrong Maple 	• 	• 	• 		30 
Autumn Applause Ash 		• 	• 		30 
Black Tupelo 	• 	• 	• 		30 
Capital Flowering Pear 	• 	• 	• 		30 
Cascara 	• 	• 	• 	• 	30 
Crimson King Maple 		• 	• 		30 
Crimson Sentry Maple 	• 	• 	• 	• 	30 
Eastern Redbud 	• 	• 	• 		30 
European Hornbeam 	• 	• 	• 	• 	30 
Frontier Elm 			• 		60 
Ginko 		• 	• 		30 
Globe Sugar Maple 			• 		60 
Golden Desert Ash 	• 	• 	• 	• 	30 
Goldenrain 	• 	• 	• 		30 
Greenspire Linden 		• 	• 		30 
Ivory Japanese Lilac 	• 	• 	• 	• 	30 
Leprechaun Ash 	• 	• 	• 		30 
Persain Parrotia 	• 	• 	• 		30 
Purple Beech 	• 	• 	• 		30 
Raywood Ash 		• 	• 	• 	30 
Katsura 	• 	• 	• 		30 
Red Oak 			• 		60 
Red Sunset Maple 			• 		60 
Scanlon/Bowhall Maple 	• 	• 	• 		30 
Scarlet Oak 			• 		60 
Shademaster Honey Locust 		• 	• 		30 
Skyrocket English Oak 	• 	• 	• 		30 
Japanese snowbell 	• 	• 	• 	• 	30 
Sourwood 	• 	• 	• 	• 	30 
Tall Stewartia 	• 	• 	• 	• 	30 
Chinese Fringetree 	• 	• 	• 	• 	30 
Tri-Color Beech 			• 		60 
Trident Maple 	• 	• 	• 	• 	30 
Urbanite Ash 		• 	• 		30 
Yellowwood 	• 	• 	• 		30 
Zelkova Musashino 	• 	• 	• 		30 
 
(Ord. 963-96 § 9, 6-24-96; Ord. 1079-01 § 8, 7-23-01; Ord. 1279-09 § 8, 3-23-09; Ord. 1427-19 , § 43, 11-25-19)  
CHAPTER 75 - ACCESS MANAGEMENT 
 
TDC 75.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the development of safe, convenient and economic transportation systems and to preserve the safety and capacity of the street system by limiting conflicts resulting from uncontrolled driveway access, street intersections, and turning movements while providing for appropriate access for all properties. 
(Ord. 635-84, § 43, 6-11-1984; Ord. 982-97, § 2, 8-4-1997; Ord. 1103-02, 3-25-02)  
TDC 75.020. - Permit for New Driveway Approach. 
(1)  Applicability. A driveway approach permit must be obtained prior to constructing, relocating, reconstructing, enlarging, or altering any driveway approach. 
(2)  Exceptions. A driveway approach permit is not required for: 
(a)  The construction, relocation, reconstruction, enlargement, or alteration of any driveway approach that requires a state highway access permit; or 
(b)  The construction, relocation, reconstruction, enlargement or alteration of any driveway approach that is part of the construction of a publicly or privately engineered public improvement project. 
(3)  Procedure Type. A Driveway Approach Permit is processed as a Type II procedure under TDC 32.220 (Type II). 
(4)  Submittal Requirements. In addition to the application materials required by TDC 32.140 (Application Submittal), the following application materials are also required: 
(a)  A site plan, of a size and form and in the number of copies meeting the standards established by the City Manager, containing the following information: 
(i)  The location and dimensions of the proposed driveway approach; 
(ii)  The relationship to nearest street intersection and adjacent driveway approaches; 
(iii)  Topographic conditions; 
(iv)  The location of all utilities; 
(v)  The location of any existing or proposed buildings, structures, or vehicular use areas; 
(vi)  The location of any trees and vegetation adjacent to the location of the proposed driveway approach that are required to be protected pursuant to TDC Chapter 73B or 73C; and 
(vii)  The location of any street trees adjacent to the location of the proposed driveway approach. 
(b)  Identification of the uses or activities served, or proposed to be served, by the driveway approach; and 
(c)  Any other information, as determined by the City Manager, which may be required to adequately review and analyze the proposed driveway approach for conformance with the applicable criteria. 
(5)  Criteria. A Driveway Approach Permit must be granted if: 
(a)  The proposed driveway approach meets the standards of this Chapter and the Public Works Construction Code; 
(b)  No site conditions prevent placing the driveway approach in the required location; 
(c)  The number of driveway approaches onto an arterial are minimized; 
(d)  The proposed driveway approach, where possible: 
(i)  Is shared with an adjacent property; or 
(ii)  Takes access from the lowest classification of street abutting the property; 
(e)  The proposed driveway approach meets vision clearance standards; 
(f)  The proposed driveway approach does not create traffic hazards and provides for safe turning movements and access; 
(g)  The proposed driveway approach does not result in significant adverse impacts to the vicinity; 
(h)  The proposed driveway approach minimizes impact to the functionality of adjacent streets and intersections; and 
(i)  The proposed driveway approach balances the adverse impacts to residentially zoned property and the functionality of adjacent streets. 
(6)  Effective Date. The effective date of a Driveway Approach Permit approval is the date the notice of decision is mailed. 
(7)  Permit Expiration. A Driveway Approach Permit approval expires one year from the effective date, unless the driveway approach is constructed within the one-year period in accordance with the approval decision and City standards. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 75.030. - Driveway Approach Closure. 
(1)  The City Manager may require the closure of a driveway approach where: 
(a)  The driveway approach is not constructed in conformance with this Chapter and the Public Works Construction Code; 
(b)  The driveway approach is not maintained in a safe manner; 
(c)  A public street improvement project is being constructed, and closure of the driveway approach will more closely conform to the current driveway approach standards; 
(d)  A new building or driveway is constructed on the property; 
(e)  A plan text amendment or zone change is proposed for the property served by the driveway; 
(f)  A change of use or activity in an existing building increases the amount of required parking; 
(g)  The driveway approach has been abandoned; or 
(h)  There is a demonstrated safety issue. 
(2)  Notice. Notice of driveway approach closure must be given in writing to the property owner and any affected tenants stating the grounds for closure, the date upon which the closure becomes effective, and the right to appeal. 
(3)  Appeals. Any person entitled to notice under subsection (2) of this section may appeal the decision to the City Council. 
(4)  Effect. Closure is effective immediately upon the mailing of notice of the decision. Unless otherwise provided in the notice, closure terminates all rights to continue the use the driveway approach for which the notice of closure has been issued. 
(5)  Failure to Close Driveway. If the owner fails to close the driveway approach to conform to the notice within 90 days, the City Manager may cause the closure to be completed and all expenses assessed against the property owner. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 75.040. - Driveway Approach Requirements. 
(1)  The provision and maintenance of driveway approaches from private property to the public streets as stipulated in this Code are continuing requirements for the use of any structure or parcel of real property in the City of Tualatin. No building or other permit may be issued until scale plans are presented that show how the driveway approach requirement is to be fulfilled. If the owner or occupant of a lot or building changes the use to which the lot or building is put, thereby increasing driveway approach requirements, it is unlawful and a violation of this code to begin or maintain such altered use until the required increase in driveway approach is authorized by the City. 
(2)  Owners of two or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may agree to utilize jointly the same driveway approach when the combined driveway approach of both uses, structures, or parcels of land satisfies their combined requirements as designated in this code; provided that satisfactory legal evidence is presented to the City Attorney in the form of deeds, easements, leases or contracts to establish joint use. Copies of said deeds, easements, leases or contracts must be placed on permanent file with the City Recorder. 
(3)  Joint and Cross Access. 
(a)  Adjacent commercial uses may be required to provide cross access drive and pedestrian access to allow circulation between sites. 
(b)  A system of joint use driveways and cross access easements may be required and may incorporate the following: 
(i)  A continuous service drive or cross access corridor extending the entire length of each block served to provide for driveway separation consistent with the access management classification system and standards; 
(ii)  A design speed of ten mph and a maximum width of 24 feet to accommodate two-way travel aisles designated to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles, and loading vehicles; 
(iii)  Stub-outs and other design features to make it visually obvious that the abutting properties may be tied in to provide cross access via a service drive; and 
(iv)  An unified access and circulation system plan for coordinated or shared parking areas. 
(c)  Pursuant to this section, property owners may be required to: 
(i)  Record an easement with the deed allowing cross access to and from other properties served by the joint use driveways and cross access or service drive; 
(ii)  Record an agreement with the deed that remaining access rights along the roadway will be dedicated to the city and pre-existing driveways will be closed and eliminated after construction of the joint-use driveway; 
(iii)  Record a joint maintenance agreement with the deed defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners; and 
(iv)  If subsection(i) through (iii) above involve access to the state highway system or county road system, ODOT or the county must be contacted and must approve changes to subsection(i) through (iii) above prior to any changes. 
(4)  Requirements for Development on Less than the Entire Site. 
(a)  To promote unified access and circulation systems, lots and parcels under the same ownership or consolidated for the purposes of development and comprised of more than one building site must be reviewed as one unit in relation to the access standards. The number of access points permitted must be the minimum number necessary to provide reasonable access to these properties, not the maximum available for that frontage. All necessary easements, agreements, and stipulations must be met. This must also apply to phased development plans. The owner and all lessees within the affected area must comply with the access requirements. 
(b)  All access must be internalized using the shared circulation system of the principal commercial development or retail center. Driveways should be designed to avoid queuing across surrounding parking and driving aisles. 
(5)  Lots that front on more than one street may be required to locate motor vehicle accesses on the street with the lower functional classification as determined by the City Manager. 
(6)  Except as provided in TDC 53.100, all driveway approach must connect directly with public streets. 
(7)  To afford safe pedestrian access and egress for properties within the City, a sidewalk must be constructed along all street frontage, prior to use or occupancy of the building or structure proposed for said property. The sidewalks required by this section must be constructed to City standards, except in the case of streets with inadequate right-of-way width or where the final street design and grade have not been established, in which case the sidewalks must be constructed to a design and in a manner approved by the City Manager. Sidewalks approved by the City Manager may include temporary sidewalks and sidewalks constructed on private property; provided, however, that such sidewalks must provide continuity with sidewalks of adjoining commercial developments existing or proposed. When a sidewalk is to adjoin a future street improvement, the sidewalk construction must include construction of the curb and gutter section to grades and alignment established by the City Manager. 
(8)  The standards set forth in this Code are minimum standards for driveway approaches, and may be increased through the Architectural Review process in any particular instance where the standards provided herein are deemed insufficient to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(9)  Minimum driveway approach width for uses are as provided in Table 75-1 (Driveway Approach Width): 
TABLE 75-1 
Driveway Approach Width 
Use 	Minimum Driveway
Approach Width 	Maximum Driveway
Approach Width 
Single-Family Residential, townhouses, and duplexes 	10 feet 	26 feet for one or two care garages 
  
37 feet for three or more garages 
Multi-family 	2 Units = 16 feet 
  
3-49 Units = 24 feet 
  
50-499 = 32 feet 
  
Over 500 = as required by the City Manager 	May provide two 16 foot one-way driveways instead of one 24-foot driveway 
  
May provide two 24-foot one-way driveways instead of one 32-foot driveway 
Commercial 	1-99 Parking Spaces = 32 feet 
  
100-249 Parking Spaces = two approaches each 32 feet 	Over 250 Parking Spaces = As Required by the City Manager, but not exceeding 40 feet 
Industrial 	36 feet 	Over 250 Parking Spaces = As Required by the City Manager, but not exceeding 40 feet 
Institutional 	1-99 Parking Spaces = 32 feet 
  
100-249 Parking Spaces = two approaches each 32 feet 	Over 250 Parking Spaces = As Required by the City Manager, but not exceeding 40 feet 
 
(10)  Driveway Approach Separation. There must be a minimum distance of 40 feet between any two adjacent driveways on a single property unless a lesser distance is approved by the City Manager. 
(11)  Distance between Driveways and Intersections. Except for single-family dwellings, the minimum distance between driveways and intersections must be as provided below. Distances listed must be measured from the stop bar at the intersection. 
(a)  At the intersection of collector or arterial streets, driveways must be located a minimum of 150 feet from the intersection. 
(b)  At the intersection of two local streets, driveways must be located a minimum of 30 feet from the intersection. 
(c)  If the subject property is not of sufficient width to allow for the separation between driveway and intersection as provided, the driveway must be constructed as far from the intersection as possible, while still maintaining the 5-foot setback between the driveway and property line. 
(d)  When considering a driveway approach permit, the City Manager may approve the location of a driveway closer than 150 feet from the intersection of collector or arterial streets, based on written findings of fact in support of the decision. 
(12)  Vision Clearance Area. 
(a)  Local Streets. A vision clearance area for all local street intersections, local street and driveway intersections, and local street or driveway and railroad intersections must be that triangular area formed by the right-of-way lines along such lots and a straight line joining the right-of-way lines at points which are ten feet from the intersection point of the right-of-way lines, as measured along such lines (see Figure 73-2 for illustration). 
(b)  Collector Streets. A vision clearance area for all collector/arterial street intersections, collector/arterial street and local street intersections, and collector/arterial street and railroad intersections must be that triangular area formed by the right-of-way lines along such lots and a straight line joining the right-of-way lines at points which are 25 feet from the intersection point of the right-of-way lines, as measured along such lines. Where a driveway intersects with a collector/arterial street, the distance measured along the driveway line for the triangular area must be ten feet (see Figure 73-2 for illustration). 
(c)  Vertical Height Restriction. Except for items associated with utilities or publicly owned structures such as poles and signs and existing street trees, no vehicular parking, hedge, planting, fence, wall structure, or temporary or permanent physical obstruction must be permitted between 30 inches and eight feet above the established height of the curb in the clear vision area (see Figure 73-2 for illustration). 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 75.050. - Access Limited Roadways. 
(1)  This section applies to all developments, permit approvals, land use approvals, partitions, subdivisions, or any other actions taken by the City pertaining to property abutting any road or street listed in TDC 75.050(2). In addition, any property not abutted by a road or street listed in subsection (2), but having access to an arterial by any easement or prescriptive right, must be treated as if the property did abut the arterial and this Chapter applies. 
(2)  The following Freeways and Arterials are access limited roadways: 
(a)  Interstate 5 Freeway; 
(b)  Interstate 205 Freeway; 
(c)  Pacific Highway 99W; 
(d)  Tualatin-Sherwood Road at all points located within the City of Tualatin Planning Area; 
(e)  Nyberg Street, from its intersection with Tualatin-Sherwood Road east to 65th Avenue, including the I-5 Interchange; 
(f)  124th Avenue from Pacific Highway 99W south to Tonquin to Basalt Creek Parkway; 
(g)  Lower Boones Ferry Road, from Boones Ferry Road to the Bridgeport/72nd intersection and from the Bridgeport/72nd intersection to the east City limits; 
(h)  Boones Ferry Road at all points located within the City of Tualatin Planning Area; 
(i)  65th Avenue from its intersection with Nyberg Street south to City limits; 
(j)  Borland Road from 65th Avenue east to Saum Creek; 
(k)  Bridgeport Road from Lower Boones Ferry Road to the west City limits; 
(l)  Martinazzi Avenue from Boones Ferry Road south to Sagert Street; 
(m)  Sagert Street from Martinazzi Avenue to 65th Avenue; 
(n)  Leveton Drive from 108th Avenue to 124th Avenue; 
(o)  108th Avenue from Leveton Drive to Herman Road; 
(p)  Herman Road from Teton Avenue to 124th Avenue; 
(q)  90th Avenue; 
(r)  Avery Street; 
(s)  Teton Avenue; 
(t)  Basalt Creek Parkway. 
If the Council finds that any other road or street is in need of access control for any reason, it may direct that the street or road be added to this section through a Plan Text Amendment. 
(3)  This Chapter takes precedence over any other TDC chapter and over any other ordinance of the City when considering any development, land use approval or other proposal for property abutting an arterial or any property having an access right to an arterial. 
(4)  The City may act on its own initiative to protect the public safety and control access on arterials or any street to be included by TDC 75.030, consistent with its authority as the City Road Authority. 
(Ord. 635-84, § 45, 6-11-84; Ord. 982-97, § 4, 8-4-97; Ord. 1103-02, 3-25-02; Ord. 1321-11 § 52, 4-25-11; Ord. 1354-13 § 22, 02-25-13; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. No. 1418-19, § 6, 4-22-19)  
TDC 75.060. - Interim Access Agreement. 
(1)  When a property abuts a freeway or arterial and a future street shown in TDC Chapter 11, Transportation, (Figures 11-1 and 11-3), or abuts or bisects the property, the City Manager may approve an interim access on the arterial through an agreement with the property owner if: 
(1)  The City Manager finds that at the current time the construction of the new street shown in TDC Chapter 11, Transportation, (Figures 11-1 and 11-3), is impractical due to costs of right-of-way acquisition. 
(2)  The Interim Access Agreement must be signed by the property owner and contain the following provisions: 
(a)  A statement that the property owner receiving interim access dedicates the right-of-way for the new street as shown in TDC Chapter 11, Transportation, (Figures 11-1 and 11-3), if it would be on the property. 
(b)  A statement that the property owner agrees that at such time as the City Manager finds that it is practical to construct a new street as shown in TDC Chapter 11, Transportation, (Figures 11-1 and 11-3), the property owner agrees to pay for or construct its fair share of the new street when it is practical. 
(c)  A statement that at such time as the new street as shown in TDC Chapter 11, Transportation, (Figures 11-1 and 11-3), is constructed, the interim access must be closed and no longer used. 
(d)  A statement that the cost of this closure of the interim access must be borne by the property owner; and 
(e)  A statement that the City may enforce the Interim Access Agreement against the property owner, its successors, and assigns and seek any remedies available to the City at law and in equity. 
(3)  In granting the interim access the property owner may be required to share said interim access with adjacent properties. 
(4)  The interim access must be constructed in a manner to make it as efficient as possible. Improvements required as part of the interim access may include: 
(a)  A left turn lane; 
(b)  A right turn lane; 
(c)  Driveways constructed at street intersections to provide for truck turning movement; 
(d)  Dedication of additional right-of-way on the arterial; 
(e)  Installation of traffic control signals; and 
(f)  Limitation of new driveways to right turn in, right turn out movements by construction of raised median barriers or other means. 
(5)  Any interim access approved in accordance with this chapter must be set forth in the form of a written agreement, approved by the City Attorney. The agreement must be verified by the owner in the manner provided for deeds and restrictions on real property. The agreement must bind the parties thereto as well as their heirs, successors in interest and assigns and must not be modified without the express written approval of the City, and the agreement must be recorded in the deed of records for the County in which the property is located. 
(Ord. 635-84, § 51, 6-11-84, § 75.090(7); Ord. 743-88, § 30, 3-28-88; Ord. 1103-02, 3-25-02; Ord. 1354-13 § 25, 02-25-13; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 75.070. - Existing Driveways and Street Intersections. 
(1)  Existing driveways with access onto arterials on the date this chapter was originally adopted are allowed to remain. If additional development occurs on properties with existing driveways with access onto arterials then this Chapter applies and the entire site must be made to conform with the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  The City Manager may restrict existing driveways and street intersections to right-in and right-out by construction of raised median barriers or other means. 
(Ord. 635-84, § 48, 6-11-84; Ord. 982-97, § 7, 8-4-97; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 75.100. - Spacing Standards for New Intersections. 
Except as shown in TDC Chapter 11, Transportation, (Figures 11-1 and 11-3), all new intersections with arterials must have a minimum spacing of one-half mile between intersections.  
TDC 75.110. - Joint Access Standards. 
When the City Manager determines that joint accesses are required by properties undergoing development or redevelopment, an overall access plan shall be prescribed by the City Manager and all properties shall adhere to this. Interim accesses may be allowed in accordance with TDC 75.060 of this chapter to provide for the eventual implementation of the overall access plan. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 75.120. - Collector Streets Access Standards. 
(1)  Major Collectors. Direct access from newly constructed single family homes, duplexes or triplexes are not permitted. As major collectors in residential areas are fully improved, or adjacent land redevelops, direct access should be relocated to the nearest local street where feasible. 
(2)  Minor Collectors. Residential, commercial and industrial driveways where the frontage is greater or equal to 70 feet are permitted. Minimum spacing at 100 feet. Uses with less than 50 feet of frontage shall use a common (joint) access where available. 
(3)  If access is not able to be relocated to the nearest local street, the City Manager may allow interim access in accordance with 75.060 of this chapter to provide for the eventual implementation of the overall access plan. 
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 75.130. - New Streets Access Standards. 
(1)  New streets designed to serve as alternatives to direct, parcel by parcel, access onto arterials are shown in TDC Chapter 11, Transportation, (Figures 11-1 and 11-3). These streets are shown as corridors with the exact location determined through the partition, subdivision, public works permit or Architectural Review process. Unless modified by the City Council by the procedure set out below, these streets will be the only new intersections with arterials in the City. See map for changes 
(2)  Specific alignment of a new street may be altered by the City Manager upon finding that the street, in the proposed alignment, will carry out the objectives of this chapter to the same, or a greater degree as the described alignment, that access to adjacent and nearby properties is as adequately maintained and that the revised alignment will result in a segment of the Tualatin road system which is reasonable and logical. 
(3)  The City Council may include additional streets in TDC Chapter 11, Transportation, (Figures 11-1 and 11-3), through the plan amendment procedure. In addition to other required findings, the City Council must find that the addition is necessary to implement the objectives of this chapter. 
(Ord. 635-84, § 53, 6-11-84; Ord. 743-88, § 31, 3-28-88; Ord. 975-97, § 3, 5-12-97; Ord. 1023-99, § 11, 6-28-99; Ord. 1354-13 § 27, 02-25-13; Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-2018)  
TDC 75.140. - Existing Streets Access Standards. 
The following list describes in detail the freeways and arterials as defined in TDC 75.050 with respect to access. Recommendations are made for future changes in accesses and location of future accesses. These recommendations are examples of possible solutions and shall not be construed as limiting the City' s authority to change or impose different conditions if additional studies result in different recommendations from those listed below. 
(1)  INTERSTATE 5 (I-5). I-5 is a State facility and access is controlled by the State. 
(2)  INTERSTATE 205 (I-205). I-205 is a State facility and access is controlled by the State. 
(3)  PACIFIC HIGHWAY 99W. 
(a)  On the southeasterly side of Pacific Highway 99W access will be provided by Cipole Road, 130th Avenue, 124th Avenue and Hazelbrook Road. In addition to 130th Avenue, shared driveway accesses will be allowed between Tax Lots 2S1 21A 1800 (Grimm's Fuel, 18850 Cipole Road) and 1801 (Construction Equipment Company, 18650 99W), and Lots 2000 (no street address) and 2101 (Anderson Forge & Machine, 18500 99W). A shared driveway access will also be allowed between 130th Avenue and 124th Avenue. West of Cipole Road and south of Pacific Highway 99W access will be provided by a new street or private drive extending west of Cipole Road across from the proposed Cummins Drive/Cipole Road intersection. 
(b)  East of 124th Avenue on the southeasterly side of Pacific Highway 99W, property will access onto Tualatin Road or onto Hazelbrook Road. In this area a central access from Pacific Highway 99W consisting of one right-in and one right-out driveway may be allowed. The access point shall be located within the middle one-third of the frontage between 124th Avenue and Hazelbrook Road. The City Manager shall determine the final location at the time any portion of either site is developed. 
(c)  On the northwesterly side of Pacific Highway 99W access will be provided by Cipole Road and Pacific Drive. West of Cipole Road and north of Pacific Highway 99W access will be provided by Pacific Drive. Pacific Drive will be extended as a frontage road toward the 124th Avenue intersection as far as is practicable as determined by the City Manager. Past that point shared driveways shall be used as determined by the City Manager. Pacific Drive will be reconfigured to align with 130th Avenue to form a new intersection. From the reconfigured intersection with Pacific Drive and Pacific Highway 99W to 124th Avenue, interim accesses may be approved in accordance with TDC Chapter 75. Between 124th Avenue and the Tualatin River on the northwesterly side of Pacific Highway 99W existing accesses will remain except as noted below for development or redevelopment due to the median of Pacific Highway 99W these will be limited to right-turn in, right-turn out. Any redevelopment in this area will require that the driveway accesses be consolidated to a minimum number as determined by the City Manager. 
(4)  TUALATIN-SHERWOOD ROAD. 
(a)  Nyberg Street to Boones Ferry Road: Access to this section was purchased at the time of right-of-way acquisition. Access will be provided by Martinazzi Avenue and Boones Ferry Road. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code, a single access onto Tualatin-Sherwood Road shall be allowed along the north side of this section in the block between Martinazzi Avenue and Boones Ferry Road; its exact location and configuration shall be determined by the City Manager. 
(b)  Boones Ferry Road to 89th Avenue: All access to this property was purchased as part of the right-of-way acquisition. Access shall be limited to right-in, right-out access on the south side at Mohave Court and on the north side kitty-corner or opposite to Mohave Court. Full access shall be prohibited at these locations by means of a median barrier. An existing four-way intersection serving 89th Avenue, Old Tualatin-Sherwood Road, and a driveway of the Hedges Greene retail development (Tax Lot 2S123D 2600) located approximately 800 feet west of Boones Ferry Road. 
(c)  89th Avenue to Teton Avenue: 
(i)  Tualatin-Sherwood Road access shall be limited as follows: On the north side of the road the Emery Zidell Commons Subdivision (Tax Map 2S1-23D) shall have two street accesses located at 90th Avenue across from 90th Court and at 95th Place at the west property line. The intersection of 90th Avenue with Tualatin-Sherwood Road shall remain a four-way intersection. The four-way intersection at the west line of the Emery Zidell Subdivision shall remain located across from 95th Place on the south side of Tualatin-Sherwood Road. 
(ii)  Between 95th Place and 97th Avenue on the north side of Tualatin-Sherwood Road, the two existing driveways may remain, but limited to right-in, right-out. A cross access will be developed to serve tax lots 2S1 23CA 200, 90000, 700, 800, 801 and 900 for access to 95th Place. 
(iii)  The cul-de-sac street system (of 97th Avenue) extends north with Potano Street as a stub to the west to serve Tax Lot 2S1 23CB 100. On the south side Tualatin Gardens Subdivision (Tax Lot 2S1 23DA, 1400) shall access onto Old Tualatin-Sherwood Road. Tax Lots 2S1 23DB 00600 and 2S1 23DC 00401 shall access onto 95th Place. Between 97th Avenue and Teton Road, Tax Lots 2S1 23CC 200 and 300 shall have a joint driveway access, and Tax Lot 400 shall have a cross access to either the joint driveway on Tax Lots 200 and 300 or a cross access over Tax Lot 500 to Teton Avenue. 
(iv)  A driveway extends south of Tualatin-Sherwood Road at 97th Avenue. The driveway provides access for Tax Lot 2S1 23 CD 300 and the six Tualatin Business West Tax Lots 2S123CD 700, 800, 900, 1000, 1100, and 1200 located between 95th Place and the properties to the west fronting Teton (2S1 23CC/1100, 1200, 1300). The properties fronting on Teton Avenue take access from Teton Avenue. The Washington County water quality facility (Tax Lot 2S123CC 1000) is permitted the one existing service driveway adjacent to its east property line. 
(d)  Teton Avenue to Avery Street/112th Avenue: 
(i)  On the north side of Tualatin-Sherwood Road no new driveways will be constructed and existing driveways will be removed at the time of development or redevelopment. All of the properties will be served by either Manhasset Drive or 112th Avenue. 112th Avenue will connect to Myslony Street. Tax Lot 2S1 22DD 600 (Western Industrial Ceramics (2S1 22D/200) shall take access to Manhasset Street. An eastern extension off of the 112th Avenue/Myslony Street connection will terminate at and provide access to Tax Lot 2S1 22D 600 (Pascuzzi Investment LLC and may provide additional access for Tax Lot 2S1 22DD 100 (UPS) which has access from the west end of Manhasset Drive. 
(ii)  On the south side of Tualatin-Sherwood Road there will be no new driveways or streets. Development of property east of Tax Lot 2S1 27AA 90000 (Arlington Commons at Tualatin Condominiums) on Tualatin-Sherwood Road may be accomplished only with a joint access agreement with Lakeside Lumber through its driveways on Tax Lot 2S1 27AA 2000. Tax Lot 90000 shall have one access onto Tualatin-Sherwood Road. Properties between Arlington Commons at Tualatin and Avery Street on the south side are served from Avery Street and Avery Court and no driveway access will be constructed with Tualatin-Sherwood Road. 
(e)  Avery Street/112th to Cipole Road. On the north side of Tualatin-Sherwood Road between 112th Avenue and Cipole Road the area will be served by the following streets or driveways: 
(i)  115th Avenue which will extend north to Amu Street. 
(ii)  124th Avenue which will extend north and west to an intersection at 124th Avenue approximately 800 feet north of Tualatin-Sherwood Road. 
(iii)  124th Avenue. 
(iv)  Cipole Road. The exact location and configuration of the streets or driveways shall be determined by the City Manager. 
(v)  On the south side of Tualatin-Sherwood Road between Avery Street and 120th Avenue the area will be served by the following street system: 
(A)  115th Avenue. 
(B)  120th Avenue, which may be restricted to right-in, right-out movements in the future. The exact location and configuration of the streets shall be determined by the City Manager. No driveways will be constructed in this area and existing driveways will be removed. Tax Lot 2S127B 800 (Select Sales) shall have a cross access to 115th Avenue. 
(5)  NYBERG STREET. 
(a)  Tualatin-Sherwood Road to 65th Avenue: 
(i)  West of I-5. On the south side between Fred Meyer and I-5 any development shall be served by the Fred Meyer driveway Tax Lot 2S1 24CA 200 or Urban Renewal Area Block 6) aligned with the Urban Renewal Area Block 2 driveway on the north side and shall not be granted any access to Nyberg Street. No additional driveways will be allowed. 
(ii)  East of I-5. 
(A)  On the north side of the Nyberg Woods development (Tax Lot 2S1 24A 2503) shall be limited to one signalized access and one right-in/right-out access. The driveway for Forest Rim Apartments (Tax Lot 2S1 24A 2800) may remain. 
(b)  On the south side, access to Tax Lot 2S1 24DB 200 (Shell) shall be limited to right-in, right-out. Tax Lot 2S1 24DB 100 (La-Z-Boy) access shall be aligned with the Nyberg Woods signalized access. The existing westside Nyberg Retail access shall be limited to right-in, right-out. Tax Lot 2S1 24DA 100 (Meridian Park Veterinary Hospital and 7Eleven) shall share a driveway that aligns with the 65th/Nyberg Street intersection. There will be no new additional driveways created in this section of roadway. 
(6)  124TH AVENUE. 
(a)  Pacific Highway to Tualatin Road. No street or driveway accesses on the west side of this intersection will be permit-ted. No driveway accesses shall be allowed between Pacific Highway 99W and Tualatin Road. 
(b)  Tualatin Road to Herman Road. Between Tualatin Road and Herman Road, access to 124th Avenue shall be limited to a street intersection at Leveton Drive. The area west of the 124th Avenue/Tualatin Road intersection and south of Pacific Highway 99W will be served by a cul-de-sac connecting to the westward extension of Leveton Drive. 
(c)  Herman Road to Tualatin-Sherwood Road. On the east side of 124th Avenue between Herman Road and Tualatin-Sherwood Road the area will be served by the following streets or driveways: 
(i)  A street intersection at Myslony Street. 
(ii)  A street or driveway intersection approximately 800 feet south of the Myslony Street/124th Avenue intersection extending east with an alternative to extend north to connect with Myslony Street a minimum of 150 feet east of 124th Avenue. Access may be limited to right in/right out as determined by the City Manager. 
(iii)  Cimino Street extending east and south to an intersection at Tualatin-Sherwood Road across from 120th Avenue. The exact location and configuration of the streets and driveways shall be determined by the City Manager. 
(iv)  On the west side of 124th Avenue between Herman Road and Tualatin-Sherwood Road the area will be served by the following streets or driveways: 
(A)  A driveway across from Myslony Street. 
(B)  A street or driveway intersection approximately 800 feet north of the intersection of Tualatin-Sherwood Road and 124th Avenue. The exact location and configuration of the streets or driveways shall be determined by the City Manager. 
(d)  Tualatin-Sherwood Road. Between Tualatin-Sherwood Road and Basalt Creek Parkway access to 124th Avenue shall be limited to street intersections at Tonquin Road and one other location. 
(7)  LOWER BOONES FERRY ROAD. 
(a)  Boones Ferry Road to Childs Road. 
(i)  On the south side of the road, Tax Lot 2S1 24AB 800 shall have its access located at its east property line. This access shall be combined with the access of the Mt. Hood Chemical Building (Tax Lot 2S1 24 700) at its west property line into one joint access. 
(ii)  On the north side of the road is a small lot (Leageld Development; Tax Lot 2S1 13DC/2000) the driveway of which shall line up with the intersection of Childs Road and Lower Boones Ferry Road. 
(b)  Childs Road to I-5 Freeway: 
(i)  On the south side of the road the existing driveways may be allowed to remain. No new driveways will be permitted. 
(ii)  On the north side of the road, the existing driveways may be allowed to remain. No new driveways will be permitted. 
(c)  I-5 Freeway northerly to Bridgeport Road: 
(i)  On the west side, Hazel Fern Road shall intersect with Lower Boones Ferry Road, as Traveller's Lane. 
(ii)  On the east side, the Tri-Met park and ride shall be permitted two driveway accesses as determined by the City Manager. 
(d)  72nd Avenue to the east City limits: 
(i)  On the north side access shall be permitted only by 65th Avenue and 63rd Avenue and a right-in, right-out driveway between 65th and 63rd Avenues. Between 63rd Avenue and the east City limits the properties fronting Lower Boones Ferry Road shall take access from 63rd Avenue. 
(ii)  On the south side access shall be permitted at 65th Avenue. Between 65th Avenue and the east City limits no new accesses shall be permitted. A median may be constructed to limit access to right-in, right-out. 
(8)  BOONES FERRY ROAD. 
(a)  North City Limits to the Tualatin River. All existing driveways will remain. No new driveways will be permitted. 
(b)  Tualatin River to Tualatin Road. 
(i)  Between the River and Martinazzi Avenue on the south side, the access for the apartments (Tax Lot 2S1 24B 1500) will be closed and converted over to the Loop Road. The Loop Road will have a right-in, right-out connection to Boones Ferry Road between the river and Martinazzi Avenue. 
(ii)  On the south side of Boones Ferry Road between Martinazzi Avenue and the driveway for the White Lot (formerly Lot C), any development or redevelopment shall take access over the White Lot or from Martinazzi Avenue. 
(iii)  Between the White lot and 84th Avenue, all properties shall have combined accesses resulting in only one access on Boones Ferry Road. Between 84th Avenue and Tualatin Road on the south side, any redevelopment shall result in no driveways onto Boones Ferry Road and access shall be taken from 84th Avenue or Seneca Street. 
(iv)  On the north side Tax Lots 2S1 24BC 1301 and 1400 and Tax Lot 2S1 24B 1300 (Apartments by Hedges Creek: Kaplan) shall combine their driveways at a location to be determined by the design of the Martinazzi Avenue-Boones Ferry Road intersection. Further the properties shall combine their access into one on Lot 1300 across from the White lot's driveway. Between the Green (former Lot G) and Blue (former Lot H) Lots, any redevelopment of these properties shall remove the existing driveways and take access from the public parking lots from a cross access between the two public lots. Between the Blue Lot and Tualatin Road any development or redevelopment shall have access off of Tualatin Road at the north edge of the property or over the Blue Lot. 
(c)  Tualatin Road to Tualatin-Sherwood Road. 
(i)  On the west side of this road is the Portland & Western Railroad (PNWR) tracks. There will be no access to Boones Ferry Road across the PNWR tracks except an access for a public street to the west side of the railroad tracks, centered on the centerline of Nyberg Street. The existing two driveways to the Tax Lot 2S1 23D 3400 (Sweek House also known as Willowbrook) shall be allowed a gated emergency access onto Boones Ferry Road, the other access shall be closed and access taken over Tax Lot 2S1 23D 2600 (Hedges Greene retail development) to Nyberg Street. 
(ii)  On the east side of this road, all redevelopment shall lead to elimination of all driveways onto Boones Ferry Road. Vehicular access to Boones Ferry Road in this section shall be limited to the Seneca Street intersection and Nyberg Street intersection. This will require interim access agreements per TDC 75.090. 
(d)  Tualatin-Sherwood Road to Sagert Street. 
(i)  On the west side, all existing driveways will be allowed to remain. On the frontage of the property of the demolished historic Tualatin Elementary School (Tax Lots 2S1 23DD 500 and 501), a new local street intersection is allowed on SW Boones Ferry Road that connects to a future public street on the Old Tualatin Elementary School property that extends north from Sagert Street in the approximate alignment of 90th Avenue. The new local street intersection may be located approximately 500 ft. north of the intersection with Sagert Street. Tax Lot 2S1 23DA 100 (the unnamed retail development at the intersection with Warm Springs Street will have one access aligned with Warm Springs. 
(ii)  On the east side, the driveway of McDonald's (Tax Lots 2S1 24CB 1201, 1301, and 1400) was closed and shall remain closed. Any additional development on the Brock property (Tax Lot 2S1 24CB 2100) shall result in closure of this driveway to Boones Ferry Road. Any additional development on (Tax Lot 2S1 24CB 2200) (Tualatin West Center retail development) shall result in closure of this driveway to Boones Ferry Road. Between Warm Springs Street and Tualatin-Sherwood Road, as an option to closing the driveways at Brocks, and Tualatin West Center, it may be permissible to construct a raised median barrier or other improvements in Boones Ferry Road in this section to physically eliminate left turning movements, thus limiting all these driveways to right turn in, right turn out. Any redevelopment of the residential property between Mohawk and Sagert on the east side of Boones Ferry Road shall be accomplished in such a manner that the ultimate access to this area is from a street off of Sagert Street at its intersection with 86th Avenue. This may require interim agreements in accordance with TDC 75.090. All existing driveways in this area will be allowed to remain so long as the use of the property does not change. 
(e)  Sagert Street to Avery Street. The existing driveways will be allowed to remain. Any redevelopment of any residential property between Sagert and Avery shall result in no additional driveways being constructed in this area. 
(f)  Avery Street to Ibach Street. South of Avery Street, the Sundae Meadows Subdivision and Tualatin Presbyterian Church (Tax Lot 2S1 26AC 301) shall access Boones Ferry Road via Siletz Drive. One additional street or private drive (Cherry Lane) will be allowed for the Boones Ferry Commons Condominiums (Tax Lot 2S1 26CA 90000). 
(g)  Ibach Street to Norwood Road. Development of these residential properties shall result in no more than two driveway accesses for Tualatin High School, one emergency access with no curb cut for Grahams Landing Townhomes Condos (Tax Lot 2S1 35BA 90000) and only street intersections for other properties. All street intersections on Boones Ferry Road between Ibach and Norwood shall be spaced a minimum of 500 feet apart. 
(9)  65TH AVENUE. 
(a)  Nyberg to Borland: There will be no new additional driveways. 
(b)  Borland Road to south city limits: A street connection will be constructed across from Sagert Street to serve property to the east of 65th Avenue. 
(10)  BORLAND ROAD. 
(a)  Between 65th and the Entrance to Bridgeport School: In this section of roadway, as the residential properties develop, all accesses to Borland shall be limited to street intersections. These street intersections shall be spaced a minimum of 500 feet apart. All development in this area shall be interconnected so there are no dead-end entrances from Borland Road. 
(b)  Bridgeport School Entrance to Saum Creek: As the residential properties develop, all accesses to Borland shall be limited to street intersections. These street intersections shall be spaced a minimum of 500 feet apart. All development in this area shall be interconnected so there are no dead-end entrances from Borland Road. Access to Prosperity Park Road is allowed. 
(11)  BRIDGEPORT ROAD. 
(a)  72nd Avenue to the West City Limits. 
(i)  On the north side, the existing driveways will be allowed to remain. No new driveways will be permitted. 
(ii)  On the south the existing driveways will be allowed to remain. No new driveways will be permitted. 
(12)  72ND AVENUE. 
(a)  Bridgeport Road to North City Limits. The existing driveways will be allowed to remain. No new driveways will be permitted. 
(13)  MARTINAZZI AVENUE. 
(a)  Boones Ferry Road to Seneca Street: 
(i)  On the west side, any redevelopment on the Haberman and Soft Tough Dentistry property (2S1 24BC 1500 and 1503) or the unnamed retail development property with corner tenant Umpqua Bank (Tax Lot 2S1 24BC 1502) shall result in combining these two driveways into one driveway on Martinazzi Avenue, or the Halstin retail development property shall take access from the White Lot (former Lot C) to Boones Ferry Road. 
(ii)  On the east side the existing driveway shall be removed and access shall be taken off of the Loop Road. 
(b)  Seneca Street to Nyberg Street. No driveways shall be permitted. The raised center median prohibiting left turns in this area shall remain until driveways are removed. On the west side on Tax Lot 2S1 24BC 2702 (Wells Fargo Bank), the driveway shall be removed and access taken from Seneca Street or Nyberg Street. On the east side the driveway for Tax Lot 2S114B 2000 (Tualatin Center retail development Building 1) shall be removed and access taken from the Loop Road or Nyberg Street. 
(c)  Nyberg Street to Tualatin-Sherwood Road. There shall be no access to Martinazzi Avenue. 
(d)  Tualatin-Sherwood Road to Warm Springs Street. The only access shall be the existing Fred Meyer/Martinazzi Square driveway intersection. 
(e)  Warm Springs Street to Sagert Street. There shall be no additional access granted. The only street intersection will be Mohawk Street. 
(14)  SAGERT STREET. 
(a)  Martinazzi Avenue to 65th Avenue. No new driveways or streets shall be al-lowed, except the City Manager may allow one driveway from the SE corner lot of Sagert and Martinazzi. This driveway may be restricted to right-in, right-out. 
(15)  LEVETON DRIVE. 
(a)  108th Avenue to 118th Avenue. 
(i)  On the north side of Leveton Drive, JAE (2S122B 200) shall align a driveway across from 118th Avenue and be permitted a second driveway approximately 50 feet from their east property line. Novellus (2S122AA 500 and 2S122AB 100) shall be permitted three driveways located approximately 25 feet and 950 feet from the west property line for Tax Lot 100 and 600 feet west of 108th Avenue for Tax Lot 500. 
(ii)  On the south side, Phight Inc. (2S122 300) shall be allowed a driveway aligned with the west Novellus (2S122AB 100) driveway and a driveway adjacent to their east property line. Fujimi (2S122 400) shall be allowed a driveway adjacent to their west property line and east property line. Tofle (2S122AD 400) shall be allowed a driveway aligning across from the Novellus (2S122AA 500) driveway and a second driveway approximately 260 feet west of 108th Avenue. 
(b)  118th Avenue to 124th Avenue. The existing driveways will be allowed to remain. No new driveways will be permitted. 
(16)  108TH AVENUE. 
(a)  Leveton Drive to Herman Road. 
(i)  On the west side, Tofle (2S122AD 400) shall take access from Leveton Drive. The undeveloped property (2S122AD 500) shall be allowed one driveway onto 108th Avenue. The old Shulz Clearwater site (2S122AD 800) and then Northwest Pipe and Metal Fab (2S122AD 600 and 700) shall provide a joint driveway access. The Wahco Inc. property (2S122AD 900) shall take access from Herman Road. 
(ii)  On the east side, the DOT Inc. site shall have a driveway that aligns with Leveton Drive. The City Operations Center (2S122AD 200 and 300) will be permitted two driveways at locations to be determined by the City Manager. 
(17)  HERMAN ROAD. 
(a)  Teton Avenue to 108th Avenue: 
(i)  On the north side, the existing driveways will be allowed to remain. No new driveways will be permitted. Airifco (2S123B 600) will be permitted one driveway adjacent to their west property line. 
(ii)  On the south side is the Portland & Western Railroad (PNWR) tracks. There will be no access to Herman Road across the tracks except for a shared driveway between the Kem Equipment (2S122AD 800) and Marshall Property (2S122AD 1000) located on the common property line. The Marshall Property (2S123BC 1000) shall take access from Teton Avenue. 
(b)  108th Avenue to 118th 
(i)  On the north side the existing driveways will be allowed to remain. No new driveways will be permitted. 
(ii)  On the south side is the Portland & Western Railroad (PNWR) tracks. There will be no access to Herman Road across the tracks. 
(c)  118th Avenue to 124th Avenue: 
(i)  On the north side the existing driveways will be allowed to remain. No new driveways will be permitted. 
(ii)  On the south side is the Portland & Western Railroad (PNWR) tracks. There will be no access to Herman Road across the tracks. 
(18)  90TH AVENUE. 
(a)  Tualatin Road to Tualatin-Sherwood Road. The existing driveways will be allowed to remain. No new driveways will be permitted. 
(19)  AVERY STREET. 
(a)  Teton Road to Tualatin-Sherwood Road: 
(20)  TETON AVENUE. 
(a)  Tualatin Road to Herman Road. The existing driveways will be allowed to remain. No new driveways will be permitted. 
(b)  Herman Road to Tualatin-Sherwood Road. The existing driveways will be allowed to remain. No new driveways will be permitted. 
(c)  Tualatin-Sherwood Road to Avery Street. The existing driveways will be allowed to remain. No new driveways will be permitted. 
(21)  BASALT CREEK PARKWAY. 
(a)  124th Avenue to Boones Ferry Access to the Parkway shall be limited to Grahams Ferry Road and Boones Ferry Road. 
(Ord. 635-84, § 54, 6-11-84; Ord. 786-89, 11-14-89; Ord. 859-92, § 1, 2-24-92; Ord. 800-90, § 2, 3 and 4, 3-26-90; Ord. 849-91, § 41, 11-25-91; Ord. 879-92, § 1, 10-12-92; Ord. 882-92, § 26 and 27, 12-14-92; Ord. 975-97, § 4, 5-12-97; Ord. 982-97, § 9, 8-4-97; Ord. 1023-99, § 12, 6-28-99; Ord. 1080-01 § 1, 7-23-01; Ord. 1103-02, 03-25-02; Ord. 1080-01, 7-23-01; Ord. 1191-05, 6-27-05; Ord. 1234-07 § 1, 4-9-07, Ord. 1309-10, § 1. 8-23-10; Ord. 1321-11 § 53, 4-25-11; Ord. 1354-13 § 28, 02-25-13; Ord 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. No. 1418-19, §§ 7, 8, 4-22-19)  
CHAPTER 80 - MARIJUANA FACILITIES 
 
TDC 80.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Protect the general health, safety, property, and welfare of the public; 
(2)  Balance the right of individuals to produce and access marijuana and marijuana derivatives consistent with state law, with the need to minimize adverse impacts to nearby properties that may result from the production, storage, distribution, sale, and/or use of marijuana and derivatives; 
(3)  Prevent or reduce criminal activity that may result in harm to persons or property; 
(4)  Prevent or reduce diversion of state-licensed marijuana and marijuana derivatives to minors; and 
(5)  Minimize impacts to the City's public safety services by reducing calls for service. 
(Ord No. 1379-15, 03-23-15)  
TDC 80.020. - Definitions. 
The words and phrases have the following meanings: 
Edible marijuana means edible product that contains marijuana. 
Homegrown marijuana means marijuana grown or made by a person 21 years of age or older for noncommercial purposes. 
Marijuana means all parts of the plant of the Cannabis family Cannabaceae, whether growing or not; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its resin, and includes both medical and recreational marijuana as defined by Oregon law. 
Marijuana extract means a product obtained by separating resins from the marijuana plant by solvent extraction. 
Marijuana facility means a commercial or public use or structure where marijuana is produced, processed, wholesaled, retailed, distributed, transferred, sold or consumed and registered with the Oregon Health Authority (OHA)or the Oregon Liquor Control Commission (OLCC). 
(Ord No. 1379-15, 03-23-15; Ord 1414-18, 12-10-18)  
TDC 80.030. - Relationship to Other Standards. 
(1)  The provisions of this Chapter apply to all marijuana facilities requiring a state license or registration. 
(2)  The regulations in this Chapter are in addition to other development code standards, including all base zone standards. Sites with overlay zones, plan districts, inventoried hazards, and/or sensitive lands are subject to additional regulations. Specific uses or development types may also be subject to regulations set forth elsewhere in the Tualatin Development Code. 
(3)  To the extent there is a conflict between other provisions in the Tualatin Development Code and the provisions of this Chapter, the provisions in this Chapter apply. 
(Ord No. 1379-15, 03-23-15)  
TDC 80.050. - Planning Districts Where Marijuana Facilities Permitted. 
Marijuana facilities are permitted in the following planning districts and subject to the other provisions of this Chapter: 
(1)  Light Manufacturing (ML); 
(2)  General Manufacturing (MG); and 
(3)  Manufacturing Business Park (MBP). 
(Ord No. 1379-15, 03-23-15)  
TDC 80.060. - Standards for Marijuana Facilities. 
(1)  All Marijuana facilities must comply with all applicable State requirements. 
(2)  A marijuana facility cannot be located within 3,000 feet, measured from the closest property line, from any: 
(a)  Residential Planning District or residential uses; 
(b)  City Park listed below: 
(i)  Atfalati Park 
(ii)  Brown's Ferry Park 
(iii)  Ibach Park 
(iv)  Jurgens Park 
(v)  Lafky Park 
(vi)  Little Woodrose Nature Park 
(vii)  Saarinen Wayside Park 
(viii)  Stoneridge Park 
(ix)  Sweek Pond Natural Area Park 
(x)  Tualatin Commons 
(xi)  Tualatin Commons Park 
(xii)  Tualatin Community Park 
(c)  School; and 
(d)  Library. 
(3)  A marijuana facility cannot be located within 2,000 feet, measured from the closest property line, of any other marijuana facility. 
(4)  A marijuana facility cannot exceed 3,000 square feet in size. 
(5)  A marijuana facility must be located in a permanent building and may not be located in a trailer, shipping container, cargo container, tent, motor vehicle, or other non-permanent structure. 
(6)  A marijuana facility that is a retail sales or medical dispensary marijuana facility is prohibited from co-locating with any other marijuana facility. 
(7)  Drive-through marijuana facilities are prohibited. 
(Ord No. 1379-15, 03-23-15)  
TDC 80.070. - Marijuana Facility Operating Restrictions. 
(1)  Retail sales and medical dispensary marijuana facilities are restricted to the following operating hours: 
(a)  The hours of operation that a retail sales marijuana facility may be open to the public is between 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. of the same day. 
(b)  The hours of operation that a medical dispensary marijuana facility may be open to registry identification cardholders is between 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. of the same day. 
(2)  All marijuana facilities must comply with the following operating restrictions: 
(a)  Comply with the restrictions on edible marijuana as provided in TDC 80.100; 
(b)  All marijuana odors and other objectionable odors must be confined to levels undetectable at the property line; 
(c)  Primary entrances must be located on street-facing facades and clearly visible from a public or private street; and 
(d)  Outdoor storage of merchandise, plants, or other materials is prohibited. 
(Ord No. 1379-15, 03-23-15)  
TDC 80.100. - Edible Marijuana. 
Marijuana facilities that produce, process, wholesale, distribute, transfer, or sell edible marijuana must comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  All edible marijuana must be individually wrapped at the original point of preparation. 
(2)  Labeling must be distinctly and clearly legible on the front of the package and must include: 
(a)  A warning that the contents contain marijuana; 
(b)  A statement that the contents are not a food product; and 
(c)  A statement emphasizing that the product is to be kept away from children. 
(3)  Packaging of edibles must be in child-resistant packaging. 
(4)  Packaging that makes the product attractive to children or imitates candy is prohibited. 
(5)  Retail sale of edible marijuana products must be behind a commercial counter or in an enclosed display case. 
(Ord No. 1379-15, 03-23-15)  
TDC 80.200. - Butane Extraction. 
The production of marijuana extracts through the use of butane is prohibited. 
(Ord No. 1379-15, 03-23-15)  
TDC 80.300. - Homegrown Marijuana. 
(1)  Persons growing homegrown marijuana must comply with all applicable state law requirements. 
(2)  Homegrown marijuana cannot be grown in the front yard of any property in a residential planning district and must comply with the following: 
(a)  Be fully screened from view on all sides; and 
(b)  Be located at least ten feet away from all property lines and 25 feet away from all adjacent residences on neighboring properties. 
(3)  No person may produce, process, keep, or store homemade marijuana extracts. 
(Ord No. 1379-15, 03-23-15)  
TDC 80.400. - Violations. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter commits a civil infraction and is subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00. Each violation, and each day that a violation continues, is a separate civil infraction. 
(2)  The civil infraction procedures in Tualatin Municipal Code Chapter 7-01 apply to the prosecution of any violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord No. 1379-15, 03-23-15)  
APPENDIX A - MAPS 
Map 9-1: Community Plan Map 
Map 9-2: Neighborhood Planning Areas 
Map 9-3: Central Urban Renewal Area 
Map 9-4: Design Type Boundaries 
Map 9-5: Commercial Setback & Commercial Services Overlay 
Map 9-6: Agricultural Animals 
Map 12-1: Water Plan 
Map 13-1: Sewer Plan 
Map 14-1: Recommended Capital Improvements Hedges Creek Subbasin 
Maps 71-1—71-6: Wetlands 
Map 72-1: NRPO and Greenways 
Map 72-2: Greenway Development Plan 
Map 72-3: Significant Natural Resources 
 
(Ord. No. 1422-19, § 3, 7-8-19; Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 30, 6-22-20) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Ord. 1427-19 , § 47, 11-25-19) 
 
(Ord. 1427-19 , § 47, 11-25-19) 
TABLE OF OMITTED MAPS 
Ordinance Number 	Adoption Date 	Maps Removed 
1427-19 	11-25-2019 	74-1 
  
APPENDIX B - FIGURES 
Figure 4-1: Comparison of Population and Housing Projects 1970 to 2000 
Figure 11-1: Functional Classification and Traffic Signal Plan 
Figure 11-2: Metro Regional Street Design System 
Figure 11-3: Local Street Plan 
Figure 11-4: Bicycle and Pedestrian System 
Figure 11-5: Transit Plan 
Figure 11-6: Freight Routes 
Figure 34-1: New Fence 
Figure 34-2: Masonry Fence Design Type 
Figure 38-1: Freeway-Oriented Activity Areas 
Figure 57-1: 100-Foot Maximum Structure Height 
Figure 71-1: Development Setbacks 
Figure 73-1: Parking Space Design Standards 
Figure 73-2: Vision Clearance Area 
Figure 73-3: Parking Maximum Map 
Figure 73-4: Central Design District 
Figures 74-2A-G: Street Design Standards 
 
 
 
 
 
(Ord. 1427-19 , § 46, 11-25-19) 
 
 
Section 34.330 Figure 34-1 
 
Section 34.340 Figure 34-2 
 
 
Figure 57-1 
100-Foot Maximum Structure Height 
 
(Ord. No. 1438-20 , § 14, 6-22-20) 
Figure 71-1 
Development Setbacks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Street Design Standards 
 
Street Design Standards 
 
Street Design Standards 
 
Street Design Standards 
 
Street Design Standards 
 
Street Design Standards 
 
Street Design Standards 
TABLE OF OMITTED FIGURES 
Ordinance Number 	Adoption Date 	Figures Removed 
1427-19 	11-25-2019 	3-4 
		11-4 
1438-20 	 6-22-2020 	57-1, 57-2 
  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the Tualatin Code included in this Code. 
Ordinance 
Number 	Adoption Date 	Section 	Section 
this Code 
1418-19 	 4-22-2019 	1 	4.065(4) 
		2 	7.010(11) 
		3       Added 	9.046 
		4 	51.110 
		5 	62.300 
		6 	75.050(2) 
		7, 8 	75.140 
1422-19 
 7- 8-2019 	1 	49.100 
			49.200 
			49.210 
			49.300 
		2 	73F.020 
		3 	App. A, Map 9-1 
1427-19 
11-25-2019 	1—4 	13.010—13.030 
		5—10 	13.050—13.090 
		11 	15.010(3) 
		12 	15.020(18) 
		13, 14 	15.100, 15.110 
		15 	31.060 
		16 	36.400(5) 
		17 	36.420(4) 
		18 	39.600 
		19 	41.320(3) 
		20 	42.320(3) 
		21 	43.320(3) 
		22 	44.320(3) 
		23 	49.320(3) 
		24 	50.310(2)(b) 
		25 	51.310(3)(b) 
		26 	52.310(2)(b) 
		27 	55.310(2)(b) 
		28 	57.100 
		29 	60.310(4)(b) 
		30 	61.310(3)(b) 
		31 	64.310(7)(b) 
		32, 33 	72.010(1), 72.020(1) 
		34       Rpld 	72.055 
		35 	72.070(4) 
		36 	72.085(1) 
		37—39 	72.090—72.110 
		40 	73C.040 
		41 	74.705 
		42 	74.707 
		43 	Tbl. 74-1 
		44       Dltd 	App. A, Fig. 3-4 
		46 	App. A, Fig. 11-4 
		47, 48 	App. B, Maps 72-2, 74-1 
		49 	15.010 
		50 	13.010 
1438-20 
 6-22-2020 	1 	5.020 
		2 	5.030 
		3 	6.030 
		4 	6.040 
		5 	31.060 
		6 	38.060 
		7 	38.105 
		8 	38.110(4) 
		9 	32.220(1) 
		10 	32.225(1) 
		11 	54.100 
		12 	54.310 
		13       Rpld 	57.005—57.900 
		14       Added 	57.010—57.300 
			App. B 
		15 	73A.200 
		16 	73A.300 
		17       Added 	73A.400 
		18       Added 	73A.410 
		19, 20       Rnbd 	73A.400, 73A.500 
		      as 	73A.500, 73A.600 
		21 	73B.020 
		22 	73B.040 
		23       Added 	73B.050 
		24—27       Rnbd 	73B.050—73B.080 
		      as 	73B.060—73B.090 
		28       Added 	73C.230 
		29, 30       Rnbd 	73C.230, 73C.240 
		      as 	73C.240, 73C.250 
		31 	App. A 
 

