CITY CODE
of
UMATILLA, OREGON
1993
Code current through:
Ord. 841, passed 1-7-2020
 
Published by:
STERLING CODIFIERS
an
American Legal Publishing Company
One West Fourth Street  *  3rd Floor  *  Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the City of Umatilla, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 841, passed January 7, 2020.  Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Cincinnati, Ohio
PENDING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 842
AN ORDINANCE PROCLAIMING THE ANNEXATION OF UNION STREET AND 44.27 ACRES LOCATED
AT THE SOUTHWEST INTERSECTION OF HIGHWAY 730 AND HIGHWAY 395 AND AT THE
SOUTHWEST CORNER OF ROXBURY ROAD AND BUD DRAPER ROAD AND WEST OF THE BEACH
ACCESS ROAD AND WANAPA ROAD INTERSECTION AND WITHDRAWING SAID PROPERTY FROM
UMATILLA COUNTY SHERIFF’S LAW ENFORCEMENT DISTRICT; ACCEPTING WRITTEN
APPLICATION FOR ANNEXATION FROM ALL OF THE OWNERS OF THE AREA AND NOT LESS THAN
50 PERCENT OF THE ELECTORS RESIDING THEREIN; MAKING FINDINGS; SETTING THE FINAL
BOUNDARIES OF THE PROPERTY TO BE ANNEXED; AND SETTING THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
MAP AND ZONING DESIGNATION FOR 44.27 ACRES OF THE ANNEXED PROPERTY
 
   WHEREAS, certain real properties (hereinafter referred to as Property)
located southwest of the intersection of Highway 730 and Highway 395 and at the
southwest corner of Roxbury Road and Bud Draper Road and west of the Beach
Access Road and Wanapa Road within the urban growth area of Umatilla, Oregon is
owned by the City of Umatilla; and
 
   WHEREAS, the owner of the Property requested annexation of the Property into
the Umatilla city limits; and
 
   WHEREAS, the City of Umatilla has assumed jurisdiction over Union Street
(Resolution No. 08-2020; Board Order BCC 2019-059) and request to annex Union
Street into city limit to facilitate improvement of Union Street to a City
standard; and
 
   WHEREAS, the Umatilla City Planning Commission held public hearings on
November 12, 2019 to consider annexation requests ANX-1-2019, ANX-2-2019 and
ANX-3-2019, by the applicant to annex the property and recommended approval of
the request to the City Council; and
 
WHEREAS, the Umatilla City Council held public hearings on January 7, 2020 to
consider the Planning Commission’s recommendation and adopted the Planning
Commission’s findings and conclusions as its own for ANX-1-2019, ANX-2-2019 and
ANX-3-2019 in approving the application request.
 
NOW THEREFORE, THE CITY OF UMATILLA DOES ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:
 
Section 1.   Findings.  The Umatilla City Council does hereby find that:
 
a.   The Property legally described in Section 3 below is within the urban
growth area of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
 
b.   The owner of the Property made written application to the City with the
consent of the owners for annexation of the Property and all of the electors
residing in the area have consented in writing to this annexation.
 
c.   The Plan and Zoning designations for the Property and for Union Street are
described in Section 5 below.
 
d.   It is not necessary to call or hold an election in the City or in the area
requested to be annexed or to hold the hearing otherwise required under ORS
222.120.
 
e.   There is no other city, district, or other municipal corporation involved
in the annexation.
 
Section 2.   Consent.  All of the owners and not less than 50 percent of the
electors have consented in writing to this annexation, which are on file with
the City, and are hereby accepted.
 
Section 3.   Setting the final boundaries.  The final boundaries of the
Property hereby annexed are legally described as follows:
 
Parcel 1 (Commonly known as Tax Lot 100 on Assessors Map 5N2815BC; Tax Account
# 133122)
All that portion of the Southwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section
15, Township 5 North, Range 28 East of the Willamette Meridian, Umatilla
County, Oregon, laying Southerly of the Southerly right-of-way line of Highway
No. 730 and Westerly of the Westerly right-of-way line of Highway No. 395;
Excepting therefrom that tract of land conveyed to Wilbur L. Duncan, et ux. by
deed recorded in Book 184, Page 286, Deed Records;
Also excepting therefrom that tract of land conveyed to James L. Schell, et ux.
by deed recorded in Instrument No. 2005-4800537, Office of Umatilla County
Records;
Also excepting therefrom any portion lying within the Highway and County Road
rights-of-ways.
Parcel 2 (Commonly known as Tax Lot 100 on Assessors Map 5N2815CB; Tax Account
# 133140)
Parcel 1, PARTITION PLAT NO. 2001-32 (Instrument No. 2001-3910573, Office of
Umatilla County Records) located in the Northwest Quarter of the Southwest
Quarter of Section 15, Township 5 North, Range 28 East of the Willamette
Meridian, Umatilla County, Oregon.
Parcel 3 (Commonly known as Tax Lot 2600 on Assessors Map 5N2811; Tax Account
#164311)
Lot 7, PORT TERMINAL SUBDIVISION, recorded October 14, 2011, Instrument No.
2011-5830649, Umatilla County Records, located in the Southeast Quarter of
Section 10 and the Southeast Quarter and Southwest Quarter of Section 11,
Township 5 North, Range 28, East of the Willamette Meridian, Umatilla County,
Oregon.
Parcel 4 (Commonly known as Tax Lot 2800 on Assessors Map 5N2814; Tax Account
#161733)
Lot 12, PORT OF UMATILLA SUBDIVISION, located in the East Half of Section 14
and the Southeast Quarter of Section 11, Township 5 North, Range 28, East of
the Willamette Meridian, Umatilla County, Oregon.
Union Street
Union Street is located is the northwest Quarter of Section 22, Township 5
North, Range 28, E.W.M., Umatilla County.
The urban growth area is amended to exclude the above described property.
 
Section 4.   Proclamation of annexation and withdrawal from Umatilla County
Sheriff’s Law Enforcement District.   The City Council does hereby publicly
declare and officially announce that the property described in Section 3 above
is hereby annexed into the city limits of the City of Umatilla, Oregon as
authorized under ORS chapter 125, and does hereby declare the said property
withdrawn from the Umatilla County Sheriff’s Law Enforcement District.
 
Section 5.   Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Map Amendment. The Comprehensive
Plan and Zoning Map designation of the Property shall be the as follows:
 
Parcel 1 (Tax Lot 100 on Assessors Map 5N2815BC; Tax Account # 133122) shall be
the City’s General Commercial (GC) zone.
 
Parcel 2 (Tax Lot 100 on Assessors Map 5N2815CB; Tax Account # 133140) shall be
the City’s General Commercial (GC) zone.
Parcel 3 (Commonly known as Tax Lot 2600 on Assessors Map 5N2811; Tax Account
#164311) shall be the City’s Heavy Industrial (M2) zone.
Parcel 4 (Commonly known as Tax Lot 2800 on Assessors Map 5N2814; Tax Account
#161733) shall be the City’s Heavy Industrial (M2) zone.
Union Street shall be the City’s Community Service (CS) designation.
Section 6.   Severability. If any provision of this Ordinance is held to be
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall not affect
other provisions of this Ordinance that can be given effect without the invalid
provision, and to this end the provisions of this Ordinance are severable.
 
Section 7.   Effective date.  The effective date of this ordinance shall be 30
days after its passage by the city council and approval by the mayor, or by the
council president in the mayor’s absence.
 
 
   PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Council this 7th day of January, 2020.
 
Council members voting yes:    Councilor Funderburk, Councilor Roxbury,
Councilor Wheeler, Councilor Chavez, and Councilor TenEyck.
                                                      
 
Council members voting no:
      NA                                                   
 
Absent Council members:      Councilor
Smith                                          
 
Abstaining Council members:
         NA                                                
 
 
And SIGNED by the Mayor/Council President this 7th day of January, 2020.
 
 
 
                                                                              
Mary Dedrick, Mayor
 
 
 
ATTEST:
 
 
                        
Nanci Sandoval, City Recorder
 
ORDINANCE NO. 843
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO UMATILLA ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE AND ITS SUCCESSORS AND
ASSIGNS, A NONEXCLUSIVE RIGHT AND FRANCHISE FOR A PERIOD OF TWENTY (20) YEARS
TO CONSTRUCT, MAINTAIN AND OPERATE, IN, ON AND UNDER THE PRESENT AND FUTURE
STREETS, ALLEYS, BRIDGES AND PUBLIC PLACES OF THE CITY OF UMATILLA, UMATILLA
COUNTY, OREGON, ELECTRIC LIGHT, POWER LINES AND APPURTENANCES FOR THE PURPOSE
OF SUPPLYING ELECTRICITY AND ELECTRIC SERVICE TO THE CITY OF UMATILLA, THE
INHABITANTS THEREOF AND OTHERS, SUBJECT TO THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS AND TO THE
MAKING OF THE PAYMENTS SPECIFIED IN THE ORDINANCE, AND PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL
OF ORDINANCE NO. 797 OF THE CITY OF UMATILLA, PASSED AND APPROVED MARCH 3,
2015.
 
THE CITY OF UMATILLA, OREGON ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS:
 
 
   Section 1. Franchise, Re-opener and Term.   The City of Umatilla, Umatilla
County, Oregon hereinafter referred to as “the City,” hereby grants to Umatilla
Electric Cooperative, an electrical cooperative, and to its successors and
assigns, hereinafter referred to as “Grantee,” a right and franchise for the
period of twenty (20) years from and after the effective date of this
ordinance, to construct, maintain and operate in, on, above and under the
present and future streets, alleys, bridges and public places of the City,
excluding parks and recreation areas unless underground, hereinafter referred
to as “streets,” electric light and power lines, with all the necessary or
desirable appurtenances, for the purpose of supplying electricity and electric
service to the City and to the inhabitants thereof, subject to the terms and
conditions and to the making of the payments hereinafter specified.
 
   It is expressly understood that certain streets, roads and public rights of
way within the City are or may be under the jurisdiction of either the State of
Oregon or Umatilla County. This agreement does not intend to convey rights on,
under or over facilities within their jurisdiction.
 
Section 2. Franchise Non Exclusive.  The right and franchise hereby granted
shall not be exclusive; and the City expressly reserves the right, at any time
during the term of the franchise, to grant rights or franchises for such
purposes to other persons or corporations, as well as the right in its own name
as a municipality to use said streets for such purposes in the event that the
City shall hereafter decide to engage in the business of supplying electricity
and electric service for municipal or other uses. Notwithstanding the grant of
this right and franchise, the siting of new transmission lines shall be subject
to the lawful rules and regulations of the City of Umatilla to the extent of
its jurisdictional authority.  Notwithstanding the non-exclusive nature of this
right and franchise, nothing in this agreement shall be deemed a waiver by
Grantee of its rights under Oregon’s Territorial Allocation Statutes currently
set forth in ORS Chapter 758.
 
Section 3. Location, Installation, Maintenance.  The locations and methods of
installation and maintenance of all poles, wires, fixtures, underground lines,
and appurtenances thereto (hereinafter referred to as “facilities”) shall be
subject at all times to reasonable regulation by the Council of the City; and
all such facilities shall be so constructed and maintained as to interfere as
little as practicable with street or other traffic. All of such facilities
shall be installed and at all times maintained by Grantee in accordance with
good electrical practice.
 
   Section 4. Service; Dependability.   The service to be furnished hereunder
by Grantee shall be continuous and shall be adequate for the requirements of
the City and its inhabitants, subject to accidents, interferences or
interruptions beyond the reasonable control of Grantee, and shall be furnished
under such reasonable control of Grantee and under reasonable rules and
regulations as Grantee may make from time to time for the proper conduct of its
business. Such service and all rates and charges therefor and all rules and
regulations pertaining thereto or to the making of necessary and proper
extension of service shall be subject at all times to any rules, regulations
and orders lawfully prescribed by Grantee or any governmental authority having
jurisdiction thereof.
 
   Section 5. Moving Buildings on City Streets.   When necessary, in order to
permit any duly authorized person to move any building or other structure
across or along any of said streets, grantee shall temporarily raise or remove
its facilities upon such streets. Grantee shall temporarily raise or remove its
facilities upon such streets, upon reasonable notice in advance from the City,
and at such time and in such manner as may be reasonably necessary to
accommodate such moving, consistent with the maintenance of proper service to
Grantee’s customers; provided, however, that the cost to the Grantee of such
temporary raising or removal, and of any interruption of Grantee’s service to
its customers caused thereby, shall first be paid or satisfactorily secured to
Grantee by the owner or mover of such building or other structure.
 
   Section 6. City Use of Utility’s Structures.   The City shall have the
right, upon reasonable notice to Grantee and without payment or charge thereof,
to attach its fire alarm, police signal wires or traffic control systems to the
poles of Grantee, but at its own risk and only in accordance with good
electrical practice. If there is not sufficient space available thereon for
said purposes as determined by Grantee, Grantee’s structure may be changed,
altered, or rearranged at the expense of the City so as to provide proper
clearance for such wires or appurtenant facilities. Such facilities shall be
subject to interference by Grantee only when and to the extent necessary for
the proper construction, maintenance, operation or repair of Grantee’s
facilities.
 
   Section 7. Indemnity; Compliance with City Ordinances.   Grantee shall
protect and save the City, its officers, employees and agents, harmless against
and from any and all damage claims, and any and all loss, liability, cost or
expense, occasioned by any negligent act or omission of Grantee in the
construction, maintenance, operation or repair of Grantee’s property or any use
thereof; and Grantee shall at all times comply with any lawful present or
future charter provisions, ordinances, rules or regulations of the City
relating to the manner of occupation or use, or to the repair or improvement of
said streets.
   
   Section 8. Arboreal Maintenance.  Grantee shall have the right and privilege
of trimming all trees which overhang said streets, in such a manner and to such
an extent as will prevent the branches or limbs or other parts of such trees
from touching or interfering with its facilities; providing no such trees are
trimmed or cut back further than may be reasonably necessary to prevent such
interference and to allow the proper operation and maintenance of said
facilities. Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent Grantee, when
necessary and with the approval of the owner of the property on which they may
be located, from cutting down and removing any trees which overhang said
streets.
 
Section 9. Franchise Fee; Revenue.
(a) Grantee shall pay to the City a franchise fee or charge equivalent to three
and one half percent (3.5%) of Grantee’s gross operating revenue as the same is
defined herein. This franchise fee shall be limited to a maximum of $1,000,000
remitted to the City in each calendar year for the five year period 2020-2024.
This franchise fee shall be limited to a maximum of $1,500,000 remitted to the
City in each calendar year for the five year period 2025-2029.
 
(b) “Gross operating revenue,” means Grantee’s gross revenues from the sale and
uses of electricity and electric service within the corporate limits of the
City other than such revenues earned in interstate commerce or on the business
of the United States government or any agency thereof, and after deducting
therefrom any amounts paid by Grantee to the United States or to the State of
Oregon as excise, occupation, or business taxes upon the sale or distribution
of electric service in the City. At the election of Grantee, Grantee may also
deduct uncollectible accounts of customers within the City.
 
   (c) Said franchise fee shall not be in addition to any other license,
occupation, franchise or excise taxes or charges which might otherwise be
levied or collected by the City from Grantee with respect to its exercise of
this franchise within the corporate limits of the City and the amount due to
the City under this agreement shall be the limit of any amounts charged to
Grantee for occupation of the streets, alleys, bridges and public places of the
City.
 
   (d) The franchise fee shall be paid quarterly on or before the 30th of each
month following a calendar quarter ending in March, June, September, or
December. The franchise fee shall be computed upon the gross operating revenue
accruing during the previous calendar quarter or portion thereof.
 
   (e) Upon thirty (30) days written notice to Grantee, the City may elect to
re-evaluate the franchise fee percent up to a maximum of five percent (5%) and
the maximum dollar amount to be remitted to the City in any calendar year. Such
re-evaluations may only be done once per every five (5) year anniversary of
this agreement.
 
   Section 10. Assignment of Franchise.   This franchise shall not be sold,
leased, assigned or otherwise transferred without the prior written consent of
the City. Grantee may pledge, or encumber this franchise as part of a corporate
reorganization, financing or refinancing activity without the City’s prior
knowledge and approval. Grantee must notify the City not later than ten (10)
business days prior to the intended transfer, and the City will not
unreasonably withhold any consent required.
 
   Section 11. Default.  
The City reserves the right to terminate this franchise and all of Grantee’s
rights herein, if after the City has provided thirty (30) days’ prior written
notice to Grantee and given Grantee an opportunity to cure:
Grantee violates any material term of the franchise, or
Grantee fails to pay the franchise fee to the City after thirty (30) days have
passed from the date upon which payment was due, or
Grantee commits any act of fraud or deceit toward the City that involve the
terms and conditions of this agreement, or
Grantee fails to obtain or maintain any permit required by state or federal law
or otherwise fails to comply with all applicable state and federal laws and
City ordinances adopted heretofore or hereafter during the term of this
franchise.
 
The foregoing shall not constitute a substantial breach if the violation occurs
without the fault of Grantee or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its
control. Grantee shall not be excused by mere economic hardship, nor
misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers, or employees.
 
Section 12. Remedies of Default.   If after thirty (30) days from the date of
Grantee’s notification of any default pursuant to Section 11, Grantee cures the
default or initiates satisfactory efforts to remedy the default, the City shall
not terminate this franchise. If Grantee fails to cure any default within
thirty (30) days of Grantee’s notification of a default or does not make
satisfactory efforts to remedy the default, the City may declare this franchise
terminated and extinguish all rights of Grantee under this franchise.
 
Section 13. Removal of Grantee’s Property, Escheat.   All property and
materials (including poles, posts, towers, wires, conduits, mains, pipes,
rails, tracks, ties, railways, pole lines, telegraph, telephone or electric
transmission lines, or structures or equipment of any kind) placed in, on,
upon, over, under or beneath any public highways, street or alley of this City,
under or by virtue of any grant, privilege or franchise, shall be removed by
the Grantee within one year after the expiration of this franchise, unless
further time is granted by the City. Except as otherwise provided herein, if
all of the property and materials referred to are not removed within one year
after the termination or expiration of the franchise or such further timer as
may be granted by the City, all and every part thereof shall be forfeited and
escheated to the City. The City may notify the Grantee that it waives
forfeiture and escheat under this section and may thereafter compel removal of
such property and materials from the public highways, streets and alleys and
restoration of the public highways, streets and alleys and may maintain court
suit to require such removal and restoration by the Grantee or the payment of
the cost thereof by the Grantee.
 
Section 14. Repeal Ordinance 797. Upon the effective date hereof, but not
otherwise, Ordinance No. 797 of the City of Umatilla passed and approved March
3, 2015 is repealed.
 
Section 15. Confidentiality. The City agrees to use its best efforts to
preserve the confidentiality of information designated by the Grantee as
proprietary, to the extent permitted by law.
 
Section 16. Fee Not a Tax . The City Council determines that the fee imposed by
this franchise is not a tax subject to the property tax limitations of Article
XI, Section 1(b) of the Oregon constitution.
 
Section 17. Severability.   The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or
provision of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other
provision of this ordinance, which can be given effect without reference to the
invalid part or parts.
 
   Section 18. Effective Date.  This ordinance shall take effect thirty (30)
days after its enactment by the Council and approval by the Mayor, but shall
become null and void unless within sixty (60) days after such effective date
Grantee shall file with the Recorder Grantee’s written acceptance of the terms,
conditions and obligations to be complied with or performed by it hereunder.
 
   Section 19. Notices.   All notices required under the terms of this Contract
to be given by either party to the other shall be in writing, and unless
otherwise specified in writing shall be sent to the parties at the addresses
following:
   
   CITY:                  GRANTEE:   
   David Stockdale, City Manager         Robert Echenrode, CEO
   City of Umatilla            Umatilla Electric Cooperative
   PO Box 130               750 W. Elm
   Umatilla, OR 97882            Hermiston, OR 97838
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   PASSED and ADOPTED by the City Council the 7th   day of April, 2020,
 
Voting yes, Council Members:    Councilor Funderburk, Councilor Roxbury,
Councilor Smith, Councilor Wheeler, Councilor Chavez, and Councilor TenEyck.   
                     
 
                                       
 
Voting no, Council Members:      NA                        
   
Absent Council Members:       NA                        
 
Abstaining Council Members:      NA                          
 
And SIGNED in authentication by the Mayor this 7th   day of April, 2020.
 
 
                                       
                  Mary Dedrick, Mayor
 
ATTEST:
 
                  
Nanci Sandoval, City Recorder
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTANCE
 
   This franchise ordinance is accepted Umatilla Electric Cooperative, this
       day of          , 2020.
 
 
Umatilla Electric Cooperative
 
 
 
                        
 
By:                         
   Robert Echenrode, CEO
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 612
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY CODE OF UMATILLA, OREGON
   BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Umatilla,
Oregon, an Oregon Municipal Corporation:
   Section 1.  From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the City
Code of the City of Umatilla, Oregon prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.,
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with
the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body
of the City, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the Official
Code and Law of the City as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
   Section 2.  There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the Official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, three (3) copies of which
shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk, certified as to
correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office
is regularly open.
   Section 3.  All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official
City Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and
the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the
governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said Official City Code. All ordinances
of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises,
vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and
effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the City Code.
Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the Official City Code.
   Section 4.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5.  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6.  This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full
force and effect from and after its passage and approval in accordance with
law, as printed and published in book form by order of the Mayor and City
Council.
   PASSED by the Council and signed by the Mayor this 16th day of November,
1993.
   /s/  George Hash       
   Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/  Linda Gettmann   
City Recorder
CHARTER
CITY OF UMATILLA, OREGON
Preamble
We, the voters of Umatilla, Oregon exercise our power to the fullest extent
possible under the Oregon constitution and laws of the state, and enact this
home rule charter. (Charter, 11-7-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
Chapter I
NAMES AND BOUNDARIES
Section 1. Title.
This charter may be referred to as the 2006 charter.
Section 2. Name.
The city of Umatilla, Oregon, continues as a municipal corporation with the
name city of Umatilla.
Section 3. Boundaries.
The city includes all territory within its boundaries as they now exist or are
legally modified. The city will maintain as a public record an accurate and
current description of the boundaries. (Charter, 11-7-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
Chapter II
POWERS
Section 4. Powers.
The city has all powers that the constitutions, statutes and common law of the
United States and Oregon expressly or impliedly grant or allow the city, as
fully as though this charter specifically enumerated each of those powers. In
accordance with the foregoing, no new tax shall be enacted, no existing tax
shall be increased, and no sunset provision shall be extended or eliminated.
Section 5. Construction.
The charter will be liberally construed so that the city may exercise fully all
powers possible under this charter and under United States and Oregon law.
Section 6. Distribution.
The Oregon constitution reserves initiative and referendum powers as to all
municipal legislation to city voters. This charter vests all other city powers
in the council except as the charter otherwise provides. The council has
legislative, administrative and quasi-judicial authority. The council exercises
legislative authority by ordinance, administrative authority by resolution, and
quasi-judicial authority by order. The council may not delegate its authority
to adopt ordinances. (Charter, 11-7-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
Chapter III
COUNCIL
Section 7. Council.
The council consists of a mayor and six councilors nominated and elected from
the city at large. Each council position shall bear a number running from 1
through 6. The present councilors whose terms of office expire with the end of
2006 are assigned position numbers 1, 3, and 5; the councilors whose terms of
office expire with the end of 2008 are assigned position numbers 2, 4, and 6.
Section 8. Mayor.
The mayor presides over and facilitates council meetings, preserves order,
enforces council rules, and determines the order of business under council
rules. The mayor shall be the presiding office of the council. The mayor shall
not vote except in case of a tie vote of the members of the council present at
a meeting. With the consent of council, the mayor appoints members of
commissions and committees established by ordinance or resolution. The mayor
must sign all records of council decisions. The mayor serves as the political
head of the city government.
Section 9. Council President.
At its first meeting of every evenly numbered year, the council must elect a
president from its membership. The president presides in the absence of the
mayor and acts as mayor when the mayor is unable to perform duties.
Section 10. Rules.
The council will adopt rules to govern its meetings.
Section 11. Meetings.
The council must meet at least once a month at a designated time and place.
Section 12. Quorum.
A majority of the council members is a quorum to conduct business, but a
smaller number may meet and compel attendance of absent members as prescribed
by council rules.
Section 13. Vote Required.
The express approval of a majority of a quorum of the council is necessary for
any council decision, except when this charter requires approval by a majority
of the council.
Section 14. Record.
A record of council meetings must be kept in a manner prescribed by Oregon
state law: ORS 192.650. (Charter, 11-7-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
Chapter IV
LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY
Section 15. Ordinances.
The council will exercise its legislative authority by adopting ordinances. The
enacting clause for all ordinances must state "The city of Umatilla ordains as
follows:".
Section 16. Ordinance Adoption.
   (a)   Except as authorized by subsection (b), adoption of an ordinance
requires approval by a majority of the council at two meetings.
   (b)   The council may adopt an ordinance at a single meeting by the
unanimous approval of at least a quorum of the council, provided the proposed
ordinance is available in writing to the public at least one week before the
meeting.
   (c)   Any substantive amendment to a proposed ordinance must be read aloud
or made available in writing to the public before the council adopts the
ordinance at that meeting.
   (d)   After the adoption of an ordinance, the vote of each member must be
entered into the council minutes.
   (e)   After adoption of an ordinance, the city custodian of records must
endorse it with the date of adoption and the custodian's name and title.
Section 17. Effective Date Of Ordinances.
Ordinances normally take effect on the 30th day after adoption, or on a later
day provided in the ordinance. An ordinance may take effect as soon as adopted
or other date less than 30 days after adoption if it contains an emergency
clause. However, any ordinance which enacts a tax, increases an existing tax,
or repeals or extends a sunset provision shall only take effect upon approval
by a majority of the voters, unless the ordinance approved by the voters sets a
different effective date. (Charter, 11-7-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
Chapter V
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY
Section 18. Resolutions.
The council will normally exercise its administrative authority by approving
resolutions. The approving clause for resolutions may state "The city of
Umatilla resolves as follows:".
Section 19. Resolution Approval.
   (a)   Approval of a resolution or any other council administrative decision
requires approval by the council at one meeting.
   (b)   Any substantive amendment to a resolution must be read aloud or made
available in writing to the public before the council adopts the resolution at
that meeting.
   (c)   After approval of a resolution or other administrative decision, the
vote of each member must be entered into the council minutes.
   (d)   After approval of a resolution, the city custodian of records must
endorse it with the date of approval and the custodian's name and title.
Section 20. Effective Date Of Resolutions.
Resolutions and other administrative decisions take effect on the date of
approval, or on a later day provided in the resolution. (Charter, 11-7-2006,
eff. 1-1-2007)
Chapter VI
QUASI-JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
Section 21. Orders.
The council will normally exercise its quasi-judicial authority by approving
orders. The approving clause for orders may state "The city of Umatilla orders
as follows:".
Section 22. Order Approval.
   (a)   Approval of an order or any other council quasi-judicial decision
requires approval by the council at one meeting.
   (b)   Any substantive amendment to an order must be read aloud or made
available in writing to the public at the meeting before the council adopts the
order.
   (c)   After approval of an order or other council quasi-judicial decision,
the vote of each member must be entered in the council minutes.
   (d)   After approval of an order, the city custodian of records must endorse
it with the date of approval and the custodian's name and title.
Section 23. Effective Date Of Orders.
Orders and other quasi-judicial decisions take effect on the date of final
approval, or on a later day provided in the order. (Charter, 11-7-2006, eff. 1-
1-2007)
Chapter VII
ELECTIONS
Section 24. Councilors.
The term and position number of a councilor in office when this charter is
adopted is the term and position number for which the councilor was elected. At
each general election after the adoption, three councilors will be elected for
four-year terms.
Section 25. Mayor.
The term of the mayor in office when this charter is adopted continues until
the beginning of the first odd-numbered year after adoption. At every other
general election after the adoption, a mayor will be elected for a four-year
term.
Section 26. State Law.
City elections must conform to state law except as this charter or ordinances
provide otherwise. All elections for city offices must be nonpartisan.
Section 27. Qualifications.
   (a)   The mayor and each councilor must be a qualified elector under state
law, and reside within the city for at least one year immediately before
election or appointment to office.
   (b)   No person may be a candidate at a single election for more than one
city office.
   (c)   Neither the mayor nor a councilor may be employed by the city.
   (d)   The council is the final judge of the election and qualifications of
its members.
Section 28. Nominations.
The council must adopt an ordinance prescribing the manner for a person to be
nominated to run for mayor or a city councilor position.
Section 29. Terms.
The term of an officer elected at a general election begins at the first
council meeting of the year immediately after the election, and continues until
the successor qualifies and assumes the office.
Section 30. Oath.
The mayor and each councilor must swear or affirm to faithfully perform the
duties of the office and support the constitutions and laws of the United
States and Oregon.
Section 31. Vacancies:
The mayor or a council office becomes vacant:
   (a)   Upon the incumbent's:
      (1)   Death,
      (2)   Adjudicated incompetence, or
      (3)   Recall from the office.
   (b)   Upon declaration by the council after the incumbent's:
      (1)   Failure to qualify for the office within 10 days of the time the
term of office is to begin.
      (2)   Absence from the city for 60 days without council consent,
      (3)   Ceasing to reside in the city,
      (4)   Ceasing to be a qualified elector under state law,
      (5)   Conviction of a public offense punishable by loss of liberty,
      (6)   Resignation from the office, or
      (7)   Removal under section 33(i).
Section 32. Filling Vacancies.
A mayor or councilor vacancy will be filled by appointment by a majority of the
remaining council members. The appointee's term of office runs from appointment
until the next general election when the appointee must run for office to fill
the remaining term of office, if any, of that appointee's position. If a
disability prevents a council member from attending council meetings or a
member is absent from the city, a majority of the council may appoint a
councilor pro tem. (Charter, 11-7-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
Chapter VIII
APPOINTIVE OFFICERS
Section 33. City Manager.
   (a)   The office of city manager is established as the administrative head
of the city government. The city manager is responsible to the mayor and
council for the proper administration of all city business. The city manager
will assist the mayor and council in the development of city policies, and
carry out policies established by ordinances and resolutions.
   (b)   A majority of the council must appoint and may remove the manager. The
appointment must be made without regard to political considerations and solely
on the basis of education and experience in competencies and practices of local
government management.
   (c)   The manager must become and remain a resident of the city while
manager, unless nonresident status is approved by the council.
   (d)   The manager may be appointed for a definite or an indefinite term, and
may be removed at any time by a majority of the council. The council must fill
the office by appointment as soon as practicable after the vacancy occurs.
   (e)   The manager must:
      (1)   Attend all council meetings unless excused by the mayor or council;
      (2)   Make reports and recommendations to the mayor and council about the
needs of the city;
      (3)   Administer and enforce all city ordinances, resolutions,
franchises, leases, contracts, permits, and other city decisions;
      (4)   Appoint, supervise and remove city employees;
      (5)   Organize city departments and administrative structure;
      (6)   Prepare and administer the annual city budget;
      (7)   Administer city utilities and property;
      (8)   Encourage and support regional and intergovernmental cooperation;
      (9)   Promote cooperation among the council, staff and citizens in
developing city policies, and building a sense of community;
      (10)   Perform other duties as directed by the council;
      (11)   Delegate duties, but remain responsible for acts of all
subordinates.
   (f)   The manager has no authority over the council or over the judicial
functions of the municipal judge.
   (g)   The manager and other employees designated by the council may sit at
council meetings but have no vote. The manager may take part in all council
discussions.
   (h)   When the manager is temporarily disabled from acting as manager or
when the office of manager becomes vacant, the council must appoint a manager
pro tem. The manager pro tem has the authority and duties of manager, except
that a pro tem manager may appoint or remove employees only with council
approval.
   (i)   No council member may directly or indirectly attempt to coerce the
manager or a candidate for the office of manager in the appointment or removal
of any city employee, or in administrative decisions regarding city property or
contracts. Violation of this prohibition is grounds for removal from office by
a majority of the council after a public hearing. In council meetings,
councilors may discuss or suggest anything with the manager relating to city
business. (Charter, 11-7-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
Section 34. Municipal Court And Judge.
   (a)   A majority of the council may appoint and remove a municipal judge. A
municipal judge will hold court in the city at such place as the council
directs. The court will be known as the municipal court.
   (b)   All proceedings of this court will conform to state laws governing
justices of the peace and justice courts.
   (c)   All areas within the city and areas outside the city as permitted by
state law are within the territorial jurisdiction of the court.
   (d)   The municipal court has jurisdiction over every offense created by
city ordinance. The court may enforce forfeitures and other penalties created
by such ordinances. The court also has jurisdiction under state law unless
limited by city ordinance.
   (e)   The municipal judge may:
      (1)   Render judgments and impose sanctions on persons and property;
      (2)   Order the arrest of anyone accused of an offense against the city;
      (3)   Commit to jail or admit to bail anyone accused of a city offense;
      (4)   Issue and compel obedience to subpoenas;
      (5)   Compel witnesses to appear and testify and jurors to serve for
trials before the court;
      (6)   Penalize contempt of court;
      (7)   Issue processes necessary to enforce judgments and orders of the
court;
      (8)   Issue search warrants; and
      (9)   Perform other judicial and quasi-judicial functions assigned by
ordinance.
   (f)   The council may appoint and may remove municipal judges pro tem.
   (g)   The council may transfer some or all of the functions of the municipal
court to an appropriate state court.
Section 35. Reserved.
(Charter, 11-7-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
Chapter IX
PERSONNEL
Section 36. Compensation.
The council must authorize the compensation of city officers and employees as
part of its approval of the annual city budget.
Section 37. Merit Systems.
The city manager will determine the rules governing recruitment, selection,
promotion, transfer, demotion, suspension, layoff, and dismissal of city
employees based on merit and fitness. (Charter, 11-7-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
Chapter X
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Section 38. Procedure.
The council may by ordinance provide for procedures governing the making,
altering, vacating, or abandoning of a public improvement. A proposed public
improvement may be suspended for six months upon remonstrance by owners of the
real property to be specially assessed for the improvement. The number of
owners necessary to suspend the action will be determined by ordinance.
Section 39. Special Assessments.
The procedure for levying, collecting and enforcing special assessments for
public improvements or other services charged against real property will be
governed by ordinance. (Charter, 11-7-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
Chapter XI
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 40. Debt.
City indebtedness may not exceed debt limits imposed by state law. A charter
amendment is not required to authorize city indebtedness.
Section 41. Ordinance Continuation.
All ordinances consistent with this charter in force when it takes effect
remain in effect until amended or repealed.
Section 42. Repeal.
All charter provisions adopted before this charter takes effect are repealed.
Section 43. Severability.
The terms of this charter are severable. If any provision is held invalid by a
court, the invalidity does not affect any other part of the charter.
Section 44. Time Of Effect.
This charter takes effect January 1, 2007. (Charter, 11-7-2006, eff. 1-1-2007;
amd. Ord. 743, 12-12-2006)
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-5: Adoption Of State Laws
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Umatilla. This code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the UMATILLA CITY CODE and is hereby
published by authority of the council and shall be supplemented to incorporate
the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (1993 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (1993 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(1993 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The city clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the clerk. Any
person having in his/her custody a copy of this code shall make every effort to
maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. He/she
shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him/her or made available to him/her through the office of the
city clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be
returned to the office of the city clerk when directed so to do by order of the
city council. (1993 Code)
1-1-5: ADOPTION OF STATE LAWS:
Notwithstanding any other sections of this code, any Oregon Revised Statute
adopted by reference in this code refers to the respective Oregon Revised
Statute as now constituted. (Ord. 726, 1-13-2004)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City
Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
City; and all special ordinances. (1993 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the
preceding Section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this City Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1993 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable, if any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City
herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provisions; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this City Code. (1993 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the singular number
only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females
as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided,
that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this
City Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or
where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
   B.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been
changed in the content of this City Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section" and/
or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1993 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
such meaning herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
   AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
   CITY: The City of Umatilla, County of Umatilla, State of Oregon.
   CODE: The Municipal Code of the City of Umatilla.
   EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
City of Umatilla".
   FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or
any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the City, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
   OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
   OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this Code.
   OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Umatilla".
   OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.
   OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
   PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and
every right or interest therein.
   STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
   TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such buildings or land, whether alone or with
others.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper
mark. (1993 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the City Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such section, including the catchlines, are amended or re-
enacted. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Restitution
1-4-3: Criminal Penalty
1-4-4: Police Training Assessment
1-4-5: Application
1-4-6: Liability Of Officers
1-4-7: Contempt Before Municipal Court
1-4-8: Effect Of Nonpayment Of Fines, Restitution Or Costs
1-4-9: Code Enforcement Officer
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a civil violation classified under any section or
provision of this code shall be sentenced to pay an amount, fixed by the court,
not exceeding:
   A.   Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a class A civil fine.
   B.   Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a class B civil fine.
   C.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a class C civil fine.
   D.   Twenty dollars ($20.00) for a class D civil fine.
Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this code, where no
other penalty is set forth, and not otherwise classified, shall be subject to a
civil fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for any one
offense. (1993 Code)
1-4-2: RESTITUTION:
The municipal judge may order any person convicted of violation of any
provision of this code who, while in violation of this code, causes another
person monetary or physical injury, to pay restitution to the injured party.
Restitution may be ordered in addition to any other penalties or fines set
forth in these ordinances. (1993 Code)
1-4-3: CRIMINAL PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this code shall be punished by a
fine or sentence pursuant to the schedule established in Oregon Revised
Statutes 161.635. (Ord. 755, 6-1-2010)
1-4-4: POLICE TRAINING ASSESSMENT:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection D of this section, whenever the
municipal judge imposes a sentence of a fine, term of imprisonment, probation
or any combination thereof, including a sentence imposed and thereafter
suspended, as a penalty for an offense as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes
161.505, excluding parking violations, an assessment in addition to such
sentence shall be collected.
   B.   The assessment is not part of the penalty or in lieu of any part
thereof. The amount of the assessment shall be established by resolution of the
council and may be revised by resolution of the council at any time.
   C.   The city shall deposit assessments imposed under subsection A of this
section in a reserve fund to defray the cost of police training expenses
incurred.
   D.   The judge is not required to impose the assessment, or a part of the
assessment, if he or she finds that the defendant is indigent or that
imposition of the assessment would constitute an undue hardship.
   E.   Payment to the court shall not be credited to the assessment described
in subsections A to D of this section until all other fines, fees and
assessments ordered by the judge have been paid. (Ord. 716, 6-4-2002)
1-4-5: APPLICATION:
   A.   The penalties provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this code the same as though they were a part of each and every
separate section. A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day
such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless
otherwise specifically provided in this code.
   B.   In all cases where the same violation is subject to a fine or penalty
or is created by different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting
officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall
be had against the same person for the same violation; provided, that the
revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty
so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Whenever the doing of any act or omission to do any act constitutes a
violation of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine
or penalties specifically declared for such violation, the general penalty
provision of this chapter shall apply. (1993 Code)
1-4-6: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intent of
the council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1993
Code)
1-4-7: CONTEMPT BEFORE MUNICIPAL COURT:
Any person who shall be guilty of contempt of the municipal court, by acting in
a contemptuous or disorderly manner before the municipal judge of the city
while said municipal judge is holding court or any session thereof, or by
disobeying the orders of such court lawfully made, shall be punished by a fine
of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) and in default of the payment of such fine, such person so guilty of
contempt shall be imprisoned until such fine is paid. (Ord. 755, 6-1-2010)
1-4-8: EFFECT OF NONPAYMENT OF FINES, RESTITUTION OR COSTS:
   A.   Default Of Payment: When a defendant sentenced to pay a fine or to make
restitution, defaults in the payment thereof or of any installment, the court,
on motion of the city attorney or upon its own motion, may require him to show
cause why his default should not be treated as contempt of court, and may issue
a show cause citation or a warrant of arrest for his appearance.
   B.   Contempt: Unless the defendant shows that his default was not
attributable to an intentional refusal to obey the order of the court or to a
failure on his part to make a good faith effort to make the payment, the court
may find that his default constitutes contempt and may order him committed
until the fine or the restitution, or a specified part thereof, is paid.
   C.   Corporation Or Unincorporated Association: When a fine or an order of
restitution is imposed on a corporation or unincorporated association, it is
the duty of the person authorized to make disbursement from the assets of the
corporation or association to pay the fine or make the restitution from those
assets, and his failure to do so may be held to be contempt unless he makes the
showing required in subsection B of this section.
   D.   Additional Time For Payment: If it appears to the satisfaction of the
court that the default in the payment of a fine or restitution is not contempt,
the court may enter an order allowing the defendant additional time for
payment, reducing the amount thereof or of each installment or revoking the
fine or order of restitution or the unpaid portion thereof in whole or in part.
   E.   Collection Of Fine: A default in the payment of a fine or costs or
failure to make restitution or any installment thereof may be collected by any
means authorized by law for the enforcement of a judgment. The levy of
execution for the collection of a fine or restitution shall not discharge a
defendant committed to imprisonment for contempt until the amount of the fine
or restitution has actually been collected. (1993 Code)
   F.   Lien For Unpaid Fines, Restitution, And Costs: When the municipal judge
orders or adjudges a person to pay a fine, restitution, or costs, the amount
thereof may be recorded in the lien docket of the city and, if recorded, shall
constitute a lien on that person's real property located inside the city for
ten (10) years in civil actions, twenty (20) years in criminal actions
including traffic violations, and fifty (50) years in criminal actions that
include an award of restitution, from the date of the order or judgment or
until the lien is paid, whichever is shorter.
   G.   Collections Of Unpaid Fines, Restitution, And Costs: When the municipal
judge orders or adjudges a person to pay a fine, restitution, or costs, the
amount thereof may be sent to a private collection agency and the court may add
to the judgment a fee for the cost of collection as allowed by Oregon law. 
Prior to the matter being assigned to collections, the municipal court must
provide the defendant with notice that the debt may be assigned to a private
collection agency for collection and the amount of the fee. (Ord. 678, 10-6-
1998; amd. Ord. 837, 9-3-2019)
1-4-9: CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
"Code enforcement officer" means a person who is hired or appointed by the city
to enforce violations of city ordinances. A code enforcement officer is
authorized to issue citations for the commission of city ordinance violation,
including civil violations classified under any section or provisions of this
code or Oregon Revised Statutes 153.008(1)(c). This authorization does not
exclude or limit other law enforcement officers listed in Oregon Revised
Statutes 153.005(1) from also issuing citations for the commission of city
ordinance violations. (Ord. 755, 6-1-2010)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR 1
SECTION:
1-5-1: Duties
 
Notes
1 1. See also Chapters 4 and 5 of the City Charter.
1-5-1: DUTIES:
   A.   The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the Council. He shall not
vote except in case of a tie vote of the members of the Council present at a
meeting. He shall have the authority to preserve order, enforce the rules of
the Council, and determine the order of business under the rules of the
Council.
   B.   The Mayor shall appoint or provide for the election of all committees
of the Council.
   C.   The Mayor shall call special meetings of the Council.
   D.   The Mayor shall sign official City documents that require the signature
of the office.
   E.   The Mayor shall have no veto power, and shall sign all ordinances
passed by the City Council within three (3) days after their passage. (Res. 14-
87, 11-17-86; 1993 Code)
   F.   The Mayor shall be deemed a Councilmember for the purpose of
constituting a quorum. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 6
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Meetings of the Council
1-6-2: Rules and Order of Business
1-6-3: Authority and Duties of the Council
1-6-4: Code of Conduct
1-6-5: Adoption Of Council Policies And Procedures
1-6-1:  MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL 1 :
   A.   Regular Meetings 2 : The Council shall meet regularly at a formal
meeting on the first and third Tuesdays of each month, beginning at seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M., according to the City Calendar Planner schedule adopted
annually by the Council. The presiding officer shall conduct the meeting in
accordance with the rules set forth herein, or when not specifically outlined,
by Robert's Rules of Order. (Res. 12-92, 1-6-92)
   B.   Special Meetings 3 : The Mayor, or in the Mayor's absence the President
of the Council, may call a special meeting of the Council.  Any two (2) Council
members may request the Mayor to call a special meeting. Upon calling a special
meeting, all City Council members must be given written notice that specifies
the subject matter of the meeting.  If there is an agenda for the meeting, it
should also be specified in the notice. At least twenty four (24) hours' notice
must be given for all special meetings of the City Council. An emergency
meeting may be called with less than twenty four (24) hours' notice, however,
the minutes of the meeting shall describe the emergency justifying less than
twenty four (24) hours' notice. For emergency meetings, all notices must be
supported by documentation and back up material and the City shall attempt to
contact the media and other interested persons to inform them of the meeting.
For an item to be considered an emergency, five (5) members of the council must
agree to hold an emergency meeting. (Res. 14-87, 11-17-86; amd. Res. 12-92, 1-
6-92; ;1993 Code; Ord. 832, 2-7-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 17 of the City Charter for meetings to be public.
2 2. See also section 14 of the City Charter.
3 3. See also section 14 of the City Charter.
1-6-2: RULES AND ORDER OF BUSINESS:
   A.   Presiding Officers: These procedures shall apply to formal, policy
sessions and briefing sessions and any special meetings of the City Council.
The Mayor shall be the presiding officer at all meetings of the City Council
and shall have a voice in all of it's proceedings. Council members shall speak
in Council meetings only upon being recognized by the presiding officer whose
recognition shall not be unreasonably withheld. In the event of the absence of
the Mayor, the Council President shall be the presiding officer. In the event
of the absence of the Council President, the Mayor shall designate the
presiding officer.
   B.   Agenda: The Council shall address itself to the items of business on
the printed agenda.
      1.   Consent Agenda: The consent agenda shall consist of those items
placed thereon which are items of business of a recurring, general nature. Any
Councilmembers shall have the right to request that a consent item be removed
from the agenda for the purpose of discussion.
      2.   Business Agenda: The business agenda will be composed of old and new
business, including committee reports. The Mayor shall have the prime
responsibility for bringing policy items to the City Council, including
presentation of such items. Any item shall be placed on the business agenda if
three (3) members of the City Council request it. The Mayor shall report within
fifteen (15) days, delineating the date that the item shall be discussed which
shall not exceed sixty (60) days without the consent of the Council.
   C.   Quorum: A quorum shall consist of four (4) members of the duly
constituted City Council. The Mayor may be deemed a City Councilmember for
means of obtaining a quorum.
   D.   Decorum and Debate:
      1.   When a measure is presented for consideration to the Council, the
presiding officer shall recognize the appropriate individual to present the
case. When two (2) or more members wish to speak, the presiding officer shall
name the member who is to speak first. No member of the Council shall interrupt
another while speaking.
      2.   No member shall speak more than the time limits provided herein on
any subject or amendment, and such member may use his time in any combination,
in separate speech or comments totaling the number of minutes permitted. The
Mayor shall not be obligated to recognize any Councilmember for a second
comment on the subject or amendment until every Councilmember wishing to speak
has been allowed a first comment. Councilmembers shall also have the right to
yield a portion of time to another member.
      3.   Any member deciding to speak more than five (5) minutes on any
question or more than five (5) minutes on any amendment to the question shall
be accorded the privilege without objection or upon motion supported by two-
thirds (2/3) of the Council. No member shall be permitted to interrupt while
another member is speaking.
      4.   No Councilmember shall be permitted to indulge in personalities, use
language personally offensive, arraign motives of members, charge deliberate
misrepresentation or use language tending to hold a member of the City Council
up to contempt.
      5.   A member speaking or otherwise transgressing the rules of the
Council shall be called to order by the presiding officer and shall immediately
be quiet unless permitted to explain.
 
Parliamentary Questions, Motions and Precedence
 Debat able Amend able A Majority Vote          2/3
                       (of those  present) 
To adjourn                      No  No  Yes No
To take a recess                No  Yes Yes No
For the previous question       No  No  Yes No
To continue to a time certain   Yes Yes Yes No
To commit, refer or recommit    Yes Yes Yes No
To amend                        Yes Yes Yes No
To amend an amendment           Yes No  Yes No
To offer a substitute amendment Yes Yes Yes No
To amend a substitute amendment Yes No  Yes No
To postpone indefintely         Yes No  Yes No
Take under advisement           Yes No  Yes No
For the original question       No  No  Yes No
To Table                        No  No  Yes No
 
      6.   When a motion has been made and seconded, any Councilmember may ask
for the question. The presiding officer will restate the question and the issue
shall immediately be put to a vote. Passage of the motion shall terminate
debate on the issue.
No member shall be permitted to vote on any question where his private right to
distinct from public interest is immediately concerned. Councilmembers should
state their reasons for not voting.
   E.   Committee Appointments:
      1.   Standing Committees: The principles of good Council procedure
indicate the value of standing committees by the Council and as such, the
following standing committees will be appointed by the Mayor at the first
regular Council meeting each calendar year:
         a.   Finance.
         b.   Police.
         c.   Streets and Lights.
         d.   Public Works.
         e.   Community Development.
         f.   Personnel, Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action.
         g.   Policy.
Each committee will consist of two (2) Councilmembers, the Mayor or a
designated third Councilmember from another committee when overlapping issues
are discussed, with the Administrator and appropriate administrative staff.
      2.   Temporary Committees: Special committees (adhoc) may be created by
the Council for special assignments. When so created, such committees shall be
appointed by the Mayor and shall terminate upon completion of their assignment,
or they may be terminated by a majority vote of the Council attending at any
regularly scheduled meeting. (Res. 14-87, 11-17-86; 1993 Code; amd. Ord. 832,
2-7-2019)
1-6-3: AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF THE COUNCIL:
   A.   Authority of Individual Council Members: Members of the Council shall
have authority only when acting as a Council legally in session. Members have
no authority over City affairs as individuals. They have complete authority,
within State law and City law and policy, over City affairs when they serve as
a legal body. The Council shall not be bound in any way by any statement or
action on the part of an individual member except when such statement or action
is a pursuance of specific instructions of the Council.
   B.   General Duties Of The Council:
      1.   The City Council shall act as a general purpose governing body of a
local political subdivision of the State of Oregon created by, and carrying out
the will of the people of the City. It shall be responsible for carrying out
certain mandatory laws, and shall consider and accept or reject the provisions
of permissive laws. In all cases, where the State laws do not provide or
prohibit, the Council shall act as the duly established legislative body in
establishing the required and appropriate laws for the City.
      2.   The duties of the Council shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
         a.   Interpretation of the needs and desires of the local community.
         b.   Appointment of the Administrator.
         c.   Approval of preliminary and final plans and specifications, as
well as, acquisition and disposal of City property.
         d.   Determination of the compensation and salary schedules of all
employees of the City in accordance with procedures established by law and City
policy.
         e.   Provide for keeping the public informed of the purposes, needs
and conditions of the City Government.
         f.   Evaluation of the programs of the City and appraisal of the
efficiency of executive personnel.
         g.   Formulation and approval of ordinances, resolutions and policies
for the City.
         h.   Implementation of all actions required by law.
         i.   Consideration of specific actions recommended by the
Administrator.
   C.   Duties Regarding The City Administrator: The City Council should:
      1.   Recognize the Administrator should have full administrative
authority for properly discharging the required professional duties within
limits of established Council policy and City law.
      2.   Act only after hearing the recommendations of the Administrator in
matters of employment or dismissal of City personnel at an official meeting.
      3.   Recognize that the Administrator is the management advisor to the
Council and should be present at all meetings of the Council except when the
Administrator's compensation and contract are under Council consideration.
      4.   Refer all complaints or problems to the Administrator who will
channel the complaint to the proper administrative office for solution. Discuss
the complaint at a regular meeting only after failure of administrative
remedies or solutions.
      5.   Present personal criticisms of any City operation directly to the
Administrator rather than to City personnel.
   D.   Duties Of The Individual Councilmembers: The duties and obligations of
an individual Councilmember may be enumerated as follows:
      1.   Have a general knowledge of State laws, regulations of the State
Departments that specifically apply to cities, Umatilla City Charter,
ordinances, resolutions, policies, rules and regulations.
      2.   Have a general knowledge of aims and objectives of the City.
      3.   Work harmoniously with other Councilmembers without trying either to
dominate the board or neglect a member's share of the work.
      4.   Vote and act in the Council meetings impartially for the good of the
City.
      5.   Represent the City to the public in such a way as to promote both
interest and support and encourage participation.
      6.   Attend all regularly scheduled City Council meetings unless excused.
(Res. 14-87, 11-17-1986)
      7.   All receipts for travel expenses must be submitted to the Finance
Officer within thirty (30) days of being incurred in order to be considered for
reimbursement. Advancement of travel expenses must be approved by the Finance
Officer and is subject to further approval of the City Administrator or
designated representative. Any elected official who does not submit receipts
documenting his/her travel expenses within thirty (30) days of an advancement
shall not be entitled to further advance payment of travel expenses. All
unsubstantiated advance travel payments will be reported as income on elected
official's 1099. (Ord. 635, 11-21-1995)
   E.   Council President: After the first meeting after the adoption of the
City Charter and thereafter at its first meeting of each succeeding year, the
Council by ballot shall elect a President from its membership. In the Mayor's
absence from a Council meeting the President shall preside. Whenever the Mayor
is unable, on account of absence, illness, or other cause, to perform the
functions of his office, the President of the Council shall act as Mayor. (Res.
14-87, 11-17-1986)
1-6-4: CODE OF CONDUCT:
In addition to the duties and obligations of an individual Councilmember as
stated in the City Charter, the following code of conduct is established by the
City Council as a whole for the individual members comprising the Council. A
City Councilmember should:
   A.   Understand that a Councilmember's function is policy making and not
administrative.
   B.   Discourage subcommittees of the Council which tend to nullify the
Council's policy making responsibility.
   C.   Refuse to "play politics" in either the traditional partisan sense or
in any other sense.
   D.   Respect the right of residents of the community to be heard in official
meetings.
   E.   Recognize that the authority rests only with the Council in official
meetings.
   F.   Refuse to participate in irregular meetings which are not official and
which all members do not have the opportunity to attend.
   G.   Refuse to make commitments on any matter which should properly come
before the Council as a whole.
   H.   Make decisions only after all available facts bearing on a question
have been presented and discussed.
   I.   Respect the opinion of others and graciously accept the principle of
"majority rule" in council decisions.
   J.   Insist that all City business transactions be on an ethical and above-
board basis.
   K.   Refuse to use a member's position on a City Council in any way
whatsoever for personal gain or for personal reasons or prestige.
   L.   Refuse to bring personal problems into Council considerations.
   M.   Advocate honest and accurate evaluation of all present and/or past
employees.
   N.   Uphold the confidentiality of executive sessions of Council. (Res. 14-
87, 11-17-1986)
1-6-5:  ADOPTION OF COUNCIL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:
Pursuant to Chapter III, Section 10 of the City Charter, every two (2) years,
in the odd numbered years, the City Council shall, by resolution, adopt
policies, procedures and rules governing meetings of the City Council. The
policies, procedures and rules shall be in conformance with the laws of the
State of Oregon, the City Charter, and the City Code. (Ord. 832, 2-7-2019)
CHAPTER 7
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-7-1: Office Of City Administrator
1-7-2: Removal; Hearing; Resignation
1-7-3: Interference In Administration
1-7-4: Salary
1-7-5: Powers And Duties
1-7-1: OFFICE OF CITY ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Appointment: The office of City Administrator is hereby continued. The
office shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor, subject to the approval of
the Council. The City Administrator ("Administrator") shall be chosen without
regard to political consideration and solely with reference to his/her
executive and administrative qualifications.
   B.   Term Of Office; Removal; Vacancies: The Administrator shall be
appointed for an indefinite term and shall be subject to removal at the
pleasure of the majority of the Council as provided in Section
1-7-2 of this Chapter. All vacancies in the office of the City Administrator
shall be filled by temporary appointment, which appointment shall not be made
permanent for a period of not less than one month or more than four (4) months
after the date of the temporary appointment.
   C.   Residency Requirement: The Administrator shall be a resident of the
City or reside within the urban growth boundary of the City within two (2)
months after appointment to the position.
   D.   Bond: Before taking office, the Administrator shall give a corporate
surety bond in the minimum amount available conditioned upon faithful
performance of his/her duties. The premium for the bond shall be paid by the
City. (Ord. 524, 5-4-1986)
1-7-2: REMOVAL; HEARING; RESIGNATION:
In addition to any other contract terms of a written employment agreement, the
Administrator may be removed from office by the Mayor with the consent of the
Council upon thirty (30) days' written notice setting forth the reasons for
removal. If removal from office is considered by the Administrator to be
unfair, he or she may request in writing, within ten (10) days of the
Administrator's receipt of the notice, a hearing before the Council. At the
hearing the Administrator may present information showing why the removal is
unfair. After hearing the information, the Council may uphold the removal or
vote to reinstate. If the hearing process before the Council extends beyond
thirty (30) days from the time of original notice of removal, the Administrator
will receive all compensation normally due until the end of deliberations. The
Administrator shall give the Council thirty (30) days' written notice of
resignation from the office. (Ord. 674, 7-7-1998)
1-7-3: INTERFERENCE IN ADMINISTRATION:
No individual member or committee of the City Council may in any manner,
directly or indirectly, by suggestion or otherwise, attempt to require the
Administrator to undertake projects requiring the expenditure of City funds or
materials, to influence or coerce the Administrator in the hiring or firing of
any City employee or in the making of any appointment or removal, or in the
purchase of supplies, or attempt to exact any promise relative to any
appointment from any candidate for the office of City Administrator, or
discuss, directly or indirectly with any such candidate, the matter of
appointment to any City office or employment. Any violation of this Section
will work a forfeiture of the office of the offending member of the City
Council; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as
prohibiting the City Council while in open session, from discussing with or
suggesting to the Administrator, fully and freely, anything pertaining to City
affairs and for the best interests of the City 1 . (Ord. 522, 4-7-1986)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 1-6-3C of this Title.
1-7-4: SALARY:
The salary and benefits of the Administrator shall be reviewed annually and
shall be set by the Council. (Ord. 522, 4-7-1986)
1-7-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The powers and duties of the Administrator shall be as follows:
   A.   Devote his/her entire time to the discharge of the Administrator's
official duties; attend all meetings of the Council, unless excused therefrom
by the Council or Mayor; attend meetings of the Council committees, if
requested by the chairman; keep the Council advised at all times of the affairs
and needs of the City, and make reports, upon request of the Council, of all
the affairs and departments of the City. The Administrator shall only be
directly responsible to the Council as an entity. (Ord. 522, 4-7-1986)
   B.   With the exception of the Council, City Attorney, City Auditor or over
the judicial activities of the Municipal Judge, general supervision and control
over appointive City officers and employees and their work with power to
transfer an employee from one department to another, to the end of obtaining
the utmost efficiency in each of them and shall designate the duties employees
shall perform and all matters pertaining to their work for the City. Provided,
however, the Administrator may not appoint or employ with the City his/her
spouse nor any person related to the Administrator by consanguinity or affinity
within the third degree. (Ord. 524, 5-5-1986)
   C.   Act as purchasing agent for all departments of the City.
   D.   Oversee the financial preparation of all budgetary documents and
records of the City and keep the City Council advised of the City's financial
condition at all times.
   E.   Ensure that all laws and ordinances are enforced, except the provisions
of any laws or ordinances which involve criminal offenses; the responsibility
of criminal offenses shall be the duty of the Chief of Police. Administer and
enforce the policies, rules, procedures and resolutions duly adopted by the
Mayor and Council, and make such recommendations concerning the affairs of the
City as the Administrator deems desirable.
   F.   Meet with private citizens and interested groups seeking information or
bringing complaints and attempt to resolve problems and complaints fairly or
report same to the Council.
   G.   Supervise the operation of all public utilities owned and operated by
the City and have general supervision over all City property.
   H.   Sit with the Council at all meetings and have the right to take part in
all discussions of the Council, but shall have no vote.
   I.   Be the administrative head of the City and may, when necessary to
achieve a more efficient operation of the City government, organize, reorganize
or change the various departments of the City government. (Ord. 522, 4-7-1986)
CHAPTER 8
NOMINATION OF CITY OFFICES 1
SECTION:
1-8-1: Nomination of Candidates for Election to the Offices of Mayor and City
Council
1-8-2: Verification of Signatures
1-8-3: Withdrawal of Candidates
 
Notes
1 1. See section 32 of the City Charter.
1-8-1: NOMINATION OF CANDIDATES FOR ELECTION TO THE OFFICES OF MAYOR AND CITY
COUNCIL:
   A.   Candidates for the offices of Mayor and City Council shall be nominated
by filing with the City Recorder:
      1.   A petition for nomination signed by at least twenty five (25)
electors residing in the City; or
      2.   A declaration of candidacy accompanied by a filing fee of ten
dollars ($10.00).
   B.   A petition for  nomination or a declaration of  candidacy shall be
filed with the City Recorder not sooner than the one hundred tenth day before
and not later than the seventieth day before the date of the general biennial
elections for State and County officers. A nominating petition or declaration
of candidacy shall contain the information specified in ORS 249.031. (1993
Code)
1-8-2: VERIFICATION OF SIGNATURES:
Before a nominating petition is finally accepted for filing, the County Clerk
shall verify the signatures of electors on the petition as required by ORS
249.008. (1993 code)
1-8-3: WITHDRAWAL OF CANDIDATES:
A nominee for election to the City offices of Mayor or City Council may
withdraw the nomination not later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. of the last day
specified for filing a petition or declaration in Section
1-8-1 of this Chapter, by filing with the City Recorder a written withdrawal of
candidacy. The withdrawal shall be signed by the nominee and state the reasons
for withdrawal. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 9
REFERENDUM
SECTION:
1-9-1: Definitions
1-9-2: Referendum of Measures
1-9-3: Ballot Titles
1-9-4: Effective Date
1-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them:
   ELECTORS: An individual qualified to vote under section 2, article II,
Oregon Constitution and Section 27, Chapter VI, Umatilla City Charter.
   MEASURES: Includes any of the following submitted to the people for their
approval or rejection at an election:
   A.   A proposed ordinance or resolution.
   B.   A revision of or amendment to the Umatilla City Charter.
   C.   A proposition or a question of an advisory nature.
   D.   ORS 250.005(3).
   REFERENDUM: Includes the action by the City Council of submitting a measure
to the electors of the City to approve or reject at an election.
   UMATILLA CITY COUNCIL: The City governing body referred to in ORS 250.255 et
seq. (Ord. 548, 5-23-88)
1-9-2: REFERENDUM OF MEASURES:
The City Council may order a referendum, by resolution, to be held at any
regularly scheduled election or at any emergency election ordered by the
Council. The election shall be conducted according to State law 1  and all
referendums shall conform to the format and procedure prescribed by State law 2
. (Ord. 548, 5-23-88)
 
Notes
1 1. ORS 221.230.
2 2. ORS chapter 250.
1-9-3: BALLOT TITLES:
When the City Council orders a referendum, a ballot title for the measure shall
be prepared by the Council. The ballot title shall be filed with the City
Recorder. (Ord. 548, 5-23-88; 1993 Code)
1-9-4: EFFECTIVE DATE:
A referendum measure becomes effective thirty (30) days after the day on which
it is enacted or approved by a majority of the votes cast thereon. (Ord. 548,
5-23-88)
CHAPTER 10
MUNICIPAL JUDGE PRO TEMPORE
SECTION:
1-10-1: Appointment
1-10-2: Oath of Office; Conduct
1-10-3: Supervision; Appointment Extension and Termination
1-10-4: Powers and Duties
1-10-5: Compensation
1-10-1: APPOINTMENT:
   A.   Appointment: The City Administrator may appoint any eligible person to
serve as Municipal Judge Pro Tempore of the Umatilla Municipal Court, whenever
the City Administrator determines that the appointment is reasonably necessary
and will promote the more efficient administration of justice. A person is
eligible for appointment if the person is a resident of this State, a citizen
of the United States and of the age of twenty one (21) years or older.
   B.   Challenge: The eligibility, appointment or qualification of an
appointee under subsection A of this Section, is subject to challenge only in a
direct proceeding before the City Council.
   C.   Disqualification: A Municipal Judge Pro Tempore appointed as provided
in subsection A of this Section, is subject to disqualification to sit in any
case for any of the causes specified in ORS 14.210, 14.250 or 221.348. (Ord.
580, 5-6-91)
1-10-2: OATH OF OFFICE; CONDUCT:
   A.   Oath of Office: An appointment under Section 1-10-1 shall not become
effective until the appointee subscribes an oath or affirmation substantially
as follows:
      I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of
the United States, the Constitution of the State of Oregon, and the Charter of
the City of Umatilla, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the
office of Municipal Judge of the City of Umatilla of the State of Oregon to the
best of my ability.
The oath or affirmation shall be filed in the office of the City Recorder.
   B.   Conduct: Municipal Judge Pro Tempore will conduct themselves in the
manner prescribed by the Code of Judicial Conduct. (Ord. 580, 5-6-91)
1-10-3: SUPERVISION; APPOINTMENT EXTENSION AND TERMINATION:
   A.   Supervision: A Municipal Judge Pro Tempore appointed as provided in
Section
1-10-1 of this Chapter, shall be subject to the direction of the City
Administrator in respect to the assignment of cases and the general
administration of the business of the court, except the exercise of the powers
of Municipal Judge.
   B.   Appointment Extension and Termination: The City Administrator at any
time may:
      1.   Extend the term of appointment of a Municipal Judge Pro Tempore as
provided in Section
1-10-1 of this Chapter;
      2.   Terminate the term of appointment of a Municipal Judge Pro Tempore
appointed as provided in Section
1-10-1 of this Chapter; but
      3.   Termination does not affect the validity of any judgment, decree,
order or other action of the Municipal Judge Pro Tempore before the effective
date of the termination.
   C.   Limitation: A Municipal Judge Pro Tempore appointed as provided in
Section
1-10-1 of this Chapter, is not eligible to appear as attorney in the Municipal
Court in any case tried by a jury of the same jury panel during which the
Municipal Judge Pro Tempore served as Municipal Judge Pro Tempore. (Ord. 580,
5-6-91)
1-10-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Powers: Each judge pro tempore appointed and qualified as provided in
Section
1-10-1 of this Chapter, above has all the judicial powers, duties, jurisdiction
and authority, while serving the appointment, of a regularly appointed
Municipal Judge as the City Administrator prescribes.
   B.   Duties: It is the duty of a Municipal Judge Pro Tempore appointed as
provided in Section
1-10-1 of this Chapter, to hear, decide and dispose of all cases and matters
submitted to the Municipal Judge Pro Tempore as promptly as the nature of the
questions involved will permit. The powers, jurisdiction and judicial authority
of the Municipal Judge Pro Tempore in respect to any case or matter tried or
heard by the Municipal Judge Pro Tempore while serving under the appointment
shall continue beyond the expiration of the appointment so far as may be
necessary to:
      1.   Decide or dispose of case or matter on trial or held under
advisement.
      2.   Hear and decide any motion for a new trial or a judgment
notwithstanding a verdict or objections to any cost bill, that may be filed in
the case.
      3.   Settle a transcript for appeal and grant extension of time therefor.
(Ord. 580, 5-6-91)
1-10-5: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Compensation: A Municipal Judge Pro Tempore appointed as provided in
Section
1-10-1 of this Chapter, shall be entitled to receive such compensation as the
Council approves.
   B.   Based on Fines or Bail Prohibited: The amount of compensation for a
Municipal Judge Pro Tempore shall not be based upon the amount of revenues
collected from fines or bail forfeitures or any set percentage thereof 1 .
(Ord. 580, 5-6-91)
 
Notes
1 1. ORS 221.145.
CHAPTER 11
JURY SELECTION
(Rep. by Ord. 726, 1-13-2004)
CHAPTER 12
CITY FINANCES
SECTION:
1-12-1: Finance Officer Duties
1-12-2: City Depository
1-12-3: Check Signing Procedures
1-12-4: Fee Schedule
1-12-5: Funds
1-12-1: FINANCE OFFICER DUTIES:
The duties of the Finance Officer shall be:
   A.   To report directly to and be responsible to the City Administrator for
all matters relating directly or indirectly to the financial condition and
recordkeeping of the City.
   B.   To prepare payment of all debts and obligations of the City and obtain
approval for payment from the City Council.
   C.   To be responsible for the preparation and submission of the City budget
to the City Budget Committee under the direction of the City Administrator.
   D.   To establish and publish schedules of meetings and publication dates
necessary to implement budgets and meet levy or tax base election dates.
   E.   Attend all meetings of the Budget Committee and serve as the Budget
Officer of the City.
   F.   To fulfill the obligations of Budget Officer as outlined in the Oregon
Revised Statutes 1 .
   G.   Further duties shall be to insure that the fiscal policies and the
implementation of fiscal policy conforms to current budget and fiscal laws of
the State of Oregon; to prepare the fiscal records and budgetary accounting
reports as required by the City auditor, State law and City Council.
   H.   The Finance Officer shall advise the City Administrator of any changes
in the financial condition of the City; recommend to the City Administrator
changes in financial policy, revenue resources or potential cost savings and
carry out any other tasks as directed by the City Administrator. (Res. 9-86, 2-
3-86)
 
Notes
1 1. ORS 294.331.
1-12-2: CITY DEPOSITORY:
   A.   The City Recorder and the City Treasurer shall be directed and
empowered to deposit the funds of the City in the Inland Empire Bank of
Umatilla, Oregon.
   B.   The Recorder and Mayor are authorized and empowered to sign necessary
documents requested by the bank in connection with this Section within their
authority as defined by the City Charter.
   C.   The bank is authorized and directed to honor appropriate signatures as
directed by filed signature cards. (Res. 1-63, 1-23-63)
1-12-3: CHECK SIGNING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Authorized Officers: The following officers of the City are hereby
authorized to sign City checks:
      1.   Mayor.
      2.   President of City Council.
      3.   City Administrator.
      4.   City Recorder.
   B.   Signature Combination: Checks may be signed by a combination of the
following:
      1.   Mayor with any of the above officers.
      2.   Council President and any of the above officers.
   C.   Absence of Mayor or President: Should the Mayor or President of the
Council not be available and a check must be written that requires immediate
payment, the City Administrator and City Recorder may sign said checks under
the following circumstances:
A copy of the signed check signed by the City Administrator and City Recorder
shall be made and said copy signed by the Mayor upon his/her availability, and
said copy shall be kept in a file for this purpose. (Res. 9-83, 10-4-82)
1-12-4: FEE SCHEDULE:
   A.   Charges Set by Resolution: Notwithstanding any other ordinance, City
licenses, permits and services and the amounts charged for them shall be set by
resolution of the City Council, except the franchise fees authorized in
Ordinances 298 (Pacific Northwest Bell), 443 (Sewage Disposal), 468 (Pacific
Power and Light), and 489 (Cascade Natural Gas).
   B.   One Resolution: City licenses, permits and services and the amounts
charged for them shall be combined into one resolution to be known as the
General Fee Resolution of 19___.
   C.   Omitted Fee Procedure: Failure to include a City service or charge in
this resolution will not be an excuse for nonpayment of the service or charge
omitted from the resolution. Whenever changes are made in the services or
amounts listed in the resolution, a complete new resolution will be enacted
repealing the previous resolution.
   D.   Annual Review: All licenses, permits and charges for services of the
City will be reviewed by January 31, 1986, and thereafter at least once by
January 31 of each following year. (Ord. 518, 10-21-85)
   E.   Access to Schedule: The fee schedule is available in the office of the
City Recorder for inspection by the public. (1993 Code)
1-12-5: FUNDS:
   A.   Deposit Trust Fund: The City does hereby establish, beginning in fiscal
year 1991-92, the Deposit Trust Fund. Deposits placed by applicants for water
and sewer service, shall be deposited into the Deposit Trust Fund. Any of the
applicants deposit that remains after paying closing water, sewer and refuse
bills will be paid with approved interest, as established in Ordinance 559, to
the applicant from the Deposit Trust Fund. (Res. 19-92, 4-7-92)
   B.   Asset Forfeiture Trust Fund: The City does hereby establish, beginning
in fiscal year 1991-92, the Asset Forfeiture Trust Fund. All asset forfeiture
cash proceeds shall be placed in the Asset Forfeiture Trust Fund and dispersed
in accordance with ORS chapter 166, section 5(1)(a). (Res. 23-92, 5-5-92)
   C.   Library Fund: The City does hereby establish, beginning in fiscal year
1992-93, the Library Fund. (Res. 32-92, 6-2-92)
   D.   Refuse Agency: Revenues from refuse billings are held until the end of
the month. The funds are then disbursed to Sanitary Disposal and General Fund.
   E.   Municipal Court Trust: Revenues from the Court are held until the end
of the month. The funds are then disbursed to the State and County and refunds
are dispersed to defendants. Any revenue remaining after said disbursements are
made shall be allocated to the General Fund. This Fund also holds bail until it
is disbursed. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 13
PRIVATE PROPERTY AND REGULATORY TAKING CLAIMS
SECTION:
1-13-1: Purpose
1-13-2: Definitions
1-13-3: Application Process
1-13-4: Application Review
1-13-5: Notice And Determination By Council
1-13-6: Evidence
1-13-7: Council Decision
1-13-8: Council Resolution
1-13-9: Private Cause Of Action
1-13-10: Fees
1-13-1: PURPOSE:
Any person filing a demand for compensation from the city of Umatilla under the
provisions of ballot measure 37, as incorporated into Oregon Revised Statutes,
chapter 197, shall, within the time limit provided by any applicable statute of
limitations, submit to the city administrator with true and accurate
accompanying information and documentation as necessary to establish the
validity and value of such demand for compensation, including, but not
necessarily limited to, the information hereafter enumerated, a written demand
for compensation. Any application so given shall include, but shall separately
state, the claims for which they are applying with respect to the property
therein described on the date the application is tendered to the city. No
application shall set forth claims which do not affect all of the property
described in the application. Where multiple demands for compensation are
sought to be asserted for more than one parcel of real property, the claims
shall be stated in separate notices unless all of the claims set forth affect
all of the parcels described in the application. (Ord. 734, 12-7-2004, eff. 12-
7-2004)
1-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases mean:
   CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The city administrator of the city of Umatilla, or
designee.
   CLAIM: A claim filed under ballot measure 37.
   EXEMPT LAND USE REGULATION: A land use regulation that:
   A.   Restricts or prohibits activities commonly and historically recognized
as public nuisances under common law;
   B.   Restricts or prohibits activities for the protection of public health
and safety, such as fire and building codes, health and sanitation regulations,
solid or hazardous waste regulations, and pollution control regulations;
   C.   Is required in order to comply with federal law;
   D.   Restricts or prohibits the use of property for the purpose of selling
pornography or performing nude dancing; or
   E.   Was enacted prior to the date of acquisition of the property by the
owner or a family member of the owner.
   FAMILY MEMBER: Includes the wife, husband, son, daughter, mother, father,
brother, brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law,
mother-in-law, father-in-law, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, stepparent,
stepchild, grandparent, or grandchild of the owner of the property, an estate
of any of the foregoing family members, or a legal entity owned by any one or
combination of these family members or the owner of the property.
   JUST COMPENSATION: An amount of money equal to the reduction in the fair
market value of real property that is the direct result of the enactment or
enforcement of a land use regulation which provides the basis for a valid
demand for compensation claim.
   LAND USE REGULATION: Includes:
   A.   Any statute regulating the use of land or any interest therein;
   B.   Administrative rules and goals of the land conservation and development
commission; and
   C.   City's comprehensive plan, zoning ordinances, land division ordinances,
and transportation ordinances.
   OWNER: The present owner of the property, or any interest therein.
   VALID CLAIM: A claim submitted by the owner of real property that is subject
to a land use regulation adopted or enforced by the city that restricts the use
of the private real property in a manner that reduces the fair market value of
the real property. (Ord. 734, 12-7-2004, eff. 12-7-2004)
1-13-3: APPLICATION PROCESS:
The demand for compensation, accompanied by the deposit set by separate council
fee resolution, shall be submitted to the city administrator, in writing. All
of the owner(s) of the subject property, shall be the applicant(s). If not all
owners are to be the applicant, the application shall be subscribed by at least
one of the property owner(s) and accompanied by the written consent of the
other owners to the submission of the demand for compensation claim. If not all
owners subscribe or consent to the submission of the application, the
application shall contain a statement identifying the owners who have not
subscribed or consented to the application, and state that such owners were
provided with a copy of the application and refused to subscribe or consent
thereto. Such application for compensation shall be verified under the
applicant's oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that the information
contained in the application for compensation and supporting materials is true
and correct. The application shall contain or have attached thereto the
following information and materials at a minimum:
   A.   A description, sufficient for identification, of the regulation
asserted by the applicant to have restricted the use of the private real
property;
   B.   The street address, and a description in compliance with the provisions
of Oregon Revised Statutes 93.600, sufficient to identify and permit location
of the private real property, the use of which is alleged to have been
restricted by such regulation;
   C.   The true and correct names, mailing addresses, telephone numbers of all
owners, documentation showing evidence of ownership, all restrictions on the
use of the property unrelated to the land use regulations, and a statement of
the date the applicant acquired ownership of the property and that shows the
ownership interests of all owners of the property;
   D.   A completed department of treasury, internal revenue service, form W-9,
request for taxpayer identification number and certification, which will be
held in confidentiality with the city's finance director;
   E.   Whether the claim is alleged to arise on account of: 1) the adoption of
a regulation, 2) the enforcement of a regulation, or 3) the application of a
regulation, and the date on which the claim is alleged to have arisen by reason
of such event;
   F.   A copy of, or reference to the existing land use regulations that the
applicant claims restricts the use of the property, including the date the
applicant claims the land use regulation was first enacted, enforced, or
applied to the property;
   G.   A copy of the land use regulations in existence and applicable to the
property when the applicant became the owner of the property, and a copy of the
land use regulation in existence immediately before the regulation was enacted,
enforced, or applied to the property;
   H.   A description of the effect of the regulation on property, including a
statement of the manner in which the use of the property is thereby restricted;
   I.   A statement of the amount claimed to be due for compensation;
   J.   A statement of the manner in which the fair market value of the
property has been reduced, and a statement describing any affirmative
obligation imposed on the owner which are part of the reduction in fair market
value;
   K.   The alleged values of the property on the date the claim is alleged to
have arisen, including the value the property would have on such date as it is,
subject to the restriction, and the alleged value of the property on such date,
without the restriction, accompanied by a copy of a detailed written appraisal
report by an appraiser, qualified, certified and licensed as such in the state
of Oregon for the type of property under consideration, indicating the amount
of the alleged reduction in the fair market value of the property by showing
the difference in the fair market value of the property before and after
application of the regulation(s);
   L.   Whether or not applicant believes the restriction to be related to the
prohibition of a historically and commonly recognized nuisance, or to implement
a requirement of federal law; and
   M.   Any additional information which would aid in the determination of the
validity and value of the claim, or any decision to release the restriction.
(Ord. 734, 12-7-2004, eff. 12-7-2004)
1-13-4: APPLICATION REVIEW:
The city administrator shall conduct a completeness review of the demand for
compensation and shall advise the applicant, in writing, of any material
remaining to be submitted. The applicant will submit the material needed for
completeness within thirty (30) days of the written notice that additional
materials need to be submitted. Notwithstanding an applicant's failure to
provide all of the information required by section
1-13-3 of this chapter, the city may review and act upon a demand for
compensation claim. (Ord. 734, 12-7-2004, eff. 12-7-2004)
1-13-5: NOTICE AND DETERMINATION BY COUNCIL:
   A.   At the next regularly scheduled city council meeting following
provision of notice as required by subsection B of this section, the city
council shall consider the application. At the council meeting or subsequent
meeting the city council shall determine whether compensation is granted and
the amount of compensation, whether any exceptions to the requirement for
compensation apply, or whether the regulation should be modified, removed, or
deemed not to apply to the applicant's property.
   B.   Notice of the city council's intent to consider the application shall
be mailed to the applicant and property owners within three hundred feet (300')
of the applicant's property no later than seven (7) days prior to the initial
meeting at which the council will consider the application. Failure of any
person to receive notice shall not invalidate any action taken or decision made
by the council. (Ord. 734, 12-7-2004, eff. 12-7-2004)
1-13-6: EVIDENCE:
The burden of proof of any material element shall be upon the applicant for all
matters required to be shown that the applicant is entitled to just
compensation and shall be upon the city to show that the regulation is exempt
from the obligation for compensation. (Ord. 734, 12-7-2004, eff. 12-7-2004)
1-13-7: COUNCIL DECISION:
The council's decision to waive or modify a land use regulation or to
compensate the owner shall be based upon consideration of whether the public
interest would be better served by compensating the applicant, or by removing
or modifying the challenged land use regulation(s) with respect to the subject
property. If the council removes or modifies the challenged land use
regulation, it may, at its discretion, put back into effect with respect to the
subject property, all of the land use regulations in effect at the time the
applicant acquired the property. (Ord. 734, 12-7-2004, eff. 12-7-2004)
1-13-8: COUNCIL RESOLUTION:
The city council shall adopt a resolution prior to the expiration of one
hundred eighty (180) days from the date the demand for compensation was filed.
The council may take, but is not limited to taking, any one or more of the
following actions on a demand for compensation, as appropriate:
   A.   Determines that the claim is a valid claim and removes or modifies the
challenged land use regulation(s) with respect to the subject property;
   B.   Determines that the claim is a valid claim and compensation is due to
the applicant in an amount set forth in the council's resolution;
   C.   Determines that the claim is valid and that the city should acquire the
property through negotiation or eminent domain; or
   D.   Denies the demand for compensation based on, but not limited to, any
one or more of the following findings:
      1.   The land use regulation does not restrict the use of the private
real property.
      2.   The fair market value of the property is not reduced by the
enactment, enforcement or application of the land use regulation.
      3.   The demand for compensation was not filed in a timely manner, as
follows:
         a.   Within two (2) years of the effective date of measure 37 or the
date the city applies the land use regulation as an approval criteria to an
application submitted by the owner of the property, whichever is later.
         b.   Within two (2) years of the enactment of a land use regulation,
or the date the owner of the property submits a land use application in which
the land use regulation is an approval criteria, whichever is later.
      4.   The owner is not the present property owner, or the property was not
owned by a family member of the current owner at the time the land use
regulation was enacted, enforced or applied.
      5.   The land use regulation is an exempt land use regulation as defined
in measure 37.
      6.   The land use regulation in question is not an enactment of the city.
(Ord. 734, 12-7-2004, eff. 12-7-2004)
1-13-9: PRIVATE CAUSE OF ACTION:
If the council's approval of a demand for compensation claim by removing or
modifying a land use regulation causes a reduction in value of other property
located in the vicinity of the applicant, the adversely affected owners of the
property shall have a cause of action in the Oregon circuit court to recover
from the applicant the amount of the reduction, and shall also be entitled to
attorney fees, costs and disbursements in trial and on appeal. (Ord. 734, 12-7-
2004, eff. 12-7-2004)
1-13-10: FEES:
The applicant shall pay for the cost of processing the application on a demand
for compensation. The city council shall set by resolution a fee schedule to
cover the costs of processing the application. The city administrator shall
maintain a record of the city's costs in processing a demand for compensation
claim, including the costs of obtaining information required by section
1-13-3 of this chapter, which the applicant does not provide to the city.
Following the final action by the council on the demand for compensation, the
city administrator may send to the applicant a bill for actual costs, including
staff and legal costs, that the city incurred in reviewing and acting on the
claim. If the applicant does not pay the amount due within thirty (30) days,
the city may pursue collection, including filing a lien on the property. (Ord.
734, 12-7-2004, eff. 12-7-2004)
CHAPTER 14
CITY EMPLOYEES AND VOLUNTEERS
SECTION:
1-14-1: Public Trust And Confidence
1-14-2: Representation
1-14-3: Criminal Record Review
1-14-4: OLCC Recommendation Of Liquor License Applicants
1-14-5: OSP LEDS Criminal Offender Information Check
1-14-6: LEDS Criminal History Check Procedure
1-14-7: Filing
1-14-8: Criminal History Checks On Prospective Youth Organization Volunteers
1-14-9: Criminal History Checks Of Liquor License Applicants
1-14-1: PUBLIC TRUST AND CONFIDENCE:
In order for the city government to operate effectively, persons selected for
employment or as a public service volunteer with the city of Umatilla must have
the highest degree of public trust and confidence. (Ord. 745, 3-6-2007)
1-14-2: REPRESENTATION:
City employees and public service volunteers represent the city to its
citizens. Many city employees and volunteers have responsibilities to regulate
and maintain public health and safety. Some city employees have the ability and
authority to bind the city contractually, have access to public funds and
property, and possess access to privileged and proprietary information
submitted to the city in confidence. (Ord. 745, 3-6-2007)
1-14-3: CRIMINAL RECORD REVIEW:
There is a need to protect youths from harmful or dangerous encounters and to
that end a review of the criminal records of those who volunteer with youth in
the city is necessary and appropriate. (Ord. 745, 3-6-2007)
1-14-4: OLCC RECOMMENDATION OF LIQUOR LICENSE APPLICANTS:
Liquor license applicants are required to apply to the city for recommendation
to the Oregon liquor control commission (OLCC) in their licensing process. It
is necessary and appropriate that such applicants' criminal record history is
reviewed in the city's recommendation process. (Ord. 745, 3-6-2007)
1-14-5: OSP LEDS CRIMINAL OFFENDER INFORMATION CHECK:
Applicants for employment and appointed volunteers with the city will be
required to authorize the city to conduct a criminal offender information check
through the OSP LEDS system before employment or appointment is made. (Ord.
745, 3-6-2007)
1-14-6: LEDS CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECK PROCEDURE:
A member of the police department trained and authorized to perform criminal
history checks through the LEDS system will conduct the check on the
prospective employee or volunteer and orally report to the human resources
department that the applicant's records indicate "no criminal record" or
"criminal record". If the applicant's record is reported as "criminal record",
the city may, under OAR 257-010-0025, request a written criminal history report
from the OSP identification services section. Human resources will make the
written criminal history record available to the appropriate official for his
or her consideration in making the selection. (Ord. 745, 3-6-2007)
1-14-7: FILING:
The written criminal history record on persons that are not hired or appointed
as a volunteer will be retained in accordance with the requirements of OAR 166-
200-0090 for a period of three (3) years and thereafter will be destroyed. The
criminal history record of applicants and volunteers with a criminal history
that are hired or appointed will become a part of the confidential personnel
files of that employee or volunteer. Access to confidential personnel files is
limited to only authorized persons who have an official need to access such
files that is sanctioned by law or regulation. (Ord. 745, 3-6-2007)
1-14-8: CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECKS ON PROSPECTIVE YOUTH ORGANIZATION VOLUNTEERS:
Nonprofit organizations serving youth in the community, including, but not
limited to, youth baseball, youth basketball, youth soccer and youth football
organizations may request that the police department perform criminal history
checks. Subject to workload priorities and staff availability, the police
department may perform such criminal record checks on the prospective youth
volunteers. The police department shall confirm only if a criminal record
exists, without any detail of such record. The youth volunteer organization may
request criminal record history directly with the Oregon state police pursuant
to state statute and administrative rule. (Ord. 745, 3-6-2007)
1-14-9: CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECKS OF LIQUOR LICENSE APPLICANTS:
Criminal history checks of liquor license applicants shall be performed by the
police department. (Ord. 745, 3-6-2007)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Commission Created
2-1-2: Membership; Compensation
2-1-3: Terms Of Office; Vacancies
2-1-4: Organization And Procedure
2-1-5: Quorum; Rules And Regulations
2-1-6: Staff; Technical Advisors
2-1-7: Powers And Duties
2-1-8: Items Submitted For Commission Approval
2-1-9: Renaming Streets Procedure
2-1-10: Commission Recommendations
2-1-11: Hearings Officer
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
The city planning commission for the city is hereby authorized and established
by this chapter. (Ord. 264, 3-18-1959)
2-1-2: MEMBERSHIP; COMPENSATION:
The commission shall consist of the city administrator and the public works
superintendent as ex officio members, and seven (7) other members to be
appointed by the mayor, with confirmation by the council, not more than two (2)
of whom shall be nonresidents of the city residing within the urban growth
area. The commission shall receive no compensation. (Ord. 652, 3-4-1997)
2-1-3: TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
At the first meeting of the commission, the seven (7) appointed members shall
choose their term of office by lot as follows: one for one year, two (2) for
two (2) years, two (2) for three (3) years and two (2) for four (4) years.
Immediately thereafter, the members shall notify the mayor and council in
writing of such allotment. The successors shall hold office for four (4) years.
Any vacancy shall be filled by appointment of the mayor with the approval of
the council for the unexpired term of the predecessor in the office. Any member
(s) appointed prior to the effective date of ordinance 652, adopted March 4,
1997, may serve out the remainder of his or her term of office. Subsequent
appointments or reappointments of nonresidents of the city to the commission
must meet the residency requirement of section
2-1-2 of this chapter.
   A.   Removal: A commission member may be removed following a hearing before
the city council for good cause. Good cause shall include absence from three
(3) consecutive meetings or fifty percent (50%) of meetings in any six (6)
month period, failure to divulge a conflict or bias or other action or deed not
deemed to reflect the best interest of the community. (Ord. 767, 1-3-2012)
2-1-4: ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE:
   A.   Officers: The commission, at its first meeting, shall elect a president
and vice president, who shall be members appointed by the mayor and who shall
hold office during the pleasure of the commission.
   B.   Records; Reports: The commission shall elect a secretary who need not
be a member of the commission. The secretary shall keep an accurate record of
all commission proceedings. The commission shall on October 1 of each year make
and file a report of all its transactions to the city council. (Ord. 264, 3-18-
1959)
2-1-5: QUORUM; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Four (4) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. The commission
may make and alter rules and regulations for its government and procedure
consistent with laws of this state and with the city charter and ordinances. It
shall assign to the commission an office or headquarters in the city hall, if
possible, in which to hold its meetings, transact the business and keep its
records. (Ord. 619, 6-7-1994)
2-1-6: STAFF; TECHNICAL ADVISORS:
The commission may employ consulting advice on municipal problems, a secretary
and such clerks as may be necessary; and pay for their services, and for such
other expenses as the commission may lawfully incur, including the necessary
disbursements incurred by its members in the performance of duties as members
of this commission, as authorized by the city council. (Ord. 264, 3-18-1959)
2-1-7: POWERS AND DUTIES:
Except as otherwise provided by law, the commission may:
   A.   Recommend and make suggestions to the city council and to all other
public authorities concerning laying out, widening, extending, parking and
locating of streets, sidewalks and boulevards, relief of traffic congestion,
betterment of housing and sanitation conditions and establishment of zones of
districts limiting the use, height, area and bulk of buildings and structures.
   B.   Recommend to the City Council and all other public authorities plans
for regulation of the future growth, development and beautification of the
Municipality in respect to its public and private buildings and works, streets,
parks, grounds and vacant lots, and plans consistent with future growth and
development of the City in order to secure to the City and its inhabitants
sanitation, proper service to all public utilities, harbor, shipping and
transportation facilities.
   C.   Recommend to the City Council and all other public authorities plans
for promotion, development and regulation of industrial and economic needs of
the community in respect to private and public enterprises engaged in
industrial pursuits.
   D.   Advertise the industrial advantages and opportunities of the
Municipality and availability of real estate within the Municipality for
industrial settlement.
   E.   Encourage industrial settlement within the Municipality.
   F.   Make an economic survey of present potential possibilities of the
Municipality with a view to ascertaining its industrial needs.
   G.   Study needs of existing local industries with a view to strengthening
and developing local industries and stabilizing employment conditions.
   H.   Do and perform all other acts and things necessary to carry out the
provisions of ORS 227.010 to 227.120.
   I.   Study and propose in general such measures as may be advisable for
promotion of the public interest, health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience
an welfare of the City and of the area six (6) miles adjacent thereto. (Ord.
264, 3-18-59; 1993 Code)
2-1-8: ITEMS SUBMITTED FOR COMMISSION APPROVAL:
   A.   All subdivision plats located within the City limits, and all plans or
plats for vacating or laying out, widening, extending, parking and locating
streets or plans for public buildings shall first be submitted to the
Commission by the Public Works Superintendent or other proper Municipal
officer, and a report thereon from the Commission secured in writing before
approval is given by the proper Municipal official.
   B.   All subdivision plats and all plats or deeds dedication land to public
use in that portion of a county within six (6) miles outside the limits of any
City shall first be submitted to the City Planning Commission, if no such
Commission exists, to the Public Works Superintendent and approved by the
Commission or Public Works Superintendent before they shall be recorded.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to receive or record such plan, plat or replat or
deed in any public office unless the same bears thereon the approval, by
indorsement, of such Commission or Public Works Superintendent. However, the
indorsement of the Commission or of the Public Works Superintendent of the City
with boundaries nearest the land such document affects shall satisfy the
requirements of this Section in case the boundaries of more than one City are
within six (6) miles of the property so mapped or described. If the governing
bodies of such cities mutually agree upon a boundary line establishing the
limits of the jurisdiction of the cities other than the line equidistant
between the cities and file the agreement with the recording officer of the
County containing such boundary line, the boundary line mutually agreed upon
shall become the limit of the jurisdiction of each City until superseded by a
new agreement between the cities or until one of the cities files with such
recording officer a written notification stating that the agreement shall no
longer apply.
   D.   Copies of all ordinances for establishment of boundaries of any zone or
district provided by ORS 227.090, and all ordinances regulating or limiting the
use, height, area, bulk and construction of buildings to be submitted to the
Council before they are presented to the Council, shall be first submitted by
the Auditor or City Recorder to the Commission to make its recommendation. The
Auditor or City Clerk, shall immediately so notify the Council, and the
Commission shall make its recommendation thereon in writing to the Council. The
Commission shall first hold a public hearing at such time and place as may be
directed by the Council, and make a careful and appropriate investigation
thereon. Before final action is taken by the City Council, or any department of
a City government, on the location or design of any public building, bridge,
statue, park, parkway, boulevard, playground or public grounds the same shall
be submitted to the Commission for consideration and report. Unless the City
Council definitely names a longer period for the return of a report specified
in ORS 227.090 to 227.120, the approval of the Commission to any matter so
referred to it in accordance with the provisions of those sections shall be
deemed to have been given at the end of thirty (30) days after the receipt of
the matter in writing by its secretary unless the Commission submits a report
thereon prior to that time. (Ord. 264, 3-18-59; 1993 Code)
2-1-9: RENAMING STREETS PROCEDURE:
   A.   Within six (6) miles of the limits of any City, the Commission, if
there is one, or if no such Commission legally exists, then the Public Works
Superintendent, shall recommend to the City Council the renaming of any
existing street, highway or road, other than a County road or State highway, if
in the judgment of the Commission, or if no such Commission legally exists,
then in the judgment of the Public Works Superintendent, such renaming is in
the best interest of the City and the six (6) mile area.
   B.   Upon receiving such recommendation, the Council shall afford persons
particularly interested, in the general public, an opportunity to be heard at a
time and place to be specified in a notice of hearing published in a newspaper
of general circulation with the Municipality and the six (6) mile area not less
than once within the week prior to the week within which the hearing is to be
held. After such opportunity for hearing has been afforded, the City Council by
ordinance shall rename the street or highway in accordance with the
recommendation or by resolution shall reject the recommendation. A certified
copy of each such ordinance shall be filed for record with the County Clerk or
Recorder, and a like copy shall be filed with the County Assessor and County
Surveyor. The County Surveyor shall enter the new names of such streets and
roads in red ink on any filed plat and tracing thereof which may be affected,
together with appropriate notations concerning the same. (Ord. 264, 3-18-59;
1993 Code)
2-1-10: COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS:
The Commission may make recommendations to any person, copartnership,
corporation or public authority. However, such recommendation shall not have
the force or effect of a law or ordinance, except when so prescribed by law or
by City ordinance. Any person, copartnership or public authority having charge
of the construction, placing or designing of buildings or other structures and
improvements, or objects of art, may call upon the Commission for a report
thereon. (Ord. 264, 3-18-59)
2-1-11: HEARINGS OFFICER:
The City Council may appoint one or more public hearings officers to conduct
the public hearings of the Planning Commission and to serve at the pleasure of
the appointing authority. Such hearings officer may or may not be a member of
the Planning Commission. (Ord. 378, 12-6-76)
CHAPTER 2
LOCAL CONTRACT REVIEW BOARD
SECTION:
2-2-1: Local Contract Review Board
2-2-2: Rules Adopted
2-2-1: LOCAL CONTRACT REVIEW BOARD:
Pursuant to ORS 279.011 to 279.061, the City Council is designated as the Local
Contract Review Board for all contracts concerns of the City. (Res. 8-84, 4-2-
84)
2-2-2: RULES ADOPTED:
The City Council hereby adopts rules as the Local Contract Review Board Rules
for the purpose of governing public contracts in the City. These rules shall
remain in effect until such time as they may be further amended by the Contract
Review Board of the City. The Rules are available for inspection by the public
in the office of the City Recorder. (Res. 8-84, 4-2-84; 1993 Code)
CHAPTER 3
LIBRARY BOARD
SECTION:
2-3-1: Purpose
2-3-2: Board Membership; Residency; Compensation
2-3-3: Term of Office; Removal
2-3-4: Meetings
2-3-5: Officers
2-3-6: Responsibilities and Duties
2-3-7: Assistance to the Board
2-3-8: Internal Administrative Policies and Procedures
2-3-1: PURPOSE:
The City Public Library Board shall advise and make recommendations to the
librarian, and when appropriate, the City Administrator, Mayor and City Council
on all matters related to the management of the Library, and to formulate and
adopt rules and regulations governing the use of the Library. (Ord. 571, 4-2-
90)
2-3-2: BOARD MEMBERSHIP; RESIDENCY; COMPENSATION:
   A.   Membership: The Board shall consist of five (5) members appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. The Board shall be responsible
to the City Administrator, Mayor and City Council. Board members shall be
appointed from resident voters within the urban growth boundary of the City. In
addition to the appointed members to the Board, the Administrator, Mayor and
librarian may serve on the Board as ex officio members. (Ord. 571, 4-2-90)
   B.   Compensation: No Board member shall receive a salary or any payment for
materials or services rendered the Board, but Board members may be reimbursed
for expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. (1993 Code)
2-3-3: TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVAL:
   A.   Term of Office: A full term of office shall be four (4) years from the
date of appointment. When a vacancy exists, an appointment shall be made by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council to fill the unexpired term. The
Board members in office at the time this Chapter is adopted shall continue in
office, until the end of his/her office as fixed by ordinance.
   B.   Removal:
      1.   A Board member may be removed by the Mayor with the approval of the
City Council before the expiration of member's term of office for three (3)
unexcused absences, for other violations of the Board's bylaws or for a change
of residence outside the City's urban growth boundary. (Ord. 571, 4-2-90)
      2.   A member may request a hearing before the Mayor and Council when the
Council acts on the Mayor's request for approval to remove the member. (1993
Code)
2-3-4: MEETINGS:
The Board shall meet at such times as the Board may determine are appropriate
and necessary but no less than once every other month. All Board meetings shall
be conducted in accordance with the bylaws of the organization, the provisions
of this Chapter and with State and local law. (Ord. 571, 4-2-90)
2-3-5: OFFICERS:
The Board shall, at its first meeting, elect a chairman and such other officers
as the Board may deem appropriate. Officers shall have such duties and
authority as the Board shall establish, consistent with its bylaws, other
provisions of this Chapter and with law. (Ord. 571, 4-2-90)
2-3-6: RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES:
   A.   Advisory Capacity: The Board shall have the responsibility for advising
and making recommendations to the librarian, and when appropriate, to the
Administrator, Mayor and Council, on all matters pertaining to the planning,
acquisition, development and management of the Library.
   B.   Supervision of Direction: The City Administrator shall have the
responsibility for the hiring, termination, discipline and any other personnel
actions affecting the librarian. The Board shall act in an advisory capacity in
the selection, discipline or termination of the Librarian.
   C.   Rules and Regulations: The Board shall prepare and adopt reasonable
rules and regulations governing the use of and proper conduct in the library in
the City.
   D.   Budget: The Board shall participate in the preparation of the annual
budget and shall recommend to the Budget Officer a budget for the expenditure
of all funds produced by tax or other means for the development, promotion and
management of the library in the City.
   E.   Annual Reports: The Board shall make a full and complete annual report
to the City Council and make such other reports as may be required by the Mayor
and Council. The librarian shall be responsible for the preparation of the
report with Board input. (Ord. 571, 4-2-90)
2-3-7: ASSISTANCE TO THE BOARD:
The librarian shall assist the Board in the performance of its duties, and
shall prepare reports as requested by the Board. (Ord. 571, 4-2-90)
2-3-8: INTERNAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:
The City Administrator shall be the fiscal and internal administrative agent
for the library and the department shall operate in conformance with City
administrative procedures including those pertaining to the following:
   A.   Personnel, including recruitment, selection, classification and pay for
department staff;
   B.   Personnel matters, including discipline and grievances;
   C.   Receipt, disbursement and accounting for monies;
   D.   Maintenance of general books, cost accounting records, and other
financial documents;
   E.   Purchasing;
   F.   Budget administration; and
   G.   Operation and maintenance of equipment and buildings. (Ord. 571, 4-2-
90)
CHAPTER 4
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-4-1: Appointment; Term Of Office; Removal
2-4-2: Membership; Residency
2-4-3: Duties Of The Committee
2-4-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVAL:
A commission of six (6) members shall be appointed by the city council to be
known as the parks and recreation committee. The council shall initially
appoint two (2) members to serve one year, two (2) members to serve two (2)
years, and two (2) members to serve three (3) years, from July 1 in the year of
their appointment. Thereafter, each appointed member shall serve for a term of
three (3) years or until a resignation occurs or there is a removal for good
cause by the council. If a vacancy occurs, the governing body shall appoint a
new member for the unexpired term.
   A.   Removal: A committee member may be removed following a hearing before
the city council for good cause. Good cause shall include absence from three
(3) consecutive meetings or fifty percent (50%) of meetings in any six (6)
month period, failure to divulge a conflict or bias or other action or deed not
deemed to reflect the best interest of the community. (Ord. 767, 1-3-2012)
2-4-2: MEMBERSHIP; RESIDENCY:
   A.   Residency: The committee shall have at least four (4) members who shall
reside within the city limits and no more than two (2) members who reside
outside the city limits but within the urban growth boundary.
   B.   Membership: One council member, the mayor and the city administrator
are hereby made ex officio members of the committee. (Ord. 521, 5-21-1990)
2-4-3: DUTIES OF THE COMMITTEE:
The committee shall:
   A.   Appoint one member to act as secretary, who shall keep accurate minutes
of all discussions and decisions made. (Ord. 561, 8-28-1989)
   B.   Act as an advisory committee to the city council concerning development
and maintenance of parks, trails and recreational activities which shall be
open to the general public.
   C.   Recommend expenditures related to parks and recreation and submit them
to the budget committee for their approval. (Ord. 697, 3-7-2000)
CHAPTER 5
TRANSIENT ROOM TAX REVIEW COMMITTEE 1
SECTION:
2-5-1: Appointment; Membership
2-5-2: Term Of Office; Removal
2-5-3: Duties And Responsibilities
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 3, chapter 5 of this code.
2-5-1: APPOINTMENT; MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   Appointment, Membership, Qualifications: There shall be appointed by
the city council a five (5) member commission known as the transient room tax
review committee. The committee shall be composed of one lodging operator who
operates motels or recreation parks within the city, one member of the chamber
of commerce and three (3) members at large. Members at large shall reside
within the city limits, and may be members of the chamber of commerce.
   B.   Committee Officers; Minutes: The committee shall appoint one member to
act as chairman and one member to act as secretary, who shall keep accurate
minutes of discussions and decisions made. (Ord. 763, 5-3-2011, eff. 5-17-2011)
2-5-2: TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVAL:
The council shall initially appoint two (2) members to serve one year, two (2)
members to serve two (2) years and one member to serve three (3) years.
Thereafter, each appointed member shall serve for a term of three (3) years or
until a resignation occurs or there is a removal for good cause by the council.
   A.   Removal: A committee member may be removed following a hearing before
the city council for good cause. Good cause shall include absence from three
(3) consecutive meetings or fifty percent (50%) of meetings in any six (6)
month period, failure to divulge a conflict or bias or other action or deed not
deemed to reflect the best interest of the community. (Ord. 767, 1-3-2012)
2-5-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The committee shall act as an advisory committee to the city council and may
recommend expenditures annually and submit them to council for approval.
Additionally, the committee shall:
   A.   Hear and determine appeals of orders or decisions of the tax
administrator 1  and prescribe the forms, rules and regulations relating to
appeals. The committee may affirm, modify or reverse a decision or dismiss an
appeal. In reviewing a decision of the tax administrator the committee may take
evidence and make an investigation. It shall give notice of its determination
in the manner prescribed for serving notice of a tax administrator's decision
and shall file a certified copy of each determination with the tax
administrator. A determination becomes final after twenty (20) days and becomes
due, subject to interest and penalties, and enforceable by the tax
administrator in the same manner as an order decision of the tax administrator.
   B.   Approve, modify or disapprove all forms, rules and regulations
prescribed by the tax administrator is the forms, rules and regulations are
challenged in the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
   C.   Hear and determine protests made to a form, rule or regulation approved
or prescribed by the tax administrator.
   D.   Prescribe rules for extensions and, for good cause, grant extensions of
time in excess of one month for filing a return or paying the tax.
   E.   Make investigations regarding imposition and administration of the tax
and report its findings to the city council; act in an advisory capacity to the
city council on matters pertaining to the tax and enforcement problems; and
recommend to the city council the adoption, amendment or repeal of legislation
pertaining to the tax.
   F.   Any other duties as otherwise set out herein. (Ord. 563, 10-2-1989)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 3-5-1 of this code.
CHAPTER 6
CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD
(Rep. by Ord. 829, 10-2-2018)
CHAPTER 7
YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL
SECTION:
2-7-1: Appointment, Term Of Office, Removal
2-7-2: Duties Of The Youth Advisory Council
2-7-3: Administration
2-7-1: APPOINTMENT, TERM OF OFFICE, REMOVAL:
   A.   Appointment: There shall be established a Youth Advisory Council
consisting of eight (8) students enrolled in the Umatilla High School, two (2)
of which shall be from the freshman class (9th grade); two (2) of which shall
be from the sophomore class (10th grade); two (2) of which shall be from the
junior class (11th grade); and two (2) of which shall be from the senior class
(12th grade).
   B.   Term Of Office: It is expected that each member of the Youth Advisory
Committee will serve until graduation. Consequently, each year two (2) freshmen
will be appointed, along with replacements for any YAC members who have vacated
their positions. Members shall be appointed by the Umatilla School District
based upon their academic standing, aptitude and commitment to the YAC Program
and objectives.
   C.   Removal: Members of the Youth Advisory Council may be removed by the
Superintendent of the Umatilla School District should any member fail to meet
USD expectations of their participation in this program. (Ord. 817, 3-7-2017)
2-7-2: DUTIES OF THE YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL:
   A.   It shall be the responsibility of the members of the Youth Advisory
Council to offer the perspective of Umatilla's youth and family population on
the activities, programs and policies of the City of Umatilla, the Umatilla
City Council and the Umatilla City Administration. In order to become informed
of these activities, programs and policies, each class pair shall team up with
the department heads of the Public Works Department, the Planning Department,
the Police Department and the City Manager. Each of these department heads
shall make such time available as is convenient and in whatever manner is
appropriate to foster understanding among these youth teams as to the operation
of the City's respective programs.
   B.   Additionally, all members of the Youth Advisory Council shall monitor
the actions of the Umatilla City Council, and shall provide youth perspective
on the issues therein. Regular attendance at City Council meetings is an
expectation of the City Council. Periodic reports to the Council of YAC
activities, requests for Council consideration on youth issues, and
observations of the YAC regarding Council actions may be made under the
committee report item on the City Council agenda. Additionally, it is expected
that the City Council will seek guidance from the YAC on issues of importance
to youth and families that are under consideration by the City Council. (Ord.
817, 3-7-2017)
2-7-3: ADMINISTRATION:
The City Manager shall appoint a staff liaison to act as the primary point of
contact with the Youth Advisory Council. (Ord. 817, 3-7-2017)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSING PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Purpose
3-1-2: Definitions
3-1-3: Business License Required
3-1-4: Contents Of License
3-1-5: Administrative Provisions
3-1-1: PURPOSE:
In order that business be carried on and conducted in a peaceful and profitable
manner within the city, it is necessary that the same be regulated and that the
city provide police and other services. (Ord. 486, 7-19-1982)
3-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them:
   BUSINESS: Any activity carried on with the intent that a profit be realized
therefrom.
   ENGAGE IN OR CARRY ON BUSINESS: Any act or series of acts performed within
the city in the course or pursuit of a business activity.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, agent
or representative of such. (Ord. 486, 7-19-1982; amd. Ord. 774, 7-3-2012; Ord.
836, 6-4-2019)
3-1-3: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall engage in or carry on any business within the corporate
limits of the city without having first obtained a license from the city by
filling out the business license application form.
   B.   The agent or agents of nonresident proprietor engaged in any business
in which a license is required by this title, shall be liable for the penalties
for failure to obtain a license, to the same extent as if such were themselves
proprietors.
   C.   Any person who represents to the public, by advertisement or other
means, that he/she is engaged in any business in the city for which a license
is required shall be deemed to be actually engaged in such business.
   D.   If any person shall engage in or carry on more than one business within
one place of business, one license shall be issued to cover each business.
   E.   Any person which has more than one location shall be deemed a separate
business at each location. (Ord. 486, 7-19-1982)
3-1-4: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
Every business shall specify:
   A.   The name of the person to whom it is issued.
   B.   The particular place at which the business shall be carried on.
   C.   The dates within which the license is valid. (Ord. 486, 7-19-1982)
3-1-5: ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Term Of License: The license provided for in this title shall be valid
for a period of one year, such period to begin on July 1 and end on June 30 of
the following year.
   B.   Nontransferable: The license is not transferable or assignable.
   C.   Application Period: All license applications shall be completed within
thirty (30) days of the beginning of the license period.
   D.   Fees:
      1.   Fees paid under this title shall be in addition to fees required by
other existing city ordinances and fees required by county and state agencies.
      2.   The schedule of license fees 1  to be charged by this title shall be
set by resolution of the city council. Such schedule shall be reviewed and
updated annually. (Ord. 486, 7-19-1982)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 1-12-4 of this code.
CHAPTER 2
HOBBY/CRAFT AND PRODUCE ITEM SALES PERMITS
SECTION:
3-2-1: Permit Required
3-2-2: Definitions
3-2-3: Content Of Permit
3-2-4: Administrative Provisions
3-2-5: Penalty
3-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
An annual permit shall be required to allow for the sale of hobby, craft,
produce, etc., items in a farmers' market, flea market, swap meet, etc., where
vendors rent tables or booths from a business licensed for such events in the
city of Umatilla. (Ord. 770, 4-3-2012)
3-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them:
   HOBBY/CRAFT AND PRODUCE SALES: The incidental sale of hobby/craft or produce
items at events such as farmers' markets, flea markets, swap meets, etc., where
vendors rent tables or booths from a business licensed for such events in the
city of Umatilla. Hobby/craft and produce sales are those sales that generate
income that is supplemental to other sources of income for the vendor. For the
purpose of this permit, hobby/craft and produce items does not include products
purchased new specifically for resale unless the hobby/craft vendor has
modified these items with the intent of adding value. Repackaging of items does
not constitute added value.
   VENDOR: Person or persons who rent tables or booths from a licensed business
for such events as farmers' markets, flea markets, swap meets, etc. (Ord. 770,
4-3-2012)
3-2-3: CONTENT OF PERMIT:
Every vendor shall specify:
   A.   The name of the person to whom it is issued, including mailing address,
physical address and telephone number.
   B.   The event at which the vendor has rented a table/tables or booth. (Ord.
770, 4-3-2012)
3-2-4: ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Term Of Permit: The permit provided for in this chapter shall be valid
for a period of one year, such period to begin on July 1 and end on June 30 of
the following year.
   B.   Nontransferable: The permit is not transferable or assignable.
   C.   Fee: No fee shall be charged for this permit.
   D.   Business License For Resale Items: The sale of any items purchased new
for resale shall require a business license as stipulated in chapter 1 of this
title. (Ord. 770, 4-3-2012)
3-2-5: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by the imposition of class B civil fine. (Ord. 770, 4-
3-2012)
CHAPTER 3
SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definition
3-3-2: Permit and License Required
3-3-3: Application for Permits and Licenses
3-3-4: License Fees; Exceptions
3-3-5: Investigation and Issue
3-3-6: Exhibition of License
3-3-7: Duty of Police to Enforce
3-3-8: Revocation of License
3-3-9: Appeal
3-3-10: Records
3-3-11: Penalty
3-3-1: DEFINITION:
A canvasser or solicitor is defined as any individual, whether resident of the
City, or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any
other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from
street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares
and merchandise, person property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery,
or for service to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such
individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such
sale or whether collecting advance payments on such sales or not; provided,
that such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for any
other or for any other person hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building,
structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment,
shop, or any other place within the City for the sole purpose of exhibiting
sample and taking orders for future delivery. Provided, however, that this
shall not be deemed to include regular commercial travelers employed by
wholesale houses and selling goods, wares, merchandise and services to
merchants of this City, nor to newspaper venders. (Ord. 212, 6-6-49)
3-3-2: PERMIT AND LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser as defined in Section
3-3-1 of this Chapter to engage in such business within the corporate limits of
the City without first obtaining a permit and license therefor in compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 212, 6-6-49)
3-3-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMITS AND LICENSES:
Applicants for permits and licenses under this Chapter must file with the City
Recorder a sworn application in writing (in duplicate) on a form to be
furnished by the City Recorder, which shall give the following information:
   A.   Name and description of applicant.
   B.   Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant.
   C.   A brief description of the nature of the business and goods to be sold.
   D.   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship.
   E.   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
   F.   The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders
taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or
products are located at the time said application is filed, and the proposed
method of delivery.
   G.   A photograph of the applicant taken within sixty (60) days immediately
prior to the date of filing the application, which picture shall be a two inch
by two inch (2" x 2"), showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a
clear and distinguishing manner. The fingerprints of the applicant, and names
of at least two (2) reliable property owners in the County of Umatilla, State
of Oregon, who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business
respectability, or in lieu of the names of references, such other available
evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant
as will enable an investigation to properly evaluate such character and
business responsibility.
   H.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any Municipal ordinance, the nature of
the offense and the punishment of the penalty assessed therefor.
At the time of filing the application, a fee as may be set by resolution 1
shall be paid to the City Recorder to cover the cost of investigation of the
facts stated therein. (Ord. 212, 6-6-49; amd. Ord. 518, 10-21-85)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section 1-12-4 of this Code; see section 2 of Ordinance 518.
3-3-4: LICENSE FEES; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   License Fees: License fees to be paid by each licensee prior to the
issuance of any license shall be as provided in Section 1-12-4 of this Code and
as set by resolution.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   No fee shall be required of one selling products of the farm or
orchard actually produced by the seller.
      2.   No fee shall be required of one soliciting for any regularly and
permanently established merchant of the City.
      3.   No fee shall be required of one selling goods or merchandise or
performing services on a purely nonprofit basis for charitable, educational or
religious benefit; provided, such facts are established by the applicant to the
satisfaction of the City Recorder.
   C.   Right to Solicit Without Payment: Any and all persons claiming to have
the right under State or Federal law to solicit or canvass in the City without
payment of license fee, shall nevertheless, apply for and secure a solicitor's
or canvasser's license in the manner set forth in this Chapter and it shall be
the duty and responsibility of such person to establish their right to receive
such license without payment of fees herein set forth to the satisfaction of
the City Recorder, or the Chief of Police of said City in event of the absence
of the City Recorder from said City.
   D.   Assistants: For each helper or assistant to those who must procure the
permit and license for soliciting or canvassing, said helpers or assistants
must procure the permit and license as herein provided for soliciting and
canvassing. (Ord. 212, 6-6-49; amd. Ord. 518, 10-21-85)
3-3-5: INVESTIGATION AND ISSUE:
Upon receipt of such application, the same shall be referred to the Chief of
Police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and
moral character to be made as deemed necessary for the protection of the public
good, and who shall make a report thereof to the City Recorder within a period
of ten (10) days from the date of the filing of the application.
   A.   Disapproved: If as a result of such investigation the applicant's
character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief
of Police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for
the same, and return the said application to the City Recorder, who shall
notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit
will be issued.
   B.   Approval: If as a result of such investigation, the character and
business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the
Chief of Police shall endorse on the application his approval, execute a permit
addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for and
return said permit, along with the application to the City Recorder who shall,
upon payment of the prescribed fee, deliver to the applicant his permit and
issue a license. Such license shall contain the signature and seal of the
issuing officer, and shall show the name, address and photograph of said
licensee, the fee paid, the date of issuance, and the length of time the same
shall be operating, as well as license number and other identifying description
of any vehicle used in such soliciting or canvassing. The Recorder shall keep a
permanent record of all licenses issued.
   C.   Bond in Lieu of Investigation: If any applicant for a permit and
license shall be unwilling to receive a license only upon the conclusion of a
ten (10) day period of investigation as provided herein, and desires the
issuance immediately upon application for such permit, the applicant may
deposit with the City Recorder a cash or good and sufficient surety bond in the
sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) conditioned upon the making of final
delivery of the goods ordered or services to be performed in accordance with
the terms of such order or failing therein, that the advance payment of such
order be refunded and thereupon such license or licenses may immediately be
issued. Any person aggrieved by the action of any solicitor or canvasser shall
have a right of action on the bond for recovery of money or damages or both.
Such bond shall remain on deposit for a period of ninety (90) days after the
expiration of such license, unless sooner released by the City Council of the
City. (Ord. 212, 6-6-49)
3-3-6: EXHIBITION OF LICENSE:
Solicitors and canvassers are required to exhibit licenses at request of any
citizen. (Ord. 212, 6-6-49)
3-3-7: DUTY OF POLICE TO ENFORCE:
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the City to require any person
seen soliciting or canvassing, or who is not known by such officer to be duly
licensed, to produce a solicitor's or canvasser's license and to enforce the
provisions of this Chapter against any person found to be violating the same.
(Ord. 212, 6-6-49)
3-3-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Revocation: Permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this
Chapter may be revoked by the City Recorder, after notice and hearing, for any
of the following causes:
      1.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for license;
      2.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as solicitor or canvasser;
      3.   Any violation of this Chapter;
      4.   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
      5.   Conducting the business of soliciting or of canvassing, in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
   B.   Notice of Hearing: Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall
be given in writing, setting forth specifically, the grounds of complaint and
the time and place of hearing. Such notice will be mailed, postage prepaid, to
the licensee, at his/her last known address at least five (5) days prior to the
date set for hearing. (Ord. 212, 6-6-49)
3-3-9: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the City Recorder
in the denial of a permit or license as provided in Section 3-3-4 of this
Chapter, or the action of the Mayor in assessing the fee as provided in Section
3-3-5 this Chapter, shall have the right to appeal to the Council, within
fourteen (14) days, after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to
such person's last known address, written statement setting forth fully the
grounds for the appeal. The Council shall set a time and place for the hearing
on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant in
the same manner as provided in Section 3-3-8 of this Chapter for notice of
hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the Council on such appeal
shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 212, 6-6-49)
3-3-10: RECORDS:
The City Recorder shall maintain a record for each license issued and record
the reports of conviction for violations of this Chapter therein. (Ord. 212, 6-
6-49)
3-3-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by the imposition of a Class B civil fine 1 . (Ord.
513, 2-4-85; 1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
CHAPTER 4
SECONDHAND DEALERS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Purpose
3-4-2: Definitions
3-4-3: Record Forms
3-4-4: Disposition of Property
3-4-5: Articles to be Tagged
3-4-6: Inspection of Articles and Records
3-4-7: Penalties
3-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide strict regulation of certain business
activities that the Council finds present an extraordinary risk of being used
as a means of concealing criminal behavior involving the theft of property.
This risk is present despite the best efforts of legitimate dealers because of
the large volume of goods and materials that are processed in such businesses.
Therefore, this Chapter is intended to reduce this type of criminal activity by
providing more timely police awareness of such business transactions. The
Council finds that the regulations provided herein are necessary and the need
for the regulations outweighs any anti-competitive effect that may result from
adoption. (Ord. 488, 11-1-82)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them:
   PERSON: Any real person, partnership, association or corporation.
   PURCHASE: To transfer property from a person, not representing a bona fide
business, to any dealer regulated by this Chapter, for any valuable
consideration. Purchase does not include a consignment of property for sale.
   SECONDHAND DEALER: Any person, engaged in, conducting, managing or carrying
on a business that purchases used:
   A.   Air conditioners;
   B.   Amplifiers, video recording equipment and accessories;
   C.   Cameras, projectors and accessories;
   D.   Citizen's band and walkie-talkie equipment;
   E.   Clocks and watches;
   F.   Electronic testing, regulating and repair equipment;
   G.   Guns and equipment;
   H.   Hi-fi, stereo, radios, tape recorders/players;
   I.   Jewelry;
   J.   Microwave ovens;
   K.   Office equipment including typewriters, calculators, recorders,
transcribers and computers;
   L.   Sewing machines;
   M.   Silverware;
   N.   Telephones;
   O.   Televisions;
   P.   Tools; and
   Q.   Items of a similar nature, from any person, not representing a bona
fide, licensed business, who appears with such article at the dealer's place of
business, and required to have a business license. (Ord. 488, 11-1-82)
3-4-3: RECORD FORMS:
   A.   All secondhand dealers shall, at the time of purchasing any article in
the business which is regulated by this Chapter from any person not
representing a bona fide, licensed business who appears with such article at
the dealer's place of business, place the description of the article purchased
upon a form which shall be provided by the Police Department 1 .
      1.   In lieu of the use of forms supplied by the Police Department, the
dealer may utilize his own forms if such forms have been approved by the Chief
or his designee. The form provided for herein shall be of such size, shape and
color and shall require such information relating to the regulations of this
Chapter, as the Chief of Police or his designee may direct.
      2.   The description of an article so purchased shall be of such
description as may be called for by the form. The dealer shall fill in all of
the blank spaces on such form with such data as is required by the form and
require the person selling any article regulated by this Chapter to sign his
name on such form.
      3.   Such form shall be filled out in clear legible printing.
      4.   Further, property regulated pursuant to this Chapter shall only be
purchased by the dealer after the seller has presented proper identification.
      5.   Since the information that is required to be furnished pursuant to
this Section to aid in the investigation of the theft of property is of a
confidential nature and related to the privacy of persons doing business with
such dealers, such information shall be considered to be confidential and
privileged from disclosure to the maximum extent possible under applicable law.
   B.   The dealer's copy of all such forms shall be retained for a period of
not less than one year.
   C.   Every person regulated by the provisions of this Section shall mail or
deliver to the Chief of Police or his designee, not later than Thursday of each
week, all of such forms, or legible copies thereof, describing articles
purchased by him during that business week. (Ord. 488, 11-1-82)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 6-1-5B1 of this Code.
3-4-4: DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY:
   A.   No property purchased by any secondhand dealer, as regulated by this
Chapter, shall be sold for a space of ten (10) full days after purchase. Such
property shall be maintained in substantially the same form as purchased and
shall not be commingled so as to preclude identification during this ten (10)
day holding period. Notwithstanding this requirement, the Chief of Police, or
his designee, may authorize, in cases in which it is shown that extreme
financial hardship will result from holding an item for the ten (10) day
period, the sale or transfer of such item before the expiration of this period.
   B.   Whenever the Chief of Police, or his designee, upon reasonable belief
that the specific property is the subject of theft, notifies in writing, any
secondhand dealer not to dispose of any specifically described property
purchased, the property shall be retained in substantially the same form and
shall not be sold, exchanged, dismantled, or otherwise disposed of for a period
of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, as determined by the Chief of Police
or his designee. (Ord. 488, 11-1-82)
3-4-5: ARTICLES TO BE TAGGED:
Any antique dealer, precious metal and gem dealer, or secondhand dealer
purchasing any article in the business which is regulated by this Chapter from
any person, not representing a bona fide, licensed business, who appears with
such article at the dealer's place of business, shall affix to the article a
tag upon which shall be written a number in legible characters, which number
shall correspond to the number on the record forms required to be kept by
Section 3-4-3 of this Chapter. (Ord. 488, 11-1-82)
3-4-6: INSPECTION OF ARTICLES AND RECORDS:
All persons licensed to do business as a secondhand dealer, and any person
employed by such dealer, shall permit the Chief of Police or his designee, upon
presentation of official identification, entry to such business premises for
the limited purpose of inspecting any articles purchased in the business as
regulated by this Chapter and currently being held pursuant to Section 3-4-
4 and/or the records incident thereto, to ensure compliance with the provisions
of this Chapter. Any such inspection shall only be authorized during normal
business. hours. (Ord. 488, 11-1-82)
3-4-7: PENALTIES:
The violation of or participation in the violation of any section of this
Chapter, by any person engaged in a business regulated under this Chapter, is
punishable, upon conviction, by the imposition of a Class C civil fine 1 .
(Ord. 488, 11-1-8;1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
CHAPTER 5
TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: Tax Imposed
3-5-3: Collection Of Tax
3-5-4: Operator's Duties
3-5-5: Exemptions
3-5-6: Registration Requirements
3-5-7: Collection, Returns And Payments
3-5-8: Delinquency Penalties
3-5-9: Deficiency Determinations; Notice
3-5-10: Fraud; Refusal To Collect; Evasion
3-5-11: Redeterminations
3-5-12: Security For Collection Of Tax
3-5-13: Liens
3-5-14: Refunds
3-5-15: Administration Of Regulations
3-5-16: Appeals To The Council
3-5-17: Transient Room Tax Fund
3-5-18: Penalties
3-5-19: Subsequent Review And Sunset Provision
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
   ACCRUAL ACCOUNTING: A system of accounting in which the operator enters the
rent due from a transient into the record when the rent is earned, whether or
not it is paid.
   CASH ACCOUNTING: A system of accounting in which the operator does not enter
the rent due from a transient into the record until the rent is paid.
   CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Umatilla, Oregon.
   ENTITLED TO OCCUPANCY: The person so entitled is obligated to pay rent to
the operator of a motel or recreation park for each day during which the person
has the right of occupancy in the motel or recreation park. This term does not
mean the person simply has reservations for a room or recreation park space,
but that the person is obligated to pay rent for the room or space for each day
such right exists.
   MOTEL: A part of a structure that is occupied or designed for occupancy by
transients for lodging or sleeping, including a hotel, inn, tourist home or
house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house,
apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house
trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure.
   OCCUPANCY: Use or possession of, or the right to use or possess, a room in a
motel or a space in a recreation park for lodging or sleeping.
   OPERATOR: A person who is the proprietor of a motel or recreation park in
any capacity. When an operator's functions are performed through a managing
agent of a type other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be
considered an operator. For purposes of this chapter, compliance by either the
operator or the managing agent shall be considered by both.
   PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social
club, fraternal organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private
dormitory, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, trustee, syndicate, or another group or combination acting as a unit.
   RECREATION PARK: Any area designated by the person establishing, operating,
managing, or maintaining the same for overnight camping by the general public.
"Recreation park" shall mean only those areas available for use through the
payment of a fee, and shall include spaces for recreational vehicles under the
general heading of "camping".
   RENT: The gross rent, exclusive of other services.
   RENT PACKAGE PLAN: The consideration charged for both food and rent where a
single rate is made for the total of both. The amount applicable to rent for
determination of the aggregate amount of taxes due from an operator during the
period for which the operator is required to report collections.
   TAX: Either the tax payable by the transient or the aggregate amount of
taxes due from an operator during the period for which the operator is required
to report collections.
   TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The city finance officer 1  and/or administrator as
appointed by the city council.
   TENANCY: The letting of real estate as a landlord to tenant pursuant to a
lease agreement creating a residential landlord-tenant relationship.
   TOURISM PROMOTION ASSESSMENT CHARGE: An increase in the local transient
lodging taxes as herein adopted to fund tourism promotion and construction of
the facility known as the Eastern Oregon Trade And Event Center.
   TRANSIENT: An individual who occupies or is entitled to occupy space in a
motel or a recreation park for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days or
less, counting portions of days as full days. The day a transient checks out of
a motel shall not be included in determining the thirty (30) day period if the
transient is not charged rent for that day. A person occupying space in a motel
shall be considered a transient until a period of thirty (30) days has expired
unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant
providing for a longer period of occupancy or the tenant actually extends
occupancy more than thirty (30) consecutive days. A person who pays for lodging
on a monthly basis regardless of the number of days in the month, shall not be
considered a transient.
   TRANSIENT ROOM TAX REVIEW COMMITTEE 2  (Referred To As COMMITTEE): A five
(5) member advisory committee appointed to review and recommend expenditures of
revenue from the transient room tax. (Ord. 758, 7-6-2010, eff. 8-1-2010; amd.
Ord. 791, 7-1-2014; Ord. 811, 5-3-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 1-12-1 of this code.
2 1. See title 2, chapter 5 of this code.
3-5-2: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   For the privilege of occupancy in any motel or recreational vehicle
park, each transient shall pay a tax in the amount of three and one-half
percent (3.5%) of the rent charged by the operator.
   B.   For the privilege of occupancy in any motel, on and after July 1, 2016,
each transient shall pay a tourism promotion assessment charge in the amount of
two dollars ($2.00) per night of occupancy up to the thirty (30) day limitation
of this chapter.
   C.   For the privilege of occupancy in any recreational vehicle park, on and
after July 1, 2016, each transient shall pay a tourism promotion assessment
charge in the amount of one dollar ($1.00) per one space night of occupancy up
to the thirty (30) day limitation of this chapter.
   D.   The taxes and charges imposed by subsections A, B, and C of this
section constitute a debt owed by the transient to the city which is
extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient
shall pay the tax to the operator of the motel or recreational vehicle park at
the time the rent is paid. The operator shall enter the tax on the operator's
records when rent is collected, if the operator keeps his/her records on the
cash accounting basis, or when earned, if the operator keeps his/her records on
the accrual accounting basis.
   E.   If rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall
be paid by the transient to the operator with each installment. If for any
reason the tax is not paid to the operator of the motel or recreational vehicle
park, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to
the city. In all cases, the rent paid or charged for occupancy shall exclude
the sale of any goods, services, and commodities other than the furnishing of
rooms, accommodations, and parking space in mobile home parks or trailer parks.
(Ord. 811, 5-3-2016)
3-5-3: COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   Every operator renting space for lodging, sleeping, or camping shall
collect the transient room tax and the tourism promotion assessment charge from
the occupant. The transient room tax and tourism promotion assessment charge
collected or accrued shall be held in trust by the operator until such funds
are remitted to the city as provided herein. (Ord. 791, 7-1-2014)
   B.   In the cases of credit or deferred payment of rent, the payment of tax
to the operator may be deferred until the rent is paid, and the operator shall
not be liable for the tax until credits are paid or deferred payments are made.
Adjustments may be made for uncollectible accounts.
   C.   The tax administrator shall enforce this chapter and may adopt rules
and regulations necessary for enforcement. (Ord. 758, 7-6-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-5-4: OPERATOR'S DUTIES:
An operator shall collect the tax when the rent is collected from the
transient. The amount of tax shall be stated separately in the operator's
records and on receipt given by the operator. An operator shall not advertise
that the tax will not be added to the rent, that a portion of it will be
assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that a portion will be refunded, except
in the manner provided by this chapter. (Ord. 758, 7-6-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-5-5: EXEMPTIONS:
The tax shall not be imposed on:
   A.   An occupant staying for more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
   B.   An occupant whose rent is less than ten dollars ($10.00) per day, with
the exception of spaces in a recreation park.
   C.   A person who rents a private home, vacation cabin, similar facility, or
camping space, from an owner who personally rents the facility incidentally to
the owner's personal use. (Ord. 758, 7-6-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-5-6: REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Operator's Registration Required: An operator of a motel or
recreational vehicle park shall register with the tax administrator, on a form
provided by the administrator, within fifteen (15) days after beginning
business or within thirty (30) days after passage of this chapter.
   B.   Contents Of Registration: The registration shall include:
      1.   The name under which the operator transacts or intends to transact
business.
      2.   The location of the motel or recreational vehicle park.
      3.   Any other information the tax administrator may require to
facilitate collection of the tax.
      4.   The signature of the operator.
   C.   Failure To Register: Failure to register does not relieve the operator
from collecting the transient room tax or tourism promotion assessment charge
or a person from paying the transient room tax or tourism promotion assessment
charge.
   D.   Certificate Of Authority:
      1.   The tax administrator shall issue a certificate of authority to the
registrant within ten (10) days after registration.
      2.   Certificates are nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be
surrendered immediately to the tax administrator on cessation of business at
the location named or when the business is sold or transferred. However, in the
event the business is transferred to a partnership or corporation wherein the
proprietor still retains a majority interest, then the operator is only
required to register the new name and other required information with the tax
administrator.
      3.   Each certificate shall state the place of business to which it
applies and shall be prominently displayed.
      4.   Each certificate shall state:
         a.   The name of the operator.
         b.   The address of the motel or recreational vehicle park.
         c.   The date when the certificate was issued.
         d.   This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that
the person named on the certificate has fulfilled the requirements of the
transient room tax ordinance of the city by registering with the tax
administrator for the purpose of collecting the transient room tax and tourism
promotion assessment charge imposed by the city and remitting the tax to the
tax administrator. (Ord. 791, 7-1-2014)
3-5-7: COLLECTION, RETURNS AND PAYMENTS:
   A.   Hereafter, unless otherwise specified, references to "tax collected/
collections/due" shall be deemed to include "transient room taxes" and "tourism
promotion assessment charges" respectively.
   B.   The taxes collected by an operator are payable to the tax administrator
on a quarterly basis on the fifteenth day of the following month for the
preceding three (3) months and are delinquent on the last day of the month in
which they are due. The initial return may be for less than the three (3)
months preceding the due date. The quarters are:
First quarter: January, February, March
Second quarter: April, May, June
Third quarter: July, August, September
Fourth quarter: October, November, December
   C.   A return showing tax collections for the preceding quarter shall be
filed with the tax administrator, in a form prescribed by the tax
administrator, by the thirtieth day of the month following each collection
quarter.
   D.   Returns shall show the amount of tax collected or due for the related
period. The tax administrator at its discretion may require returns to show the
total rentals on which the tax was collected or is due, a detailed explanation
of any discrepancy between the amounts, and the amount of rentals exempt.
   E.   The operator shall deliver the return and the tax due to the tax
administrator's office. If the return is mailed, the postmark shall be
considered the date of delivery for determining delinquencies.
   F.   For good cause, the tax administrator may extend the time for filing a
return or paying the tax for not more than one month. Further extension may be
granted only by the city council. An operator to whom an extension is granted
shall pay interest at the rate of one and five-tenths percent (1.5%) per month
on the amount of tax due, without proration for a fraction of a month. If a
return is not filed and if the tax and interest due are not paid by the end of
the extension granted, the interest shall become a part of the tax for
computation of penalties prescribed in section 3-5-8 of this chapter.
   G.   The tax administrator may require returns and payment of the tax for
other than quarterly periods in individual cases to ensure payment or to
facilitate collection by the city upon good cause and approval by the city
council. (Ord. 791, 7-1-2014)
3-5-8: DELINQUENCY PENALTIES:
   A.   An operator who has not been granted an extension of time for
remittance of tax due and who fails to remit the tax prior to delinquency shall
pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the tax due in addition to the tax.
   B.   An operator who has not been granted an extension of time for
remittance of tax due and who fails to pay a delinquent remittance before the
expiration of thirty one (31) days following the date of which the remittance
became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of fifteen percent
(15%) of the tax due, the amount of the tax, and the ten percent (10%) penalty
first imposed.
   C.   If the city council determines that nonpayment of a remittance is due
to fraud or intent to evade the tax, a penalty of twenty five percent (25%) of
the tax shall be added to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this
section.
   D.   In addition to the penalties imposed by this section, an operator who
fails to remit the required tax shall pay interest at the rate of one and five-
tenths percent (1.5%) per month, without proration for portions of a month, on
the tax due, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the tax first
became delinquent until paid.
   E.   Each penalty imposed and the interest accrued under provisions of this
section shall be merged with and become part of the tax required to be paid.
   F.   At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax
required to be collected becomes due and payable, or at any time within three
(3) years after any determination becomes final, the tax administrator may
bring any action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the
United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent,
together with penalties and interest. (Ord. 758, 7-6-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-5-9: DEFICIENCY DETERMINATIONS; NOTICE:
   A.   Deficiency Determinations: The tax administrator shall review returns
filed in accordance with this chapter. In doing so, he/she shall have the power
to determine if the returns are incorrect and the amount required to be paid on
the basis of the facts contained in the return or on the basis of any other
information.
      1.   A deficiency determination may be made on the amount due for one or
more than one period. The determined amount shall be payable immediately on
service of notice, after which the determined amount is delinquent. Penalties
on deficiencies shall be applied as provided in section 3-5-8 of this chapter.
      2.   In making a determination, the tax administrator may offset
overpayments that have been made against a deficiency for a subsequent period
or against penalties and interest on the deficiency. The interest on the
deficiency shall be computed as provided in section 3-5-8 of this chapter.
   B.   Notice Of Determination:
      1.   The tax administrator shall give the operator a written notice of
the determination either personally or by mail. If the notice is mailed it
shall be done by certified mail, return receipt requested and addressed to the
operator at the address that appears on the records of the tax administrator,
and service is complete when the notice is received by the operator.
      2.   Except in the case of fraud or intent to evade the tax, a deficiency
determination shall be made and notice mailed within three (3) years after the
last day of the month following the close of the quarterly period for which the
determination has been made or within three (3) years after the return is
filed, whichever is later. (Ord. 758, 7-6-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-5-10: FRAUD; REFUSAL TO COLLECT; EVASION:
   A.   If an operator fails or refuses to collect the tax, make the report, or
remit the tax, or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise wilfully attempts to
evade the tax payment, the tax administrator shall obtain facts and information
on which to base an estimate of the tax due. After determining the tax due and
the interest and penalties, the tax administrator shall give notice of the
total amount due.
   B.   Determination and notice shall be made and mailed by certified mail,
return receipt requested within three (3) years after discovery of fraud,
intent to evade, failure or refusal to collect the taxes, or failure to file a
return. The determination becomes payable immediately on receipt of notice and
becomes final ten (10) days after the operator has received notice.
   C.   The operator may petition for redemption and refund if the petition is
filed before the determination becomes final as set out in this section. (Ord.
758, 7-6-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-5-11: REDETERMINATIONS:
   A.   Redetermination Petition: A determination becomes payable immediately
on receipt of notice and becomes final within ten (10) days after the operator
has received notice. However, the operator may petition for redetermination and
refund by filing a petition before the determination becomes final as set forth
herein.
   B.   Redetermination:
      1.   An operator against whom a determination is made under section 3-5-
9 of this chapter, or a person directly interested, may petition the committee
for a redetermination, redemption and refund within the time required in
subsection A of this section, on forms provided by the tax administrator. If a
petition for redetermination and refund is not filed within the time required,
the determination is final on expiration of the allowable time.
      2.   If a petition for redetermination and refund is filed within the
allowable period, the committee shall reconsider the determination and, if the
operator requested a hearing in the petition, shall grant the hearing and give
the operator fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing.
The tax administrator may continue the hearing if necessary.
      3.   The committee may change the amount of the determination as a result
of the hearing. If an increase is determined, the increase is payable
immediately after the hearing.
      4.   The decision of the committee on a petition for redetermination
becomes final twenty (20) days after service of notice on the petitioner unless
appeal of the decision is filed with the city council by the tax administrator
within twenty (20) days after notice is served per section 3-5-16 of this
chapter. (Ord. 758, 7-6-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-5-12: SECURITY FOR COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   The committee may require an operator to deposit security in the form
of cash, bond, or other security in the event an operator is found to be
delinquent in taxes pursuant to any portion of this chapter. However, this
section shall not apply if the operator has filed a form of petition affecting
payment or any amount of tax due. The amount of security shall be fixed by the
committee and shall be not greater than twice the operator's estimated average
quarterly liability for the period for which the operator files returns or five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00), whichever amount is less.
   B.   Within three (3) years after the tax becomes payable or within three
(3) years after a determination becomes final, the tax administrator may bring
an action in the name of the city in the courts of this state, another state,
or the United States to collect the amount delinquent and penalties and
interest. (Ord. 758, 7-6-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-5-13: LIENS:
   A.   The tax, interest, penalty and filing fees paid to the tax
administrator and any advertising costs incurred when the tax becomes
delinquent shall be a lien from the date of its recording with the county clerk
until the tax is paid. The lien shall be superior to all subsequently recorded
liens on all tangible personal property in the operator's motel. The lien may
be foreclosed and the necessary property may be sold to discharge the lien.
   B.   Notice of the lien shall be issued by the tax administrator when the
operator has defaulted in payment of the tax, interest and penalty. A copy of
the notice shall be sent by certified mail to the operator.
   C.   Personal property subject to the lien may be foreclosed in the same
manner as a nonpossessory chattel lien as set forth in Oregon Revised Statutes
chapter 87.
   D.   A lien for the tax, interest and penalty shall be immediately released
by the tax administrator when the full amount has been paid to the city. The
operator or person making the payment shall receive a receipt stating that the
full amount of the tax, interest and penalty has been paid, that the lien is
released and that the record of the lien is satisfied. (Ord. 758, 7-6-2010,
eff. 8-1-2010)
3-5-14: REFUNDS:
   A.   Refunds By City To Operator: When the tax, penalty or interest has been
paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received
by the tax administrator, it may be refunded if a written claim stating the
specific reason for the claim is filed within three (3) years from the date of
payment. The claim shall be submitted on forms provided by the tax
administrator. If the claim is approved by the committee the excess amount may
be refunded to the operator or it may be credited to an amount then due and
payable by the operator at the option of the committee and any balance
refunded.
   B.   Refunds By City To Transient: If the tax has been collected by the
operator and deposited with the tax administrator and it is later determined
that the tax was erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax
administrator, it may be refunded to the transient if a written verified claim
by the transient stating the specific reason for the claim is filed with the
tax administrator within three (3) years from the date of payment. Notice of
the refund available shall be mailed to the transient at the address the
operator has on file or is known to the operator. The city shall give the
transient thirty (30) days from the date of mailing in which to file a verified
claim for refund. In the event a claim is not made within the thirty (30) day
period or in the event the city is unable to locate the transient, said amount
shall be deposited into the transient room tax fund. The city is authorized to
pay over any refund to an employer of the transient employee or to the
transient's agent or successor upon filing the verified claim as herein set
forth.
   C.   Refunds By Operator To Transient: If the tax has been collected by the
operator and it is later determined that the transient occupied the motel for a
period exceeding thirty (30) days without interruption, the operator shall
refund the tax to the transient. The operator shall account for the collection
and refund to the tax administrator. If the operator has remitted the tax prior
to refund or credit to the transient, the operator shall be entitled to a
corresponding refund. (Ord. 758, 7-6-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-5-15: ADMINISTRATION OF REGULATIONS:
   A.   Records Required From Operators: Every operator shall keep guest
records, accounting books, and records of room rentals for a period of three
(3) years and six (6) months.
   B.   Examination Of Records: During normal business hours and after seventy
two (72) hour notice to the operator, the tax administrator may examine books,
papers, and accounting records related to room rentals to verify the accuracy
of a return or, if no return is made, to determine the amount to be paid. In
the event the operator refuses to turn over the books, then the tax
administrator shall be entitled to injunctive relief.
   C.   Confidentiality: The tax administrator or a person having an
administrative or clerical duty under the provisions of this chapter shall not
make known in any manner the business affairs, operations, or information
obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of a person required to
file a return or pay a transient occupancy tax or a person visited or examined
in the discharge of official duty; or the amount or source of income, profits,
losses or expenditures contained in a statement or application; or permit a
statement or application, or a copy of either, or a book containing an abstract
or particulars to be seen or examined by any person. However, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent:
      1.   Disclosure to or examination of records and equipment by a city
official, employee or agent for collecting taxes for the purpose of
administering or enforcing the provisions or collecting the taxes imposed by
this chapter.
      2.   Disclosure, after filing a written request, to the taxpayer,
receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if
directly interested, in information concerning tax paid, unpaid tax, amount of
tax required to be collected, or interest and penalties. However, the city
attorney shall approve each disclosure, and the tax administrator may refuse to
make a disclosure referred to in this subsection when, in the tax
administrator's opinion, the public interests would suffer.
      3.   Disclosure of names and addresses of persons making returns.
      4.   Disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or
business done in the city. (Ord. 758, 7-6-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-5-16: APPEALS TO THE COUNCIL:
A person aggrieved by a decision of the committee may appeal to the city
council in the form prescribed by the tax administrator within twenty (20) days
of service or mailing by certified or registered mail a copy of the decision.
The council shall consider the matter at its next regular meeting but may
adjourn the matter for a maximum period of one month from the date of that
meeting in order to fully investigate the facts. They shall render their
decision in writing and no other appeals shall be heard. If not paid within
thirty (30) days after the decision is made, collection procedures may begin.
The lien mentioned herein becomes effective upon the initial determination.
(Ord. 758, 7-6-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-5-17: TRANSIENT ROOM TAX FUND:
   A.   Fund: All revenues received from the tax shall be deposited into a
special fund known as the city transient room tax fund.
   B.   Use Of Revenue: All revenues remitted to the city shall be used as
stipulated in Oregon Revised Statutes 320.350.
   C.   Unused Revenue: Any unused revenues may be invested by the city at the
highest rate available and such revenues and interest shall be allocated to the
transient room tax fund to be used for the purposes of this chapter.
   D.   Tourism Grants: Seventy percent (70%) of the transient room tax
collected shall be distributed by the transient room tax committee in the form
of tourism grants to applicants who have met all of the required criteria as
listed in the grant application. The remaining thirty percent (30%) will be
used at the city's discretion for various activities and projects.
   E.   Eastern Oregon Trade And Event Center: Funds collected from the tourism
promotion assessment charge imposed by subsections 3-5-2B and C of this chapter
and remitted to the city, less seven percent (7%) retained by the operator, are
dedicated to and shall be transferred promptly to the Eastern Oregon Trade And
Event Center authority to be split equally to fund tourism promotion and
construction of the Eastern Oregon Trade And Event Center.
   F.   Collection Fee: Every operator liable for collection and remittance of
the transient room tax imposed by this chapter may withhold five percent (5%)
of the net tax and every operator liable for collection and remittance of the
tourism promotion assessment charge imposed by this chapter may withhold seven
percent (7%) of the net tax herein collected to cover the operator's expenses
in collection and remittance of the tax and charge. (Ord. 811, 5-3-2016)
3-5-18: PENALTIES:
Failure to register pursuant to this chapter is punishable, upon conviction, by
the imposition of a class C civil fine 1 , in addition to the penalties
assessed for nonpayment as set forth herein. (Ord. 758, 7-6-2010, eff. 8-1-
2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
3-5-19: SUBSEQUENT REVIEW AND SUNSET PROVISION:
The amount of tourism promotion assessment designated to fund construction of
the Eastern Oregon Trade And Event Center is being added in an effort to aid in
their current funding deficiency. The additional one dollar ($1.00) per night
of occupancy in any motel and the additional fifty cents ($0.50) per night of
occupancy in any recreational vehicle park designated to help fund construction
will sunset on June 30, 2021, unless further extended by city council by
ordinance. (Ord. 811, 5-3-2016)
CHAPTER 6
SOCIAL GAMBLING
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions Adopted
3-6-2: Social Gambling Authorization
3-6-3: License, Regulations and Fees
3-6-4: Prohibitions
3-6-5: Revocation of License
3-6-6: Penalty
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS ADOPTED:
The definitions for ORS 167.117 to 167.162, as now constituted, are adopted by
reference as definitions for use in this Chapter, unless the context requires
otherwise. A copy of ORS 167.117 is incorporated herein by this reference and
available for inspection in the office of the City Recorder. (Ord. 551, 7-18-
88)
3-6-2: SOCIAL GAMBLING AUTHORIZATION:
Private businesses, private clubs and places of public accommodation within the
City may conduct social games or allow social games on their premises, subject
to the other sections of this Chapter. (Ord. 551, 7-18-88)
3-6-3: LICENSE, REGULATIONS AND FEES:
The City Administrator shall prepare license forms which permit the conducting
of social games upon the licensee's premises. The license shall run from
January 1 to December 31 of each year. The license fee shall be set by
resolution 1  of the City Council. The City Council is delegated the authority
to amend the rates by resolution and to also make periodic adjustments of the
rates by resolution. (Ord. 551, 7-18-88)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section 1-12-4 of this Code.
3-6-4: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   No private business, private club or place of public accommodation
shall allow or permit a social game on its premises without first obtaining a
license from the City and paying the necessary license fees.
   B.   No social game shall be played or permitted in any private business,
private club or any place of public accommodation except in a designated
unlocked portion of said establishment.
   C.   No private businesses, private clubs or places of public accommodation
shall refuse inspection by law enforcement officers at any time.
   D.   No social games shall be played or permitted in any private business,
private club or place of public accommodation between the hours of two thirty
o'clock (2:30) A.M and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
   E.   No social games shall be played or permitted in any private business,
private club or any place of public accommodation unless such business, club or
place exists for the purpose of providing other, substantial, legitimate
commercial services which are not otherwise associated with gambling or social
games.
   F.   No private business or private club may operate for the sole purpose of
providing a place at which social games are conducted.
   G.   No wager in a social game shall exceed twenty dollars ($20.00). (Ord.
551, 7-18-88)
3-6-5: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A license for social games may be revoked or not renewed by the City if the
holder of said license is convicted of any Federal, State or City law, statute
or ordinance relating to gambling, after hearing by the City Council. (Ord.
551, 7-18-88)
3-6-6: PENALTY:
Violation of Section
3-6-4 of this Chapter is punishable, upon conviction, by the imposition of a
Class B civil fine 1 . (Ord. 551, 7-18-88; 1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code. 
CHAPTER 7
ALARM SYSTEM CONTROL
SECTION:
3-7-1: Title
3-7-2: Purpose
3-7-3: Definitions
3-7-4: Alarm User Permits Required; Payment of Permit Fees Required
3-7-5: Duty to Maintain Alarm System; Permit Information
3-7-6: User Instructions
3-7-7: Automatic Dialing Device; Certain Interconnections Prohibited:
3-7-8: False Alarms; Hearing; Determination
3-7-9: Alarm Termination
3-7-10: Confidentiality; Statistics
3-7-11: Allocation of Revenues
3-7-12: Violation of Chapter; Penalties
3-7-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as ALARM SYSTEM CONTROL ORDINANCE FOR THE CITY OF
UMATILLA ("City") and may be so pleaded and shall be referred to herein as
"this Chapter". (Ord. 593, 10-20-92)
3-7-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   The public interest requires the enactment of rules, regulations,
standards and procedures to regulate and control the private alarm business
within the corporate limits of the City for the following purposes:
      1.   Those alarm users who are responsible for excessive false alarms and
who fail or refuse to remedy the cause of excessive false alarms demonstrate
their indifference to limited police resources being devoted to unnecessary
emergency responses, and such users should be treated by punitive measures.
      2.   This Chapter is to encourage alarm users and alarm businesses to
assume increased responsibility for maintaining the mechanical reliability and
the proper use of alarm systems to prevent unnecessary police emergency
responses to false alarms and thereby protect the emergency response capability
of the City from misuse.
      3.   Except where otherwise expressly provided, this Chapter governs all
alarm systems eliciting a police response,  requires annual permits,
establishes fees and charges and provides for the enforcement of violations.
(Ord. 593, 10-20-92)
3-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions apply:
   ALARM BUSINESS: A person, or other legal entity, engaged in the profit-
oriented selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering,
replacing, moving or installing of any alarm system in or on any building,
structure, facility or portion thereof.
   ALARM SYSTEM: An assembly or equipment, mechanical or electrical or both,
designed and used to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry
or attempted entry or other illegal activity on the premises of the alarm user,
which requires or solicits urgent attention and to which the police are
expected to respond.
   ALARM USER: A person, or other legal entity in control of a building,
structure, facility or portion thereof within the City wherein an alarm system
is used.
   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: A device which is interconnected to a telephone
line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and to
transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need
for emergency response. An automatic dialing device is an alarm system.
   COORDINATOR: The individual, designated by the City Administrator to issue
permits and administer the provisions of this Chapter.
   COUNCIL: The Umatilla City Council, the governing body of the City of
Umatilla, Oregon.
   EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARM: A false alarm which occurs following three (3)
previous false alarms within a one year period.
   FALSE ALARM: Signal or activation by an alarm system which elicits a
response by the Umatilla Police Department ("UPD") when a situation requiring a
response by the police does not in fact exist. False alarm does not include an
alarm signal by an alarm system, which is caused by violent and extraordinary
conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably
anticipated or subject to control by the alarm business operator or the alarm
user.
   GOVERNMENTAL POLITICAL UNIT: Any tax supported public agency.
   HANDICAP: A physical or mental impairment which for the individual
constitutes or results in a functional limitation to one or more major life
activities, as defined in ORS 443.580 (2).
   INTERCONNECT: To connect an alarm system including an automatic dialing
device to a telephone line either directly or through a mechanical device that
utilizes a telephone for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit a
message upon the activation of the alarm system.
   MONITORING CENTER: A facility used to received emergency and general
information from an alarm user and to direct an emergency response.
   PERMIT: An alarm user permit, issued by the City under this Chapter.
   PERMIT RENEWAL: The act of applying for a new permit to take the place of an
expired permit, where the alarm system under both permits is designed and used
for substantially the same building, structure, facility or portion thereof.
   PRIMARY TRUNK LINE: A telephone line serving the police dispatch center that
is designed to receive police calls. (Ord. 593, 10-20-92)
3-7-4: ALARM USER PERMITS REQUIRED; PAYMENT OF PERMIT FEES REQUIRED:
   A.   Every alarm user shall obtain an alarm user permit for each alarm
system proposed to be used by the alarm user from the City within thirty (30)
days after the effective date hereof or at the time an alarm system is
activated.
   B.   Every alarm user shall complete and submit an application form and pay
all required fees and charges as established by the City Council by resolution.
   C.   The City Administrator shall prescribe the form of the permit
application, but it shall consist of at least the following parts. Additional
parts may be inserted for administrative purposes.
      1.   The name of the alarm user;
      2.   The address of the alarm user and the address where the alarm system
has been or will be installed and used;
      3.   The name of the current emergency notification person(s) and their
telephone numbers(s);
      4.   The justification, if any, for requesting a waiver of application
fee and renewal fees; and
      5.   The name of the current alarm business responsible for operating a
monitoring center for the alarm system, if any.
   D.   Each permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. The
permit will show the date of expiration on its face.
   E.   The permit shall be physically kept upon the premises where the alarm
system is located and shall be available for inspection upon request. An alarm
permit is valid only for the  permittee and is not transferable from one person
to another or from one address to another.
   F.   A residential alarm user who lives on the premises, who owns or is the
named lessee on the property in which the alarm system is located, who conducts
no profit-oriented business on the premises and who is sixty five (65) years of
age or older or is  handicapped, shall be entitled to a waiver of application
and renewal fees but not excessive alarm and late charges. An alarm user permit
shall be obtained.
   G.   A business alarm user whose business license is paid up shall be
entitled to a waiver of application fees and renewal fees but not excessive
alarm and late charges. An alarm user permit shall be obtained.
   H.   It is an offense, punishable as a violation for any person to use,
operate or maintain an alarm system within the City without obtaining and
maintaining a current, valid alarm user permit, paying all required fees and
charges and complying with all provisions of this Chapter.
   I.   A late charge in an amount adopted by Council resolution will be
imposed and added to the permit fee and paid by an alarm user who fails to
obtain a permit within thirty (30) days after such permit is required or by an
alarm user who fails to renew a permit within thirty (30) days after a permit
has expired.
   J.   An alarm user which is a governmental political unit shall obtain and
maintain a permit and is subject to the requirements of this Chapter; however,
permit application and renewal fees shall be waived but not excessive false
alarm and late charges. (Ord. 593, 10-20-92)
3-7-5: DUTY TO MAINTAIN ALARM SYSTEM; PERMIT INFORMATION:
   A.   It shall be the duty of an alarm user to maintain its alarm system in
good operating condition and free of false alarms.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the alarm user to provide the coordinator with
current information on the permit application. Any changes in the information
contained on the permit application shall be promptly submitted to the
coordinator within ten (10) days of such change.
   C.   An alarm user whose alarm system generates ten (10) or more false
alarms within the period of a year violated this Chapter. (Ord. 593, 10-20-92)
3-7-6: USER INSTRUCTIONS:
Every Alarm business, which operates as such on behalf of alarm users within
the City shall furnish the user with instructions which enable the user to
operate the alarm system properly without false alarms and to obtain service
for the alarm system.  (Ord. 593, 10-20-92)
3-7-7: AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE; CERTAIN INTERCONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection D of this Section, it is unlawful for
any person to program an automatic dialing device to select a primary trunk
line or any 911 trunk line, capable of signaling a need for police response;
and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram an
automatic dialing device which is programmed to select a primary trunk line 
within twelve (12) hours of receipt of written notice from the Umatilla Police
Department, directing that such disconnection or reprogramming occur.
   B.   Within sixty (60) days after the effective date hereof, all existing
automatic dialing devices programmed to select a primary trunk line shall be
reprogrammed or disconnected.
   C.   Except as provided in subsection D of this Section, it is unlawful for
any person to program an automatic dialing device which selects any telephone
line assigned to the City, and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to
disconnect or reprogram such a device within twelve (12) hours of receipt of
written notice from the Umatilla Police Department that such automated dialing
device should be disconnected or reprogrammed.
   D.   The City and other governmental providers of emergency and critical
Municipal services, including but not limited to water, sewer and streets, are
exempt from the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 593, 10-20-92)
3-7-8: FALSE ALARMS; HEARINGS; DETERMINATION:
   A.   An alarm user, whose alarm system has four (4) or more false alarms
within a year shall be subject to and pay at or before  permit renewal in
addition to any other charges a charge for excessive false alarms in an amount
established by City Council resolution. Excessive false alarms charges shall be
paid by the alarm user notwithstanding an agreement or claim of liability which
holds an alarm business responsible for such changes. Excessive false alarm
charges shall be established in an amount designed to encourage correction in
an alarm system or in the operation of an alarm system, to discourage false
alarms and to reimburse the City for the use of its police resources. No permit
for substantially the same alarm system or for a different alarm system which
is designed and used for substantially the same building, structure, facility
or portion thereof, shall be issued or renewed for the same alarm user or
related alarm user thereof, unless such excessive false alarm charge is first
paid.
   B.   After each of the first two (2) false alarms during the period of a
year, the alarm coordinator shall send by regular mail a notice of false alarm
to the alarm user and the alarm business at the addresses listed on the user's
permit. The notice shall advise the alarm user and the alarm business of the
date and time of the false alarm and the specific number of false alarms
recorded by the coordinator for the alarm system during the current permit
year. The notice shall also advise that upon the occurrence of a fourth false
alarm during the permit year, the alarm user will be charged a fee upon renewal
of the permit for each excessive false alarm.
   C.   If the Umatilla Police Department responds to a third false alarm
during the period of a year, the alarm coordinator shall forward by certified
mail return receipt requested and a copy by regular mail, a notice to the alarm
user and the alarm business at the addresses listed on the user's permit that
the police have responded to three (3) false alarms at the address where the
alarm system is located. This notice shall also advise that the occurrence of
any additional false alarms at the address where the alarm system is located
during the permit year, the alarm user will be charged a fee upon renewal of
the permit for excessive false alarms.
   D.   If the police responds to a fourth or subsequent false alarm during the
period of a year, the alarm coordinator shall forward by regular mail a notice
to the alarm user and the alarm business at the addresses listed on the alarm
user's permit a notice which advises the alarm user and the alarm business that
the police have responded to excessive false alarms at the alarm location, and
as a result the alarm user shall upon renewal of the alarm system permit be
charged in accordance with a schedule of charges for excessive false alarms,
established by the City Council by resolution.
   E.   The City Administrator shall prescribe the form of the notices to be
used in this Section. For purposes of determining which form of mailing and
notice to use, any alleged false alarm, which is disputed as provided in this
Section and for which a final determination has not been made, shall be treated
as having occurred. The Police Chief shall provide for sufficient information
to the coordinator to ensure that accurate records of notices are being sent to
alarm users and alarm businesses. Failure of a person to receive a notice shall
not invalidate any proceeding in connection with a false alarm or in the
imposition of additional charges upon license renewal resulting therefrom.
   F.   An alarm user or alarm business who is aggrieved by the determination
that a particular false alarm has occurred may request a hearing. The request
shall be made in writing and filed with the City Administrator and the
Municipal Court within ten (10) days of the date on which the alarm user is
sent the notification of false alarm for which a hearing is requested. Unless a
request for a hearing is made in accordance with this Section, an alarm user or
alarm business shall have waived any right to challenge the decision whether a
particular false alarm occurred and the false alarm shall thereafter be treated
as having occurred on the date and time alleged. If a hearing is requested in
accordance with this subsection, the Municipal Court shall notify by regular
mail the persons requesting the hearing of the time and place of the hearing.
   G.   Every hearing to determine whether a false alarm has occurred shall be
held before the Umatilla Municipal Court without a jury. The Court may in the
interest of justice consolidate hearings which involve the same alarm user or
alarm system and false alarms within the same permit year. In addition the
hearing provided by this subsection may be consolidated with  a hearing on an
alleged offense provided the parties in each proceeding are the same, or the
alarm system in each case is the same. The person requesting the hearing may be
represented by counsel but counsel shall not be provided at public expense. If
counsel is to appear, written notice shall be provided to the Municipal Court
and Chief of Police not less than five (5) business days prior to the hearing
date. The Chief of Police or the City's designated representative and the
person requesting the hearing shall have the right to present written and oral
evidence. Oral testimony shall be taken only on oath or affirmation and shall
be subject to the right of cross-examination. If the person requesting a
hearing wishes that witnesses be ordered to testify, they must request the
Court to order the desired witness subpoenaed, which request shall be at least
five (5) business days prior to the scheduled hearing. A deposit for each
witness shall accompany the request and such deposit shall be refunded, if it
is determined the alleged false alarm did not occur. The deposit for subpoenas
shall be in an amount equal to witness fees provided by statute in other courts
of this State. At the hearing any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is
the type of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the
conduct of serious affairs. However, irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence
shall be excluded. The City shall have the burden of proving that a false alarm
occurred by a preponderance of the evidence. Within thirty (3) days after the
hearing, the Municipal Court shall determine  whether the alleged false alarm
has occurred and shall so advise the parties. The decision of the Municipal
Court is final.
   H.   If a request for a hearing or a decision by the Municipal Court is
pending at the time a permit expires and is subject to renewal, the alarm user
shall pay the appropriate permit renewal and other charges owing at the time
renewal is required together with any then required charges for excessive false
alarms. If the Court should determine that a false alarm  within the prior
permit year has occurred and such determination would have resulted in a higher
fee upon renewal than was paid by the alarm user or applicant due to an
excessive false alarm, the alarm user shall pay an appropriate additional false
alarm charge upon being notified of the Court's determination. (Ord. 593, 10-
20-92)
3-7-9: ALARM TERMINATION:
   A.   If a police or fire officer responds to an audible alarm and the alarm
system continues to transmit an audible signal for fifteen (15) minutes after:
      1.   A responsible party or designated person is available to respond; or
      2.   No responsible party or designated person is available to respond,
then the officer may disable the alarm and secure the premises.
   B.   Neither the City nor its employees shall be held responsible for
damages resulting from:
      1.   Disabling an alarm; or
      2.   Securing the premises; or
      3.   Failing to disable an alarm; or
      4.   Failing to secure the premises. (Ord. 593, 10-20-92)
3-7-10: CONFIDENTIALITY; STATISTICS:
   A.   Except as otherwise required by law, if an alarm user requests that
information submitted by the user as part of an application be kept in
confidence, such information shall be held in confidence and shall be deemed a
public record exempt from disclosure under Oregon law. The City Administrator
shall be responsible for maintenance of records created under this Chapter.
   B.   Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection A. of this Section, the
Umatilla Police Department may develop and maintain statistics for purposes of
evaluating alarm systems.  (Ord. 593, 10-20-92)
3-7-11: ALLOCATION OF REVENUES:
All fees and charges collected pursuant to this Chapter shall be deposited in
the General Fund of the City and are nonrefundable. (Ord. 593, 10-20-92)
3-7-12: VIOLATION OF CHAPTER; PENALTIES:
A violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is punishable, upon
conviction, by the imposition of a Class A civil fine 1 . Every day that a
violation is found to exist constitutes a separate offense. Penalties or
forfeitures imposed as a result of court proceedings shall be in addition to
any fees and charges required to obtain a permit.  (Ord. 593, 10-20-92; 1993
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
CHAPTER 8
YARD SALES
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definitions
3-8-2: Sales Conducted By
3-8-3: Rules And Regulations
3-8-4: Illegal Signs, Disposition
3-8-5: Owner Presumption
3-8-6: Penalties
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following mean:
   CALENDAR YEAR: A year which begins on January 1 and ends on December 31.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Property which is utilized, owned and maintained by an
individual or by members of a residence and acquired in the normal course of
living in or maintaining of a residence. It does not include merchandise which
was purchased for resale or obtained from closeouts, fire sales, other quantity
liquidations, or commercial consignments or motor vehicles.
   YARD SALE: Offering or displaying personal property for sale by any person
or group of individuals at a private residence within the city. The term "yard
sale" includes, but is not limited to, all sales called "garage, moving, lawn,
yard, attic, porch, backyard, patio, basement, estate" or other sales of
similarly intended nature. (Ord. 740, 12-6-2005)
3-8-2: SALES CONDUCTED BY:
Only individuals and members of fraternal, civic, patriotic, religious,
service, charitable or educational organizations may conduct yard sales. (Ord.
740, 12-6-2005)
3-8-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Persons or organizations conducting a yard sale must comply with the following:
   A.   No person or organization may hold more than four (4) yard sales in a
calendar year.
   B.   Yard sales may only be held between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays and on Monday
holidays.
   C.   All personal property for sale, displays and display tables must not be
left outside at night.
   D.   All personal property for sale, displays and display tables must be
contained on private property.
   E.   Any signs advertising the yard sale must be in compliance with the
city's sign code.
   F.   Any signs advertising the yard sale must not be placed in the public
right of way or attached to power poles, lampposts or public signs.
   G.   Any signs advertising the yard sale must be retrieved immediately after
the yard sale ends.
   H.   Yard sales may not be conducted by an ongoing business or commercial
enterprise. (Ord. 740, 12-6-2005)
3-8-4: ILLEGAL SIGNS, DISPOSITION:
Signs found within the city which are unlawfully posted upon utility poles,
regulatory signs or posts, or are placed on sidewalks, in the right of way, or
any other area not allowed by the sign code may be seized by the city and kept
as evidence of unlawful activity in preparation for prosecution. If no
prosecutorial action is taken, the city will make the signs available for
return to the presumptive owner. (Ord. 740, 12-6-2005)
3-8-5: OWNER PRESUMPTION:
It is presumed that an address or telephone number listed on any yard sale sign
is that of the person or organization responsible for posting the sign. In
addition, any signs directing the public by way of arrows or other directional
symbols or phrases to a particular residence is presumed to have been erected
by the owner(s) or occupant of said residence. (Ord. 740, 12-6-2005)
3-8-6: PENALTIES:
   A.   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a class D civil
fine.
   B.   Second violation of any of the provisions of this chapter in a one year
period is a class C civil fine.
   C.   Third violation of any of the provisions of this chapter in a one year
period is a class B civil fine.
   D.   Fourth and subsequent violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter in a one year period is a class A civil fine.
   E.   Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 740, 12-6-
2005)
CHAPTER 9
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
SECTION:
3-9-1: Purpose
3-9-2: Jurisdiction And Management Of The Public Rights Of Way
3-9-3: Applicability To Cable Service And Open Video System
3-9-4: Regulatory Fees And Compensation Not A Tax
3-9-5: Definitions
3-9-6: Registration Of Telecommunications Carriers
3-9-7: Construction Standards
3-9-8: Telecommunications Facilities
3-9-9: Telecommunications Franchise
3-9-10: Cable Franchise
3-9-11: Governing Law
3-9-12: Written Agreement
3-9-13: Nonexclusive Grant
3-9-14: Severability And Preemption
3-9-15: Penalties
3-9-16: Other Remedies
3-9-17: Compliance With Laws
3-9-18: Consent
3-9-19: Application To Existing Ordinance And Agreements
3-9-20: Confidentiality
3-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to:
   A.   Comply with the provisions of the 1996 telecommunications act as they
apply to local governments, telecommunications carriers and the services they
offer;
   B.   Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the
exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of
telecommunications carriers and services;
   C.   Promote competition on a competitively neutral basis in the provision
of telecommunications services;
   D.   Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications
services on the widest possible basis to businesses, institutions and residents
of the city;
   E.   Permit and manage reasonable access to the public rights of way of the
city for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis and
conserve the limited physical capacity of those public rights of way held in
trust by the city;
   F.   Assure that the city's current and ongoing costs of granting and
regulating private access to and the use of the public rights of way are fully
compensated by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs;
   G.   Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the city and its residents
for permitting private use of the public right of way;
   H.   Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or
services within the city, or passing through the city, register and comply with
the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city;
   I.   Assure that the city can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the
public health, safety and welfare of its citizens;
   J.   Enable the city to discharge its public trust consistent with the
rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition
and technological development. (Ord. 772, 4-19-2012)
3-9-2: JURISDICTION AND MANAGEMENT OF THE PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY:
   A.   The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over all
public rights of way within the city under authority of the city charter and
state law.
   B.   Public rights of way include, but are not limited to, streets, roads,
highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all
other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over
these areas.
   C.   The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over each
public right of way whether the city has a fee, easement, or other legal
interest in the right of way. The city has jurisdiction and regulatory control
over each right of way whether the legal interest in the right of way was
obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation,
annexation, foreclosure or other means.
   D.   No person may occupy or encroach on a public right of way without the
permission of the city. The city grants permission to use rights of way by
franchises, licenses and permits.
   E.   The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory control over a public right
of way by the city is not official acceptance of the right of way, and does not
obligate the city to maintain or repair any part of the right of way.
   F.   The city retains the right and privilege to relocate, cut or move any
telecommunications facilities located within the public rights of way of the
city, as the city may determine to be necessary, in response to any public
health or safety emergency. (Ord. 772, 4-19-2012)
3-9-3: APPLICABILITY TO CABLE SERVICE AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM:
To the extent not specifically precluded by the cable act or any other federal
law, this chapter shall apply to cable service provided within the city and to
open video systems, as that term is used in section 653 of the
telecommunications act, provided however that any existing grantee shall not
have to comply with the terms of this chapter until its current franchise
agreement has expired. (Ord. 772, 4-19-2012)
3-9-4: REGULATORY FEES AND COMPENSATION NOT A TAX:
   A.   The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any
compensation charged and paid for the public rights of way provided for in this
chapter, are separate from, and in addition to, any and all federal, state,
local and city taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications
carrier, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale,
delivery or transmission of telecommunications services.
   B.   The city has determined that any fee imposed by this chapter is not
subject to the property tax limitations of chapter XI, section 11(b) of the
Oregon constitution. (Ord. 772, 4-19-2012)
3-9-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning defined in this section. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the
singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are
mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this section shall be
given the meaning set forth in the communications policy act of 1934, as
amended, the cable communications policy act of 1984, the cable television
consumer protection and competition act of 1992, and the telecommunications act
of 1996. If not defined there, the words shall be given their common and
ordinary meaning.
   ABOVEGROUND OR OVERHEAD FACILITIES: Utility poles, utility facilities and
telecommunications facilities above the surface of the ground, including the
underground supports and foundations for such facilities.
   AFFILIATED INTEREST: Shall have the same meaning as Oregon Revised Statutes.
   CABLE ACT: The cable communications policy act of 1984, 47 USC section 521
et seq., as now and hereafter amended.
   CABLE SERVICE: The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming,
or other programming service; and subscriber interaction, if any, which is
required for the selection or use of such video programming or other
programming service.
   CITY PROPERTY: Means and includes all real property owned by the city, other
than public streets and utility easements as those are defined in this section,
and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the city, which are not
subject to right of way licensing and franchising as provided in this chapter.
   CONDUIT: Any structure, or section of any structure, containing one or more
ducts, conduits, manholes, handholes, bolts, or other facilities used for any
telegraph, telephone, cable television, electrical, or communications
conductors, or cable rights of way, owned or controlled, in whole or in part,
by one or more public or private utilities.
   CONTROL OR CONTROLLING INTEREST: Actual working control in whatever manner
exercised.
   DUCT: A single enclosed raceway for conductors or cable.
   FCC OR FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION: The federal administrative agency,
or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications
carriers, services and providers on a national level.
   FRANCHISE: An agreement between the city and a grantee which grants a
privilege to use public right of way and utility easements within the city for
a dedicated purpose and for specific compensation.
   GRANTEE: The person to which a franchise is granted by the city.
   GROSS REVENUE: Except for a telecommunications utility, gross revenue means
gross revenue derived by grantee from the provision of telecommunications
services originating or terminating in the city on facilities covered by the
franchise. For the purposes of this definition net uncollectibles from revenue
included in gross revenues may be excluded from gross revenues. For a
telecommunications utility, gross revenue means those revenues derived from
exchange access services, as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes, less net
uncollectibles from such revenues.
   LOCAL EXCHANGE SERVICE: Service provided within the boundaries of an
exchange as the exchange appears on the exchange maps filed with and approved
by the Oregon public utility commission. Local exchange service includes
"shared telecommunications service", as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes
chapter 759.
   OREGON PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION OR OPUC: The statutorily created state
agency in the state of Oregon responsible for licensing, regulation and
administration of certain communications providers as set forth in Oregon law.
   PERSON: An individual, corporation, company, association, joint stock
company or association, firm, partnership, or limited liability company.
   PRIVATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK: A system, including the construction,
maintenance or operation of the system, for the provision of a service or any
portion of a service, by a person for the exclusive use of that person and not
for resale, directly or indirectly. "Private telecommunications network"
includes services provided by the state of Oregon pursuant to Oregon Revised
Statutes 190.240 and 283.140.
   PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY: Include, but are not limited to, streets, roads,
highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all
other public ways, including the subsurface under and air space over these
areas, but only to the extent of the city's right, title, interest or authority
to grant a franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for
telecommunications facilities. Public rights of way do not include trails,
paths, or sidewalks within parks or other areas of the city unless the trail,
path or sidewalk has been dedicated as a right of way.
   PUBLIC STREET: Any highway, street, alley or other public right of way for
motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and regulatory control of the city
which has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to vehicular travel
and pedestrian purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
   RESELLER: Any person that provides telecommunications service using a
telecommunications facility within a public right of way for which service a
separate charge is made, where that person does not own, lease, control or
manage the telecommunications facility used to provide the service.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The transmission between and among points specified by
the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or
content of the information as sent and received.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACT: The telecommunications act of 1996 (47 USC section
151 et seq.) as adopted and as hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER: Any provider of telecommunications services and
includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or
manages telecommunications facilities within the city and competitive providers
of local exchange or interexchange services.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES OR SYSTEM: The equipment, other than customer
premises equipment, used by a carrier to provide telecommunications services.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The offering of telecommunications for a fee
directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
Telecommunications service includes, but is not limited to, any service
provided for the purpose of voice, video or data transmission, including, but
not limited to, local exchange service, access service, extended area service,
call origination, interconnection, switching, transport, or call termination
and any other telecommunications services identified and authorized by the FCC
or the OPUC.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS UTILITY: Has the same meaning as Oregon Revised Statutes.
   UNDERGROUND FACILITIES: Utility and telecommunications facilities located
under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or
supports for "overhead facilities".
   USABLE SPACE: All the space on a pole, except the portion below ground
level, the twenty feet (20') of safety clearance space above ground level, and
the safety clearance space between communications and power circuits.
   UTILITY EASEMENT: Any easement within the public right of way designated on
a subdivision plat or partition map as a utility easement, public utility
easement or "PUE" or any easement granted to or owned by the city and acquired,
established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent
with the telecommunications facilities.
   UTILITY FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including, but not
limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cable, wires,
transformers, plant and equipment located under, on, or above the surface of
the ground within the public right of way of the city and used or to be used
for the purpose of providing utility or telecommunications services. (Ord. 772,
4-19-2012)
3-9-6: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose for registration is:
      1.   To assure that all telecommunications carriers who have facilities
or provide services within the city comply with the ordinances, rules and
regulations of the city.
      2.   To provide the city with accurate and current information concerning
the telecommunications carriers who offer to provide telecommunications
services within the city, or that own or operate telecommunications facilities
within the city.
      3.   To assist the city in the enforcement of this chapter and the
collection of any city franchise fees or charges that may be due the city.
      4.   To assist the city in monitoring compliance with local, state and
federal laws as they apply to grantees under this chapter.
   B.   Registration Required: Except as provided in subsection D of this
section, all telecommunications carriers having telecommunications facilities
within the corporate limits of the city, and all telecommunications carriers
that offer or provide telecommunications service to customer premises within
the city, shall register with the city. The appropriate application and license
from: 1) the OPUC; or 2) the FCC qualify as necessary registration information.
Applicants also have the option of providing the following information:
      1.   The identity and legal status of the registrant, including the name,
address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for
the accuracy of the registration statement.
      2.   A description of the registrant's existing or proposed
telecommunications facilities within the city, a description of the
telecommunications facilities that the registrant intends to construct, and a
description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to
offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms,
businesses or institutions within the city.
      3.   Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission,
origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be
provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to
any business license requirements. A copy of the business license or license
number must be provided.
   C.   Registration Fee: Each application for registration as a
telecommunications carrier shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable registration
fee as established by the city council.
   D.   Exceptions: The following telecommunications carriers are excepted from
registration:
      1.   Telecommunications carriers that are owned and operated exclusively
for its own use by the state or a political subdivision of this state and
provide telecommunications services for internal governmental purposes only,
and not for resale to other entities or the public.
      2.   A private telecommunications network, provided that such network
does not use or occupy any public rights of way of the city.
      3.   Telecommunications carriers that are grantees under a
telecommunications franchise with the city or previous grantees that have
timely filed for, and are actively and expeditiously pursuing, a franchise
renewal. (Ord. 772, 4-19-2012)
3-9-7: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   No person shall commence or continue with the construction,
installation or operation of telecommunications facilities within public rights
of way in the city except as provided in this chapter.
      2.   Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed,
operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and
local codes, rules and regulations including, as applicable, Telcordia, the
national electrical code and the national electrical safety code.
   B.   Construction Permits:
      1.   Generally:
         a.   No person shall construct or install any telecommunications
facilities within a public right of way in the city without first obtaining a
construction permit and paying the construction permit fee established by the
council.
         b.   No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of
telecommunications facilities in the public rights of way unless the
telecommunications carrier has first applied for and received a franchise
pursuant to this chapter or previous grantees that have timely filed for, and
are actively and expeditiously pursuing, a franchise renewal.
         c.   No permit shall be necessary for the installation of a customer
specific wire ("a drop") by a franchise grantee where no excavation within the
right of way occurs.
         d.   No permit shall be necessary for the installation of
telecommunication facilities within a utility easement that is not otherwise
within, under or over a public street, road, highway, bridge, alley, bikeway,
sidewalk, trail or path.
         e.   Any construction permit fees paid under this subsection shall be
deducted from the franchise fee paid by the permittee, as provided in Oregon
Revised Statutes 221.515(3).
      2.   Permit Applications: Applications for permits to construct
telecommunications facilities within a public right of way shall be submitted
upon forms to be provided by the city and shall be accompanied by drawings,
plans, specifications and maps in sufficient detail for the public works
superintendent to verify that:
         a.   The facilities will be constructed in accordance with all
applicable codes, rules and regulations and that the facilities will be
constructed in accordance with the franchise agreement.
         b.   The location and route of all facilities on or in the public
rights of way to be installed aboveground or on existing utility poles. The
location and route of all facilities to be located under the surface of the
ground within the public rights of way. Existing facilities shall be
differentiated on the plans from new construction.
         c.   The location of all of applicant's existing underground
utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are within the
public rights of way along the underground route proposed by the applicant.
         d.   A typical cross section shall be provided showing new or existing
facilities in relation to the street, curb, sidewalk or right of way.
         e.   The application shall also be accompanied by computer generated
electronic maps of the proposed installations in a format specified by the city
unless the applicant demonstrates that the format utilized was developed by the
applicant and is proprietary.
         f.   Identify if trees will be substantially trimmed, removed or
replaced as a result of the areas disturbed during construction and which are
within or adjacent to the public rights of way along the route proposed by the
applicant. The applicant shall submit a plan, satisfactory to the city, for the
replacement of such trees.
      3.   Construction Permit Fee: Unless otherwise provided in a franchise
agreement, prior to issuance of a construction permit, the applicant shall pay
a permit fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council.
Such fees shall be deducted from any franchise fee paid by the permittee
pursuant to Oregon Revised Statutes 221.515(3). Nothing in this subsection
shall require a telecommunications utility to pay a permit fee unless the
utility is providing telecommunication services in addition to exchange access
services.
   C.   Traffic Control Plan: All work on, in, under, across or along any
public rights of way shall be performed consistent with the "Uniform Manual On
Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or property
and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   D.   Construction Schedule: The permittee shall submit a written
construction schedule to the superintendent of public works before commencing
any work in or about the public rights of way. The schedule is subject to
approval by the superintendent of public works, in cooperation with the
permittee.
   E.   Locates: The permittee is responsible for becoming familiar with, and
understanding the provisions of Oregon Revised Statutes chapter 757, governing
the location of underground facilities (the "one call statutes"). Grantee shall
comply with the terms and conditions set forth in the one call statutes. Every
grantee under this chapter shall join and maintain membership in the Oregon
utility notification center and shall comply with the rules adopted by the
center regulating the notification and marking of underground facilities.
   F.   Compliance With Permit: All construction practices and activities shall
be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications
for the facilities. The superintendent of public works and his representatives
shall be provided access to the work site and such information that is not
confidential, sensitive or proprietary as they may require to ensure compliance
with such requirements.
   G.   Noncomplying Work: Upon order of the superintendent of public works,
after reasonable notice and an opportunity to cure has been given, all work
which does not comply with the permit, the approved plans and specifications
for the work, the franchise agreement or the requirements of this chapter,
shall be removed at the sole expense of the permittee.
   H.   Completion Of Construction: The permittee shall promptly complete all
construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the city rights of way
and other public and private property. All construction work authorized by a
permit within city rights of way, including restoration, must be completed
within one hundred twenty (120) days of the date of issuance unless the city
engineer agrees to a longer period.
   I.   Restoration Of Public Rights Of Way And City Property:
      1.   When a permittee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work
in or affecting any public right of way or city property, it shall, at its own
expense, promptly remove any obstructions and restore such ways or property to
as near the original condition as reasonably possible, unless otherwise
directed by the city.
      2.   If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete
restoration required by this subsection, the permittee shall temporarily
restore the affected public rights of way or city property if directed to do so
by the city public works superintendent. Such temporary restoration shall be at
the permittee's sole expense and the permittee shall promptly undertake and
complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other
conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration. For the purpose of
this subsection, "temporary restoration" means restoring the property to a safe
condition permitting such use of the property as was made prior to the work
being undertaken. Temporary restoration does not require paving, landscaping or
surfacing of a permanent nature.
      3.   If the permittee fails to restore public rights of way or city
property to as near the original condition as reasonably possible, the city
shall give the permittee written notice and provide the permittee a reasonable
period of time, not exceeding thirty (30) days (or such other reasonable time
as agreed to by the parties), to restore the public rights of way or city
property. If, after such notice, the permittee fails to restore the public
rights of way or city property to as near the original condition as reasonably
possible, the city shall cause such restoration to be made at the expense of
the permittee.
      4.   A permittee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable
barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as required for
the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage
to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such
rights of way or property.
      5.   All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as
a result of the construction, installation, maintenance, repair or replacement
of telecommunications facilities, whether such work is done pursuant to a
franchise, license, or permit shall be replaced or restored as nearly as may be
practicable, to the condition existing prior to performance of work.
      6.   All restoration work within the public ways shall be subject to the
approval of the city's public works superintendent.
   J.   Construction And Completion Bond: Unless otherwise provided in a
franchise agreement, or unless the city otherwise specifically approves an
alternative security to assure performance, a performance bond written by a
corporate surety acceptable to the city, and authorized to transact business in
Oregon, equal to at least one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of
constructing grantee's telecommunications facilities within the public rights
of way of the city shall be deposited before such new construction is
commenced. Routine maintenance projects that do not disrupt other users of the
rights of way shall not require a performance bond.
      1.   The performance bond shall remain in force until sixty (60) days
after substantial completion of the work, as determined in writing by the city,
including restoration of public rights of way and other property affected by
the construction.
      2.   The performance bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the
city:
         a.   Timely completion of construction;
         b.   Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits,
technical codes and standards;
         c.   Proper location of the facilities as specified by the city;
         d.   Restoration of the public rights of way and other property
affected by the construction; and
         e.   Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens
for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work. (Ord.
772, 4-19-2012)
3-9-8: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES:
   A.   Location: All facilities located within the public right of way or
utility easements shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance
with the following terms and conditions, unless otherwise specified in a
franchise agreement:
      1.   Grantee shall install all new telecommunications facilities
(excluding upgrades and reinforcements) underground unless the city
specifically permits attachments to utility poles or other aboveground
facilities, provided, however, no entity with existing attachments to utility
poles shall be required to install new or existing facilities underground
except as provided in the following subsections. The city and grantee shall
work cooperatively to identify known upcoming projects that may require
relocation and explore options to minimize expense and disruption to existing
facilities, residents and the city.
      2.   Grantee shall install its telecommunications facilities within an
existing underground duct or conduit owned by it whenever surplus capacity
exists within such utility facility unless grantee demonstrates to satisfaction
of the city that such installation is not feasible.
      3.   A grantee with permission to install overhead facilities shall
install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing
utility poles only, and then only if usable space is available as determined by
the department of electric utilities or the owner of the poles.
      4.   Whenever any existing electric utilities are located underground
within a public right of way of the city, a grantee with permission to occupy
the same public right of way must also locate new telecommunications facilities
underground if existing conduit is available for its use. Whenever any overhead
electric utilities are voluntarily relocated underground, any grantee with
permission to occupy the same public right of way must also relocate
underground if conduit space is available for its use. The grantee may recover
forced undergrounding costs from its customers or other third parties causing
the relocation, to the extent allowed by law.
      5.   Whenever any existing aboveground electric utilities, cable
facilities or telecommunications facilities are relocated underground within a
public right of way of the city, a grantee that currently occupies the same
aboveground public right of way shall relocate its facilities underground at
the grantee's sole expense concurrently with the other affected utilities to
minimize disruption of the public right of way, absent extraordinary
circumstances or undue hardship, as determined by the city and consistent with
state law. The grantee may recover forced undergrounding costs from its
customers or other third parties causing the relocation, to the extent allowed
by law.
      6.   The city engineer or the city public works superintendent may grant
exceptions to some or all of the requirements of this subsection if the
engineer or the public works superintendent determines, in his or her sole
discretion, that a waiver is necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of
this chapter.
   B.   Interference With The Public Rights Of Way: No grantee may locate or
maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with
the use of the public rights of way by the city, by the general public or by
other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public rights of
way. All such facilities shall be moved by the grantee, temporarily or
permanently, as reasonably determined by the city to protect the public health,
safety and welfare, at the sole expense of the grantee. All use of public
rights of way shall be consistent with city codes, ordinances and regulations.
   C.   Relocation Or Removal Of Facilities: Within sixty (60) days following
written notice from the city (or such other time as reasonably agreed to by the
parties), a grantee shall, at no expense to the city, temporarily or
permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
telecommunications facilities within the public rights of way whenever the city
shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is
reasonably necessary for:
      1.   The construction, repairs, maintenance or installation of any city
or other public improvement in or upon the public rights of way.
      2.   Any relocation that is caused by and benefits a third party, even if
the request comes from the city, shall be required to pay for grantee's
relocation costs prior to such relocation.
      3.   To the extent the city requires relocation of grantee's facilities
from the public right of way or city property, the city will attempt to provide
alternate public right of way or city property for such relocated facilities.
   D.   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within sixty (60) days following
written notice from the city, or such longer period agreed to by the city, any
grantee, telecommunications carrier, or other person that owns, controls or
maintains any unauthorized telecommunications system, facility or related
appurtenances within the public rights of way of the city shall, at its own
expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the public rights of way
of the city. A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   One year after the expiration or termination of the grantee's
telecommunications franchise unless the grantee has timely filed for, and is
actively and expeditiously pursuing, a franchise renewal.
      2.   Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rights of way of
the city. A facility will be considered abandoned when it is deactivated, out
of service, or not used for its intended and authorized purpose for a period of
ninety (90) days or longer. A facility will not be considered abandoned if it
is temporarily out of service during performance of repairs, if the facility is
excess capacity of a current grantee who is not in default, if the facility is
being replaced or if the facility has been disconnected because the building or
property being served is vacant.
      3.   If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the
prior grant of a telecommunications franchise and the owner has not commenced
actions to cure after written notice.
      4.   If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the
prior issuance of a required construction permit and the owner has not
commenced actions to cure after written notice.
      5.   If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location
not permitted by the grantee's telecommunications franchise and the owner has
not commenced actions to cure after written notice. (Ord. 772, 4-19-2012)
3-9-9: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE:
A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications
carrier who desires to occupy public rights of way of the city.
   A.   Application: Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise
pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the city which shall
include the following information:
      1.   The identity of the applicant.
      2.   A description of the telecommunications services that are to be
offered or provided by the applicant over its telecommunications facilities
within the city.
      3.   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of
the facilities to be located within the public rights of way in the city,
including copies in a computerized format specified by the city (unless the
applicant demonstrates that the format utilized was developed by the applicant
and is proprietary) and all in sufficient detail to identify:
         a.   The location and route requested for applicant's proposed
telecommunications facilities;
         b.   The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently
remove or relocate.
      4.   If applicant is proposing to install aboveground facilities, to the
extent that the applicant will be using utility poles, evidence from the pole
owner that usable space is available for locating the applicant's
telecommunications facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed
route; and if usable space is not available in some or all service areas, an
indication of these locations and a "make ready" schedule for completion.
      5.   If the applicant is proposing an underground installation in
existing ducts or conduits within the public rights of way, provide information
in sufficient detail to identify:
         a.   The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits
before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities;
         b.   The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or
conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
      6.   If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new
ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public rights of way:
         a.   The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
         b.   The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits
after the installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
      7.   A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
      8.   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to
construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
      9.   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's
technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.
      10.   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and
to offer or provide the telecommunications services proposed.
      11.   Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dial
tone service or other video programming service, and sufficient information to
determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising.
      12.   An accurate map showing the location of any existing
telecommunications facilities in the city that applicant intends to use or
lease.
      13.   A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will
offer or make available to the city and other public, educational and
governmental institutions.
      14.   As builts, after completion of initial construction.
      15.   A description of applicant's access and line extension policies.
      16.   The area or areas of the city the applicant desires to serve and a
schedule for buildout to the entire franchise area.
   B.   Application And Review Fee:
      1.   Any application for a franchise pursuant to this section shall pay
an application and review fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of
the city council. This subsection shall not apply to a telecommunication
utility which provides only local exchange access.
      2.   The application and review fee shall be deposited with the city as
part of the application filed pursuant to subsection A of this section.
   C.   Determination By The City: The city shall issue a written determination
granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the standards
listed herein. If the application is denied, the written determination shall
include the reasons for denial.
   D.   Rights Granted: No franchise granted under this chapter shall convey
any right, title or interest in the public rights of way, but shall be deemed a
grant to use and occupy the public rights of way for the limited purposes and
term, and upon the conditions stated in the agreement.
   E.   Term: Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a
telecommunications franchise granted under this chapter shall be in effect for
a term of five (5) years.
   F.   Franchise Territory: Unless otherwise specified in a franchise
agreement, telecommunications franchise granted under this chapter shall be
limited to the specific geographic area of the city to be served by the
franchise grantee, and the city's public rights of way necessary to serve such
areas.
   G.   Amendments: A franchise agreement may be amended upon the occurrence of
any of the following conditions:
      1.   A new application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its
telecommunications facilities in public rights of way of the city which are not
included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter unless the
grantee has already received a franchise to occupy public rights of way in all
areas of the city.
      2.   If ordered by the city to locate or relocate its telecommunications
facilities in public rights of way not included in a previously granted
franchise, the city shall grant an amendment without further application.
      3.   A new application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to provide a service which was not
included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.
      4.   Upon mutual agreement of the parties to the franchise agreement.
   H.   Renewal Applications: A grantee that desires to renew its franchise
under this chapter shall, not less than ninety (90) days before expiration of
the current agreement, file an application with the city for renewal of its
franchise which shall include the following information:
      1.   The information required pursuant to this section that was not
previously provided to the city in connection with grantee's existing franchise
agreement.
      2.   Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between
the city and the grantee.
   I.   Renewal Determinations: The city council shall make all renewal
determinations, which shall not be unreasonably denied based on the
requirements of this chapter, and any applicable state and federal laws. The
city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal
application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the
renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the
reasons for nonrenewal.
   J.   Obligation To Cure As A Condition Of Renewal: No franchise shall be
renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee's performance
of the agreement, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been cured, or a
plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been
approved by the city.
   K.   Assignments Or Transfers Of Grant, Notice To City:
      1.   A franchise may not, directly or indirectly, be transferred or
otherwise, assigned without the prior consent of the city, which consent shall
not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed, and then only on such
reasonable conditions as may be prescribed in such consent.
         a.   Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the franchise
shall agree, in writing, to assume and abide by all of the provisions of the
franchise.
         b.   Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications franchise
without prior written approval of the city under this subsection or pursuant to
a franchise agreement shall be void and is cause for revocation of the
franchise agreement.
         c.   Notwithstanding the foregoing in this subsection, grantee may
assign the franchise in whole or in part without the city's prior written
approval to: 1) any entity controlled by or under common control with grantee;
2) any surviving successor entity or newly created successor entity in the
event of a merger, reorganization or consolidation involving grantee; and 3)
the purchaser of all or substantially all of grantee's assets located in
Umatilla, Oregon.
   L.   Suspension, Revocation Or Termination Of Franchise: A franchise to use
or occupy public rights of way of the city may be suspended or revoked for the
following reasons:
      1.   Construction or operation in the city or in the public rights of way
of the city without a franchise grant of authorization.
      2.   Construction or operation without a construction permit or at an
unauthorized location and failure to cure after written notice as provided
herein.
      3.   Invalid transfer or assignment under subsection K of this section.
      4.   Failure to comply with subsection K of this section with respect to
sale, transfer or assignment of a franchise.
      5.   Intentional misrepresentation of a material fact under this chapter
by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the city.
      6.   Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public rights of
way as described herein.
      7.   Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this
chapter.
      8.   Wilful or continued failure to pay, fees or costs required under
this chapter unless subject to a bona fide dispute.
      9.   Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.
      10.   Violation of a material provision of this chapter.
      11.   Violation of a material term of a franchise agreement.
   M.   Notice And Duty To Cure: Pursuant to subsection L of this section, in
the event that the city believes that grounds exist for suspension or
revocation of a franchise, the city shall give the grantee written notice of
the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise
statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance,
and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time not exceeding sixty (60)
days to furnish evidence that:
      1.   Corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously
pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance.
      2.   Rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.
      3.   It would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or
sanction less than suspension or revocation.
   N.   Termination/Sanctions Of Franchise: If persuaded that the grantee has
violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this chapter, or of a
franchise agreement, the city council shall determine whether to suspend or
revoke the franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure,
considering the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as
reflected by one or more of the following factors:
      1.   Whether the misconduct was egregious.
      2.   Whether substantial harm resulted.
      3.   Whether the violation was intentional.
      4.   Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other
requirements.
      5.   Whether there is a history of overall compliance.
      6.   Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.
   O.   Damage To Grantee's Facilities: Unless directly and proximately caused
by wilful, intentional, malicious, or negligent acts by the city, the city
shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any telecommunications
facility within the public rights of way of the city as a result of or in
connection with any public works, public improvements, construction,
excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public rights of way
by or on behalf of the city, or for any consequential losses resulting directly
or indirectly from such work.
   P.   Nondiscrimination: A grantee shall make its telecommunications services
available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request such
service, without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges
for grantee's services; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall
prohibit a grantee from making any reasonable classifications among differently
situated customers.
   Q.   Franchise Fees: As compensation for the benefits and privileges under
its franchise and in consideration of permission to use the right of way of the
city, the grantee shall pay a quarterly franchise fee to the city, through the
duration of its franchise, as follows:
      1.   The minimum quarterly franchise fee shall be set by resolution of
the council. (Ord. 772, 4-19-2012)
      2.   The franchise fee for a telecommunication utility shall equal seven
percent (7%) of its gross revenues on exchange access services earned within
the boundaries of the city. (Ord. 781, 3-5-2013)
      3.   Except for limited use telecommunication grantees, the franchise fee
shall equal a percent of the grantee's gross revenues derived from grantee's
provision of local exchange access telecommunications services to retail
customers. The amount of the percent for retail customers shall be set by
resolution of the council.
      4.   The annual franchise fee collectible from a telecommunications
utility shall not exceed the maximum amount under Oregon law. The city shall
accept from a telecommunications utility, in full payment of the franchise fee,
the maximum amount allowed under Oregon law. On request, the telecommunications
utility must provide documentation to support its calculation.
      5.   A grantee providing resold telecommunications services or facilities
shall be entitled to a credit against its franchise fee for an amount equal to
a percentage of the price paid for such services or facilities at wholesale.
Such percentage shall be set by resolution of the council.
      6.   So long as it registers with the city as required and pays the fees
required for grantees set forth in subsections Q1 and Q2 of this section, a
reseller may use another person's facilities to engage in telecommunications
activities in the right of way without obtaining a franchise, providing the
reseller does not, either itself or through an affiliate, own or lease, control
or manage any facilities in the right of way and is not involved in
construction or repair of facilities in the right of way.
      7.   For purposes of calculating the fees to be paid by a reseller, the
amount of compensation paid by the reseller to the owner or manager of
facilities in the right of way for the services it resells shall be deducted
from the reseller's gross revenues before applying the percentage rates
described in subsection Q3 of this section.
      8.   Payment shall be made by each April 30, July 31, October 31 and
January 31 for the quarter just ended.
      9.   Any grantee who fails to remit any fee imposed by this chapter
within thirty (30) days of the date it is due, shall pay interest at the rate
of one and one-half percent (11/2%) per month or fraction thereof on the amount
of the fee from the date on which the remittance first became due until paid.
   R.   Cable Franchise: Telecommunication carriers providing cable service
shall be subject to the city's cable franchise requirements.
   S.   Insurance: Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise
agreement, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain
the following liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the
city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees
as additional insured:
      1.   Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person
per occurrence; one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage per
occurrence; and, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for all
other types of liability and three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) in the
aggregate for each of the above.
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a
limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each person and one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and three million dollars
($3,000,000.00) in the aggregate.
      3.   Workers' compensation within statutory limits and employer's
liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00).
      4.   The liability insurance policies required by this subsection shall
be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the telecommunications
license or franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is
operating without a franchise, or is engaged in the removal of its
telecommunications facilities. Evidence of insurance must be presented
regarding the above insurance requirements and grantee will endeavor to provide
at least thirty (30) days written notice to the city prior to any cancellation
or nonrenewal.
      5.   The insurance policy requirements of this subsection may be met by a
program of self-insurance acceptable to the city.
   T.   General Indemnification: Each franchise agreement shall include, to the
extent permitted by law, grantee's express undertaking to defend, indemnify and
hold the city and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless
from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, to the extent arising out of or
resulting from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction, operation,
maintenance, repair or removal of its telecommunications facilities, and in
providing or offering telecommunications services over the facilities or
network, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited
by this chapter or by a grant agreement made or entered into pursuant to this
chapter. (Ord. 772, 4-19-2012)
3-9-10: CABLE FRANCHISE:
   A.   Granting Franchise:
      1.   The city may grant one or more cable television franchises
containing such provisions as are reasonably necessary to protect the public
interest, and each such franchise shall be awarded in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   This chapter may be amended from time to time, and in no event shall
this chapter be considered a contract between the city and a grantee such that
the city would be prohibited from amending any provision of this chapter,
provided no such amendment shall in any way impair any contract right or
increase obligations of a grantee under an outstanding and effective franchise
except in the lawful exercise of the city's police power.
   B.   Cable Franchise Required:
      1.   No person may construct, operate or maintain a cable system or
provide cable service over a cable system within the city without a franchise
granted by the city authorizing such activity. No person may be granted a
franchise without having entered into a franchise agreement with the city
pursuant to this chapter. For the purpose of this provision, the operation of
part or all of a cable system within the city means the use or occupancy of
rights of way by facilities used to provide cable service.
      2.   To the extent permitted by law, a telecommunications utility, as
defined by state law, which utilizes its system to provide cable service shall
be subject to this chapter and shall require a cable franchise under this
chapter.
      3.   Services similar to cable service, such as open video system
service, shall also be subject to this chapter to the extent provided by law.
      4.   A system shall not be deemed as operating within the city even
though service is offered or rendered to one or more subscribers within the
city, if no right of way is used or occupied. All cable franchises granted
pursuant to this chapter shall contain substantially similar terms and
conditions, which, taken as a whole and considering relevant characteristics of
the applicants, do not provide more or less favorable terms and conditions than
those required of other cable grantees.
   C.   Length Of Cable Franchise: Unless otherwise specified in a cable
franchise, no cable franchise shall be granted for a period of more than five
(5) years.
   D.   Cable Franchise Characteristics:
      1.   A cable franchise authorizes use of rights of way for installing,
operating and maintaining cables, wires, lines, optical fiber, underground
conduit and other devices necessary and appurtenant to the operation of a cable
system to provide cable services within the city, but does not expressly or
implicitly authorize a grantee to provide service to, or install a cable system
on private property without owner consent, or to use publicly or privately
owned poles, ducts or conduits without a separate agreement with the pole
owner.
      2.   A cable franchise shall not mean or include any exclusive right for
the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city as
generally required by the laws of the city. A cable franchise shall not confer
any authority to provide telecommunications services or any other
communications services besides cable services and a separate franchise shall
be required for the provision of telecommunications services in addition to the
cable franchise. A franchise shall not confer any implicit rights other than
those mandated by federal, state or local law.
      3.   A cable franchise is nonexclusive and will not explicitly or
implicitly: preclude the issuance of other franchises to operate cable systems
within the city; affect the city's right to authorize use of rights of way by
other persons to operate cable systems; or for other purposes as it determines
appropriate.
      4.   Once a cable franchise has been accepted and executed by the city
and a grantee, such cable franchise shall constitute a valid and enforceable
agreement between the grantee and the city, and the terms, conditions and
provisions of such franchise, subject to this chapter and all other duly
enacted and applicable laws and regulations, shall define the rights and
obligations of the grantee and the city relating to the franchise.
      5.   All privileges prescribed by a cable franchise shall be subordinate
to any prior lawful occupancy of the rights of way and the city reserves the
right to reasonably designate where a grantee's facilities are to be placed
within the rights of way through its generally applicable permit procedures.
      6.   A cable franchise shall be a privilege that is in the public trust
and personal to the original grantee. No franchise transfer shall occur without
the prior written consent of the city council upon application made by the
grantee pursuant to this chapter, the franchise and applicable law. Consent
shall not be unreasonably withheld, and any purported franchise transfer made
without application and prior written consent shall be void and shall be cause
for the city to revoke the cable franchise.
   E.   Cable Grantee Subject To Other Laws, Police Powers:
      1.   A cable grantee shall at all times be subject to and shall comply
with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including
this chapter. A cable grantee shall at all times be subject to all lawful
exercise of the police power of the city including, but not limited to, all
rights the city may have under the cable act, all powers regarding zoning,
supervision of construction, control of rights of way and consumer protection.
      2.   The city shall have full authority to regulate cable systems, cable
grantees and franchises as may now or hereafter be lawfully permissible.
   F.   Operation Of A Cable System Without A Franchise: Any person who
occupies rights of way for the purpose of operating or constructing a cable
system or provides cable service over a cable system and who does not hold a
valid franchise from the city shall be subject to all requirements of this
chapter. The city administrator shall have the authority:
      1.   To require such person to enter into a franchise within thirty (30)
days of receipt of written notice that a franchise is required; or
      2.   To require such person to remove its property and restore the
affected area to a condition satisfactory to the city. The city administrator
may direct city personnel, or may employ contractors, to remove the property
and restore the affected area to a condition satisfactory to the city and
charge the person the costs therefor.
      3.   To take any other action it is entitled to take under applicable
law.
In no event shall a franchise be created unless it is issued by the city
pursuant to this chapter and subject to a written franchise agreement. (Ord.
772, 4-19-2012)
3-9-11: GOVERNING LAW:
Any franchise or license granted under this chapter is subject to the
provisions of the constitution and laws of the United States, and the state of
Oregon and the ordinances and charter of the city. (Ord. 772, 4-19-2012)
3-9-12: WRITTEN AGREEMENT:
No franchise or license shall be granted unless the agreement is in writing.
(Ord. 772, 4-19-2012)
3-9-13: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT:
No franchise or license granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive
right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public rights of
way of the city for delivery of telecommunications services or any other
purposes. (Ord. 772, 4-19-2012)
3-9-14: SEVERABILITY AND PREEMPTION:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision,
condition, covenant or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be
invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, or superseded
by state or federal legislation, rules, regulations or decision, the remainder
of this chapter shall not be affected but shall be deemed as a separate,
distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions, and each remaining section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase, provision, condition, covenant and portion of this
chapter shall be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law.
In the event that federal or state laws, rules or regulations preempt a
provision or limit the enforceability of a provision of this chapter, then the
provision shall be read to be preempted to the extent and or the time required
by law. In the event such federal or state law, rules or regulation is
subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so that the
provision that had been preempted is no longer preempted, such provision shall
return to full force and effect, and shall be binding, without the requirement
of further action on the part of the city. (Ord. 772, 4-19-2012)
3-9-15: PENALTIES:
Any person or entity found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A
separate and distinct offense may be deemed committed each day on which a
violation occurs. (Ord. 772, 4-19-2012)
3-9-16: OTHER REMEDIES:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies
that the city may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 772, 4-19-2012)
3-9-17: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS:
Any grantee under this chapter shall comply with all federal and state laws and
regulations, including regulations of any administrative agency, as well as all
ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city now in effect or
adopted in the future or established during the entire term of any franchise or
license granted under this chapter, which are relevant and relate to the
construction, maintenance and operation of a telecommunications system. Each
party reserves all legal rights with respects to any provisions of this chapter
that are inconsistent with applicable law. (Ord. 772, 4-19-2012)
3-9-18: CONSENT:
Wherever the consent of either the city or of the grantees under this chapter
is specifically required in a franchise or license granted, such consent will
not be unreasonably withheld. (Ord. 772, 4-19-2012)
3-9-19: APPLICATION TO EXISTING ORDINANCE AND AGREEMENTS:
To the extent that this chapter is not in conflict with and can be implemented
with existing ordinance and franchise agreements, this chapter shall apply to
all existing ordinance and franchise agreements for use of the public rights of
way for telecommunications, except that the terms of any existing franchise
shall continue until the end of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 772, 4-19-2012)
3-9-20: CONFIDENTIALITY:
The city agrees to use its best efforts to preserve the confidentiality of
information designated by the grantee as a trade secret, to the extent
permitted by the Oregon public records law. (Ord. 772, 4-19-2012)
CHAPTER 10
MARIJUANA RELATED OPERATIONS AND ACTIVITIES
SECTION:
3-10-1: Prohibited Operations And Activities
3-10-2: Definitions
3-10-3: Fine For Violation
3-10-4: Civil Action
3-10-5: Severability
3-10-1: PROHIBITED OPERATIONS AND ACTIVITIES:
The establishment and maintenance of any of the following operations and
activities are prohibited within the jurisdictional limits of the city of
Umatilla:
   A.   Medical marijuana processors or processing sites required to be
registered under section 85 of house bill 3400 (2015);
   B.   Medical marijuana dispensaries required to be registered under Oregon
Revised Statutes 475B.450;
   C.   Marijuana producers required to be licensed under section 19, chapter
1, Oregon laws 2015;
   D.   Marijuana processors required to be licensed under section 20, chapter
1, Oregon laws 2015;
   E.   Marijuana wholesalers required to be licensed under section 21, chapter
1, Oregon laws 2015;
   F.   Marijuana retailers required to be licensed under section 22, chapter
1, Oregon laws 2015. (Ord. 813, 7-5-2016)
3-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
   MARIJUANA: All parts of the plant of the Cannabis Moraceae, whether growing
or not, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound,
manufacture, sale, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its
resin, as may be defined by Oregon Revised Statutes or as they currently exist
or may from time to time be amended. It does not include the mature stalks of
the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of
the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
predation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber,
oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA: All parts of the marijuana plants that may be used to
treat or alleviate a medical marijuana qualifying patient's medical condition
or symptoms associated with the patient's medical condition. (Ord. 813, 7-5-
2016)
3-10-3: FINE FOR VIOLATION:
A violation of section 3-10-1 of this chapter by any person or entity is
punishable by a fine in the amount set for a class A violation in Oregon
Revised Statutes 153.019. Each day such a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. From time to time, the city council may change
the amount of the fine by resolution. (Ord. 813, 7-5-2016)
3-10-4: CIVIL ACTION:
In addition to, or in lieu of, the imposition of a fine under section 3-10-3 of
this chapter, the city of Umatilla may initiate a civil action against any
person or entity violating section 3-10-1 of this chapter for any remedies
available under Oregon law, including, but not limited to, obtaining mandatory
and prohibitory injunctions and orders of abatement. If the city of Umatilla
prevails in such civil action, the city of Umatilla shall be entitled to its
reasonable attorney fees and court costs. (Ord. 813, 7-5-2016)
3-10-5: SEVERABILITY:
If any part or section of this chapter is invalid or unenforceable in any
respect for any reason, the validity and enforceability of any such provision
in any other respect and of the remaining provisions of this chapter shall not
be in any way impaired. (Ord. 813, 7-5-2016)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Purpose
4-1-2: Definitions
4-1-3: Liability For Injuries
4-1-4: Unenumerated Nuisances
4-1-5: Nuisances Enumerated
4-1-5-1: Nuisances Affecting Public Health
4-1-5-2: Nuisances Attractive To Children
4-1-5-3: Junk
4-1-5-4: Fences
4-1-5-5: Scattering Rubbish
4-1-5-6: Hauling Materials
4-1-5-7: Offensive Littering
4-1-5-8: Sidewalks
4-1-5-9: Surface Water, Drainage
4-1-5-10: Trees And Shrubs
4-1-5-11: Noxious Vegetation
4-1-5-12: Discarded And Abandoned Vehicles
4-1-5-13: Blowing Dust And Debris
4-1-5-14: Prohibited Signs
4-1-5-15: Excavations
4-1-5-16: Removal Of Animal Wastes
4-1-5-17: Prohibited Parking
4-1-5-18: Raising Livestock, Poultry Or Exotic, Wild Or Dangerous Animals
Prohibited
4-1-6: Abatement Of Nuisances
4-1-6-1: Determination Of Nuisance
4-1-6-2: Abatement Procedure
4-1-7: Chronic Nuisance Property
4-1-7-1: Definitions
4-1-7-2: Violation
4-1-7-3: Procedure
4-1-7-4: Commencement Of Actions; Remedies; Burden Of Proof
4-1-7-5: Summary Closure
4-1-7-6: Enforcement
4-1-7-7: Attorney Fees
4-1-8: Violation; Penalty
4-1-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of this chapter to encourage a clean, healthy and satisfying
environment for the City's citizens, one free from nuisances, eyesores,
unhealthy or devaluating conditions. To these ends, this chapter seeks to
regulate, identify and provide a means to enforce the regulations to protect
the health, safety and welfare of residents and property owners. (Ord. 778, 9-
4-2012)
4-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   ABANDONED VEHICLE: The vehicle has been parked or left standing upon any
public way of the City of Umatilla without authorization by statute or local
ordinance, or upon any public or private property, and is therefore a public
nuisance.
   ABATEMENT: Stopping or suppressing a nuisance completely.
   COUNCIL: The Umatilla Mayor and City Council.
   DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION: The Oregon Department of Transportation, or
other registration authority analogous to the Department of Transportation in
any state other than Oregon.
   DISCARDED VEHICLE: Any vehicle which reasonably appears to be inoperative,
wrecked, abandoned, totally or partially dismantled, or junked. Discarded
vehicles may be deemed to include major parts thereof, including, but not
limited to, bodies, frames, engines, transmissions and rear ends.
   GARBAGE: All animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking or consumption of food.
   INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines or, if none, then of the lateral boundary lines of two (2)
or more streets or highways which join one another at an angle, whether or not
one street or highway crosses the other.
   LIQUID WASTE: Waste oil, septic tank pumping, liquid industrial wastes or
other similar material.
   MANAGER: The Umatilla city manager, an authorized representative or
designee.
   NUISANCE: An unlawful act, an omission to perform a duty, or suffering or
permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which either:
   A.   Presents the potential to injure or endanger the welfare, health or
safety of others; or
   B.   Interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for
passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, ditch or drainage; or
   C.   In any way creates or enables a physical threat that renders other
persons insecure in life or the use of property including hazard trees,
derelict buildings or structures or activities that pose a threat to adjoining
properties; or
   D.   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property through the creation of noxious odors, the presence of noxious weeds,
the accumulation of waste, rubbish, or junk, or other conditions that are in
violation of this title.
   OWNER: Any person having a legal interest in real or personal property or
any person in possession or control of real or personal property, and excludes
any person whose interest is for security only.
   PERSON RESPONSIBLE: The person responsible for abating a nuisance and shall
include:
   A.   The owner;
   B.   The person in charge of property;
   C.   The person who caused to come into or continue in existence a
"nuisance" as defined herein or by another ordinance of this city.
   PUBLIC PLACE: A building, way, place or accommodation, whether publicly or
privately owned, open and available to the general public.
   RUBBISH: Glass, metal, paper, wood, plastics or other solid waste.
   SOLID WASTE 1 : All useless or discarded putrescible and nonputrescible
materials, including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, refuse, ashes,
paper and cardboard, sewage sludge, septic tank and cesspool pumpings or other
sludge, useless or discarded commercial, industrial, demolition and
construction materials, discarded or abandoned vehicles or parts thereof,
discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid or
semisolid materials, dead animals and infectious wastes.
   VEHICLE: Any device which is designed or used for transporting people, goods
or property upon a public street or roadway, including, but not limited to, a
body, engine, transmission, frame or other major parts, but does not include a
device propelled by human power, such as a bicycle, or a device operated
exclusively upon fixed rails or tracks. (Ord. 778, 9-4-2012; amd. Ord. 807, 9-
1-2015; Ord. 829, 10-2-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. ORS 459.005; OAR 340-093-0030.
4-1-3: LIABILITY FOR INJURIES:
   A.   The owner of real property on which a nuisance exists is liable to the
person injured because of failure by the owner to abate the nuisance.
   B.   If the City is required to pay damages for an injury to any person
caused by the failure of an owner to abate a nuisance, the owner shall
reimburse the City for the amount of any damages paid, and for the attorney
fees and costs of defending against the claim for damages. The City may
maintain an action in court to enforce the provisions of this section. (Ord.
778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-4: UNENUMERATED NUISANCES:
   A.   The acts, conditions or objects specifically enumerated and defined are
declared public nuisances, and may be abated as provided by section
4-1-6 of this chapter.
   B.   In addition to the nuisances specifically enumerated in section 4-1-
5 of this chapter, every other thing, substance or act that is determined by
the City Council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or
welfare of the City is declared a nuisance and may be abated as provided in
section
4-1-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-5: NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
4-1-5-1: NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH:
No person shall cause or permit a nuisance affecting public health on property
owned or controlled by the person. The following are nuisances affecting public
health and may be abated as provided in section
4-1-6 of this chapter:
   A.   Cesspools: Cesspools or septic tanks which are in an unsanitary
condition or which cause an offensive odor;
   B.   Debris: Accumulations of debris, rubbish, manure and other refuse that
are not removed within one week or pose an actual threat to life and/or
property;
   C.   Privy: Open vaults or privies constructed and maintained within the
City, except those temporarily constructed or maintained in connection with
construction projects or permitted special events in accordance with the Oregon
Department of Environmental Quality Regulations;
   D.   Odor: Premises that are in such a state or condition as to cause a
noxious odor, or which are in an unsanitary condition as to attract insects,
vermin or other pests;
   E.   Oils: Mastics, oil, grease or petroleum products allowed to be
introduced into the sewer system by a user connected to the sewer system;
   F.   Slaughterhouse: An establishment where animals are butchered; also a
tannery or any place where animals are publicly killed or butchered;
   G.   Stagnant Water: Standing water that affords a breeding place for
mosquitoes and other insect pests;
   H.   Surface Drainage: Drainage of liquid wastes from public or private
premises;
   I.   Water Pollution: Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream or
drainage ditch by sewage, industrial wastes or other substances placed in or
near the water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the
water;
   J.   Drinking In Public Places: No person shall drink any intoxicating
liquor in any public place in the City. "Public place" means any place where
any consumption of alcoholic beverages is generally prohibited, including, but
not limited to, school grounds, public parks, public playgrounds and the
parking lots thereof. In conjunction with community events and festivals,
intoxicating liquor may be consumed in premises located in public places if the
owner and the City permit such activity;
   K.   Urinating In Public: No person shall urinate while in, or in view of,
any public place, except in restrooms provided for that purpose. "Public place"
means a place to which the general public has access and includes, but is not
limited to, hallways, lobbies and other parts of apartment houses and hotels
not constituting rooms or apartments designed for actual residence, and
highways, streets, schools, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds and
premises used in connection with public passenger transportation. (Ord. 778, 9-
4-2012)
4-1-5-2: NUISANCES ATTRACTIVE TO CHILDREN:
   A.   No person shall create a hazard by maintaining or leaving, in a place
accessible to children, a container with a compartment of more than one and
one-half (11/2) cubic feet capacity and a door or lid that locks or fastens
automatically when closed and that cannot be easily opened from the inside.
   B.   No owner or person in charge of property shall permit the following to
occur on that property:
      1.   Leaving unguarded machinery, equipment or other devices where they
are dangerous and accessible to children;
      2.   Lumber, logs or pilings placed or stored in a manner so as to be
attractive, dangerous and accessible to children;
      3.   Failing to cover or fence with a suitable protective construction
any well, cistern, cesspool, excavation, or other hole of a depth of four feet
(4') or more, and a top width of twelve inches (12") or more;
      4.   Failing to lock or otherwise secure by barriers or other devices any
building or structure which is vacant;
      5.   Placing playgrounds, sports or athletic equipment or structures
within or immediately adjacent to a public right of way, such as a basketball
backboard and hoop, which if used requires or encourages playground, sports or
athletic activity within the right of way.
   C.   This section does not apply to authorized construction projects with
reasonable safeguards to prevent injury or death to playing children. (Ord.
778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-5-3: JUNK:
   A.   For the purposes of this section:
      1.   The term "junk" includes old machinery or parts thereof, old
appliances or parts thereof, other metal, glass, paper, lumber, wood or other
waste or discarded material;
      2.   The term "junk" does not include motor vehicle parts, abandoned,
dismantled or unlicensed motor vehicles;
      3.   The term "junk" also includes a total accumulation of material on
property that exceeds three (3) cubic yards.
   B.   No person shall store or permit the storing of any junk on any public
right of way.
   C.   No person shall store or permit the storing of any junk on any lot or
premises for more than seventy two (72) hours, unless it is completely enclosed
within a building or in a space within zoning setback requirements which is
entirely enclosed by a sight obscuring fence, evergreen requirement or screen,
not less than six feet (6') in height.
   D.   This section does not apply to junk kept in a licensed junkyard or
automobile wrecking house or to properly stacked cords of firewood. (Ord. 778,
9-4-2012)
4-1-5-4: FENCES:
   A.   No owner or person in charge of property shall construct or maintain a
barbed wire or razor wire fence.
   B.   No owner or person in charge of property shall construct, maintain or
operate an electric fence.
   C.   No owner or person in charge of property shall permit a fence in
disrepair, which is falling down, or patched with materials not generally
considered fencing material or which is a hazard to others. (Ord. 778, 9-4-
2012)
4-1-5-5: SCATTERING RUBBISH:
Except at a city designated dump site, no person shall deposit upon public or
private property any kind of rubbish, trash, debris, refuse or any substance
that would mar the appearance, create a stench or fire hazard, detract from the
cleanliness or safety of the property or would be likely to injure a person,
animal or vehicle traveling upon a public way. (Ord. 778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-5-6: HAULING MATERIALS:
No person shall haul sand, gravel, rock, wood or other substances in any
vehicle or conveyance that is so constructed or in such condition as to allow
the sand, gravel, rock, wood or other substance to fall on and litter the
public streets of the city. (Ord. 778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-5-7: OFFENSIVE LITTERING:
   A.   A person shall be in violation of this section by:
      1.   Discarding or depositing any rubbish, trash, garbage, debris or
other refuse upon the land of another without permission of the owner, or upon
any public way;
      2.   Draining, or causing or permitting to be drained, sewage or the
drainage from a cesspool, septic tank, recreational or camping vehicle waste
holding tank, or other contaminated source upon the land of another, or upon
any public way;
      3.   Permit any rubbish, trash, garbage, debris or other refuse to be
thrown from a vehicle which he or she is operating, except that this subsection
shall not apply to a person operating a vehicle transporting passengers for
hire subject to regulation by the interstate commerce commission or the public
utility commissioner of Oregon or a person operating a school bus subject to
Oregon Revised Statutes 485.010 to 485.060.
   B.   As used in this section, "public way" includes, but is not limited to,
roads, streets, alleys, lanes, trails, beaches, parks, and all recreational
facilities operated by the city, state or county for use by the general public.
(Ord. 778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-5-8: SIDEWALKS:
It is the duty of an owner or occupant of land adjoining a street to maintain
in good repair and remove obstructions from the adjacent sidewalk. No owner or
person in charge of property, improved or unimproved, abutting on a paved
public sidewalk, shall permit snow, ice or debris to accumulate so that the
sidewalk becomes a hazard or obstructs free passage to persons using it. (Ord.
778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-5-9: SURFACE WATER, DRAINAGE:
No owner or person in charge of property shall permit rainwater, ice or snow to
fall from any building or structure thereon onto any street or sidewalk or to
flow across any abutting public sidewalk. Drainpipes or a drainage system shall
be properly maintained so that any overflow water accumulated on the property
will not be carried across or upon any abutting public sidewalk. (Ord. 778, 9-
4-2012)
4-1-5-10: TREES AND SHRUBS:
   A.   No owner or person in charge of property shall permit trees or shrubs
on their property to interfere with street or sidewalk traffic or with overhead
utility lines.
   B.   It shall be the duty of an owner or person in charge of property
abutting the right of way of an open public street or a sidewalk to:
      1.   Keep all trees and shrubs on the premises trimmed so that any
overhanging portions are at least eight feet (8') above the sidewalk, or at
least fourteen feet (14') above the vehicular travel surface;
      2.   Keep tree limbs from blocking stop signs, street signs or other
signs;
      3.   Keep shrubs from growing out over the sidewalk or curb; and
      4.   Keep all vegetation cleared from the sight triangle required at
intersections on corner lots as specified in the Umatilla zoning ordinance.
   C.   Removal of vegetation that may cause interference with overhead utility
lines shall be supervised by qualified personnel.
   D.   It shall be the duty of an owner or person in charge of property that
abuts upon a public right of way to contact the city manager and follow the
city's instructions prior to trimming or removal of any tree in the right of
way adjacent to that property. (Ord. 778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-5-11: NOXIOUS VEGETATION:
   A.   As used in this section, the term "noxious vegetation" means
uncontrolled or uncultivated growth of vegetation left unmanaged which creates
traffic visibility problems at intersections, poses a threat of conflagration
that may endanger the safety and welfare of the citizens of Umatilla or
unreasonably interferes with the use and enjoyment of abutting public or
private property. Noxious vegetation includes:
      1.   All vegetation identified in the "Noxious Weed Policy And
Classification System" published by the Oregon department of agriculture, and
all weeds identified under OAR 603-052;
      2.   Any vegetation, including grass and weeds, that:
         a.   Poses a fire hazard because it is dry and more than twelve inches
(12") high,
         b.   Encroaches onto an opened public right of way or across a
property line,
         c.   Poses a traffic hazard because it impairs the view of a public
thoroughfare or otherwise makes use of the thoroughfare hazardous,
         d.   Creates an unsafe area to which children may be attracted,
         e.   Is capable of being used for concealment or habitation by
trespassers,
         f.   Harbors animals that pose a health threat to humans, or
         g.   Is listed as noxious by federal, state or county authorities.
   B.   The term does not include:
      1.   Vegetation (except any noxious weed outlined in the "Noxious Weed
Policy And Classification System" published by the Oregon department of
agriculture, and all weeds identified under OAR 603-052) that is maintained as
an ornamental hedge, privacy screen or windbreak no wider than approximately
five feet (5');
      2.   Vegetation that is maintained as a safety barrier at the top edge of
a steep slope or other hazardous location;
      3.   Trees.
   C.   It shall be the duty of the owner or person in charge of property to
cut down or destroy any noxious vegetation as often as needed to prevent the
health and safety hazards described above except as follows:
      1.   Undeveloped properties less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet
shall be maintained as described above.
      2.   Properties over forty thousand (40,000) square feet may be exempted
provided that parcels abutting developed properties may be required to maintain
fire buffers along developed property boundaries as directed by the city
manager.
   D.   No owner or person in charge of property abutting the right of way of
an open street or public sidewalk (whether part of a street easement or right
of way or located on public land) shall permit vegetation to interfere with
adjacent street or sidewalk traffic. (Ord. 778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-5-12: DISCARDED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES:
   A.   No vehicle or parts thereof may be abandoned or discarded upon public
or private property.
   B.   The owner of the vehicle as shown in the records of the department of
motor transportation, or the person in physical possession of the vehicle shall
be considered responsible for the abandonment of a vehicle in the manner
prohibited and shall be liable for the costs of removal, storing and
disposition of the abandoned vehicle.
   C.   This section shall supplement and be in addition to the other
regulatory codes and statutes enacted by the county, the state or any other
legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.
   D.   This section shall not apply to:
      1.   A vehicle, or parts thereof, lawfully enclosed within a building or
behind a sight obscuring fence in a manner where it is not visible from the
street or other public or private property; or
      2.   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or
parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business. (Ord.
778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-5-13: BLOWING DUST AND DEBRIS:
Every person shall take and maintain positive steps to immediately control from
blowing, any fill material, debris or any soil from their property. Said steps
shall be either by water sprinkling system, sprinkler truck, gravel blanket,
sod, straw or other agent which will positively prevent the blowing of
disturbed soil, debris and/or fill material which is placed on the property.
(Ord. 778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-5-14: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
No person may attach or cause to be attached an advertisement, bill, placard,
poster or sign upon real or personal public property. On private property
permission from the owner or person in control of the property must first be
obtained. This section shall not be construed as an amendment to or a repeal of
any City Development Code regulation of the use and location of signs. (Ord.
778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-5-15: EXCAVATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any excavation which endangers the
lateral support or causes cracking, settling or other damage to streets,
sidewalks or other public property. (Ord. 778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-5-16: REMOVAL OF ANIMAL WASTES:
The owner or person having custody or control of any animal shall have the
responsibility for cleaning up after the animal by immediately removing and
disposing of in a sanitary manner any feces deposited by the animal upon public
property or private property of another. "Sanitary manner" means placing the
feces in a closed or sealed container and depositing in a trash receptacle.
Further, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or person having custody
or control of any animal to have in his/her possession suitable equipment for
the picking up, removal and sanitary disposal of animal feces. This provision
does not apply to a guide dog accompanying a blind person or to a service dog
accompanying a disabled person or to a dog when used in police or rescue
activities. (Ord. 778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-5-17: PROHIBITED PARKING:
   A.   The parking of vehicles, trailers, motor homes, machinery, and boats is
prohibited on lawns, sidewalks, public access points, or any surface other than
driveways and/or paved, cemented or graveled parking pads.
   B.   This section shall supplement and be in addition to the other
regulatory codes and statutes enacted by the City, County, the State or any
other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-5-18: RAISING LIVESTOCK, POULTRY OR EXOTIC, WILD OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS
PROHIBITED:
No person may raise or keep livestock, poultry, exotic, wild or dangerous
animals in the City. "Livestock" means horses, mules, jackasses, cattle,
llamas, alpacas, sheep, goats, swine, domesticated fowl and furbearing animals
bred and maintained commercially or otherwise, within outdoor pens, cages and
hutches. "Exotic, wild or dangerous animal" means any animal which is not
commonly domesticated, or which is not native to North America, or a
domesticated or wild animal which because of its size, disposition or its
vicious, venomous, wild or predatory nature, or its other characteristics,
could constitute an unreasonable danger to human life or property. "Poultry"
includes domesticated fowl, chickens, ducks, turkeys or geese or any other bird
raised for meat or eggs. (Ord. 778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-6: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES:
4-1-6-1: DETERMINATION OF NUISANCE:
Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the City or within its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, the City Manager may follow procedures
prescribed in this chapter to obtain compliance with this Code. The Manager, or
his designate, may enter any property or building at any reasonable time for
the purpose of inspection or enforcing this chapter. As used in this section,
an emergency exists when the Manager has reasonable cause to believe that the
nuisance constitutes an immediate and active danger to the public health,
safety and/or welfare. Nothing in this chapter precludes the City from treating
any section of this Code as a violation pursuant to the terms of
title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 829, 10-2-2018)
4-1-6-2: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Abatement Notice:
      1.   Upon determination by the City Manager, or his designate, that a
nuisance exists as defined in this Code, a notice shall be posted on the
premises liable for the nuisance directing removal or abatement.
      2.   At the time of posting, the City shall mail notice to the owner or
agent in charge of the property at the last known address of the owner or agent
by regular and by certified mail with return receipt.
      3.   The notice to abate shall contain:
         a.   A description of the real property, by street address or
otherwise, on which or adjacent to which the nuisance exists;
         b.   A direction to remove the nuisance within ten (10) days from the
date of the notice;
         c.   A description of the nuisance;
         d.   A statement that unless the nuisance is removed or abated within
ten (10) days, or a protest is filed pursuant to subsection C of this section,
the City will abate the nuisance and the cost thereof shall be a lien against
the property;
         e.   A statement that the owner or agent in charge of the property may
protest the action by actual delivery of notice to the City Manager, or his
designate as provided in the notice, within ten (10) days from the date of the
notice.
      4.   The person posting and mailing the notice as provided herein shall,
upon completion of the posting and mailing, execute and file in the Office of
the Finance Director a certificate stating the date and place of mailing and
posting.
      5.   An error in the name or address of the owner or agent in charge of
the property or the use of a name other than that of the owner or agent shall
not make the notice void and in such case the posted notice shall be deemed
sufficient.
   B.   Abatement By The Owner:
      1.   Within the time allowed by the notice as provided in subsection A3
of this section, the owner or agent in charge of the property shall remove and
abate the nuisance or show that no nuisance exists.
      2.   Upon the City's determination that a nuisance does in fact exist,
the owner or agent in charge shall within a reasonable time, but not more than
ten (10) days, remove or abate the nuisance.
   C.   Protest Of Notice:
      1.   The owner or agent in charge of the property may, within ten (10)
days of the posting of the notice, file with the City Manager or his designate
a written statement protesting the notice of abatement. Such statement shall
specify the bases for protesting.
      2.   If the owner or agent in charge of the property protests the
abatement as provided in this subsection, and if the notice of protest is filed
with the City Manager or his designate, a hearing shall be held before the City
Manager, his designate, or a Hearings Officer, who shall decide if a nuisance
exists by substantial evidence on the record. If the City Manager, his
designate, or a Hearings Officer decides that a nuisance exists, the owner or
person in charge of the property shall cause the nuisance to be abated as
directed by the City Manager, his designate, or the Hearings Officer. If the
nuisance is not so abated, the owner or person in charge of the property is in
violation of this Code and the City may abate the property as provided in this
Code and the cost thereof shall become a lien on the property.
      3.   A hearing held under this section may be informal in nature, but the
presentation of evidence in a hearing shall be consistent with the presentation
of evidence required for contested cases as provided by Oregon Revised Statutes
183.450.
      4.   In the event the owner or person in charge of the property disagrees
with the decision of the City Manager, his designate, or the Hearings Officer,
he shall have the right to appeal the decision by filing with the City Manager
or his designate a notice of appeal within seven (7) days from the date of the
decision. Such notice shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for
the appeal. The appeal shall be heard by the City Council, as part of the
Council's regular agenda, at the next succeeding meeting of the Council or at
such time thereafter as the City Manager shall determine, but no later than
sixty (60) days after filing. After notice to the parties, at the time set for
consideration of the abatement, the owner or person in charge of the property
may appear and be heard by the Council and the Council shall thereupon
determine whether or not a nuisance in fact exists. Such determination shall be
entered upon the official minutes of the Council. Determination shall be
required only in those cases where an appeal has been filed as allowed by this
section. If the City Council determines that a nuisance does in fact exist, the
owner or person in charge of the property shall, within ten (10) days of the
Council determination, abate such nuisance. If the nuisance is not so abated,
the owner or person in charge of the property is in violation of this Code and
the City may abate the property as provided in this Code and the cost thereof
shall become a lien on the property.
   D.   Abatement By The City:
      1.   If within the time fixed, as provided in this section, the nuisance
has not been abated by the owner or agent in charge of the property, the City
shall cause the nuisance to be abated.
      2.   The City shall maintain an accurate record of the expense incurred
by the City in abating the nuisance and shall include therein an overhead
charge of ten percent (10%) for the total cost for administration.
      3.   The total cost, including the administrative overhead, shall
thereupon be assessed to the property as hereinafter provided.
   E.   Assessment Of Cost:
      1.   A notice of the assessment shall be forwarded by certified mail with
return receipt to the owner or agent in charge of the property by the Finance
Director. The notice shall contain:
         a.   The total cost, including administrative overhead, of the
abatement.
         b.   A statement that the cost as indicated will become a lien against
the property unless paid within sixty (60) days.
         c.   A statement that if the owner or agent in charge of the property
objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, he may file a notice of
objection with the Finance Director within thirty (30) days from the date of
the notice.
         d.   Notice that the fee for recording in the County Deed Records will
be added.
      2.   Objections to the proposed assessment shall be heard and determined
by the City Manager or his designate.
      3.   An assessment for the cost of the abatement as determined by the
City Manager or his designate and adopted as a matter of record by resolution
of the Council shall thereupon be entered in the docket of City liens, and upon
the entry being made, it shall constitute a lien against the property from
which the nuisance was removed or abated. Also, it shall be recorded in the
County Deed Records.
      4.   The lien shall be collected in the same manner as liens are
collected in Oregon Revised Statutes 223.505 et seq., and shall bear interest
at the rate allowed for interest on judgments. The interest shall commence to
run thirty (30) days after the entry in the lien docket.
      5.   An error in the name of the owner or agent in charge of the property
shall not void the assessment nor will a failure to receive the notice of the
assessment render the assessment void, but it shall remain a valid lien against
the property.
   F.   Additional Procedure: The procedure provided by this section is not
exclusive but in addition to procedures provided by other ordinances, and
furthermore, the Chief of Police, or any other official designated by the City
Manager may proceed summarily to abate a sanitary or other nuisance which
exists and from which there is imminent danger to human life or property. (Ord.
829, 10-2-2018)
4-1-7: CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY:
4-1-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY: A. Property on which three (3) or more nuisance
activities exist or have occurred during any ninety (90) day period; or
   B.   Property on which or within four hundred feet (400') of which any
person associated with the property has engaged in three (3) or more nuisance
activities during any ninety (90) day period; or
   C.   Property which, upon request for execution of a search warrant, has
been the subject of a determination by a court that probable cause does exist
that possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related
offenses as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 167.203, 475.005 through 475.285
and/or 475.940 through 475.980 has occurred within the previous ninety (90)
days, and the City Police Department has determined that the search warrant was
based on evidence of continuous or repeated nuisance activities at the
property; or
   D.   Property on which continuous or repeated "nuisance activities" as
defined in subsections G, H, M, and N of that definition, exist or have
occurred.
   CONTROL: The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern
property, or conduct that occurs on a property.
   NUISANCE ACTIVITIES: Any of the following activities, behaviors or conduct:
   A.   Harassment as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 166.065(1)(a).
   B.   Intimidation as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 166.155 through
166.165.
   C.   Disorderly conduct as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 166.025.
   D.   Assault or menacing as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 163.160
through 163.190.
   E.   Sexual abuse, contributing to the delinquency of a minor or sexual
misconduct as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 163.415 through 163.445.
   F.   Public indecency as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 163.465.
   G.   Prostitution or related offenses as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes
167.007 through 167.017.
   H.   Alcoholic liquor violations as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes
471.105 through 471.482.
   I.   Offensive littering as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 164.805.
   J.   Criminal trespass as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 164.243 through
164.265.
   K.   Theft as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 164.015 through 164.140.
   L.   Arson or related offenses as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 164.315
through 164.335.
   M.   Possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or
related offenses as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 167.203, 475.005 through
475.285, and/or 475.940 through 475.980.
   N.   Illegal gambling as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 167.117, and/or
167.122 through 167.127.
   O.   Criminal mischief as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 164.345 through
164.365.
   P.   Any attempt to commit 1 , and/or conspiracy to commit 2 , any of the
above activities, behaviors or conduct.
   Q.   Fire or discharge of a weapon as defined in section 5-1-3 of this code.
   R.   Unlawful operation of sound producing or reproducing equipment as
defined in section 4-3-3 of this title.
   S.   Curfew as defined by Oregon Revised Statutes 419C.680.
   T.   Curfew as defined by section 5-2-1 of this code.
   PERSON: Any natural person, agent, association, firm, partnership,
corporation or other entity capable of owning, occupying or using property in
the city.
   PERSON ASSOCIATED WITH: Any person who, on the occasion of a nuisance
activity, has entered, patronized, visited, or attempted to enter, patronize or
visit, or waited to enter, patronize or visit a property or person present on a
property, including, without limitation, any officer, director, customer,
agent, employee, or any independent contractor of a property, person in charge,
or owner of a property.
   PERSON IN CHARGE: Any person, in actual or constructive possession of a
property, including, but not limited to, an owner or occupant of property under
his or her ownership or control.
   PROPERTY: Any property, including land and that which is affixed, incidental
or appurtenant to land, including, but not limited to, any business or
residence, parking area, loading area, landscaping, building or structure or
any separate part, unit or portion thereof, or any business equipment, whether
or not permanent. For property consisting of more than one unit, property may
be limited to the unit or the portion of the property on which any nuisance
activity has occurred or is occurring, but includes areas of the property used
in common by all units of property including, without limitation, other
structures erected on the property and areas used for parking, loading and
landscaping. (Ord. 778, 9-4-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. As defined in ORS 161.405.
2 2. As defined in ORS 161.450.
4-1-7-2: VIOLATION:
   A.   Any property determined by the police department to be chronic nuisance
property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies.
   B.   Any person in charge of property determined by the police department to
be chronic nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its
remedies. (Ord. 778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-7-3: PROCEDURE:
   A.   When the police department receives two (2) or more reports documenting
the occurrence of nuisance activities on or within four hundred feet (400') of
a property, the reports shall be reviewed to determine whether they describe
the activities, behaviors or conduct enumerated under section
4-1-7-1, definition of "nuisance activities" (subsections A through T), of this
chapter. Upon such finding, the police department may notify the person in
charge in writing that the property is in danger of becoming chronic nuisance
property. The notice shall contain the following information:
      1.   The street address or a legal description sufficient for
identification of the property.
      2.   A statement that the police department has information that the
property may be chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the
nuisance activities that exist, or that have occurred. The police department
shall offer the person in charge an opportunity to propose a course of action
that the police department agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving
rise to the violation.
      3.   Demand that the person in charge respond to the city police
department within ten (10) days to discuss the nuisance activities.
   B.   When the police department receives a police report documenting the
occurrence of additional nuisance activity on or within four hundred feet
(400') of a property after notification as provided by subsection A of this
section; or, in the case of section
4-1-7-1, definition of "chronic nuisance property" (subsection C or D), of this
chapter, for which notice under subsection A of this section is not required,
the police department shall notify the person in charge in writing that the
property has been determined to be a chronic nuisance property. The notice
shall contain the following information:
      1.   The street address or a legal description sufficient for
identification of the property.
      2.   A statement that the police department has determined the property
to be chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the nuisance
activities leading to his/her determination.
      3.   Demand that the person in charge respond within ten (10) days to the
city police department and propose a course of action that the police
department agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the
violation.
      4.   Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail,
postage prepaid, addressed to the person in charge at the address of the
property determined to be a chronic nuisance property, or such other place
which is likely to give the person in charge notice of the determination by the
police department.
      5.   A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at the address
shown on the tax rolls of the county in which the property is located, and/or
the occupant at the address of the property, if these persons are different
than the person in charge, and shall be made either personally or by first
class mail, postage prepaid.
   C.   If the person in charge fails to respond as required by subsection B3
of this section, the police department may refer the matter to the city
attorney. Prior to referring the matter to the city attorney, the notice
required by subsection B of this section shall also be posted at the property.
   D.   If the person in charge responds as required by subsection B3 of this
section and agrees to abate nuisance activities giving rise to the violation,
the police department may postpone referring the matter to the city attorney.
If an agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of the nuisance
activities within sixty (60) days, or if no agreement concerning abatement is
reached within sixty (60) days, the police department may refer the matter to
the city attorney.
   E.   When a person in charge makes a response to the police department as
required by subsection A3 or B3 of this section any conduct or statements made
in connection with the furnishing of that response shall not constitute an
admission that any nuisance activities have occurred or are occurring. This
section does not require the exclusion of any evidence which is otherwise
admissible or offered for any other purpose.
   F.   The failure of any person to receive notice as provided by subsection A
or B of this section shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings
under this chapter. (Ord. 778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-7-4: COMMENCEMENT OF ACTIONS; REMEDIES; BURDEN OF PROOF:
   A.   The city police department may request the city attorney to commence
legal proceedings in a court to abate chronic nuisance property and to seek
closure, the imposition of civil penalties against any or all of the persons in
charge thereof, and, any other relief deemed appropriate.
   B.   If the court determines the property to be chronic nuisance property,
the court shall order that the property be closed and secured against all
unauthorized access, use and occupancy for a period of not less than thirty
(30) days, or more than one year. The order shall be entered as part of the
final judgment. The court shall retain jurisdiction during any period of
closure.
   C.   If the court determines a property to be chronic nuisance property, the
court may impose a civil penalty of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day
for each day nuisance activities occurred on the property, following notice
pursuant to subsection
4-1-7-3B of this chapter; or the cost to the city to abate the nuisance
activities at the property whichever is greater. The amount of the civil
penalty shall be assessed against the person in charge and/or the property and
may be included in the city's money judgment.
   D.   If satisfied of the good faith of the person in charge, the court shall
not award civil penalties if the court finds that the person in charge at all
material times could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence,
determine that the property had become chronic nuisance property.
   E.   In establishing the amount of any civil penalty, the court may consider
any of the following factors and shall cite those found applicable:
      1.   The actions taken by the person in charge to mitigate or correct the
nuisance activities at the property;
      2.   The financial condition of the person in charge;
      3.   Repeated or continuous nature of the problem;
      4.   The magnitude or gravity of the problem;
      5.   The cooperation of the person in charge with the city;
      6.   The cost to the city of investigating and correcting or attempting
to correct the nuisance activities;
      7.   Any other factor deemed relevant by a court.
   F.   The city shall have the initial burden of proof to show by a
preponderance of the evidence that the property is chronic nuisance property.
   G.   Evidence of a property's general reputation and/or the reputation of
persons residing in or frequenting it shall be admissible. (Ord. 778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-7-5: SUMMARY CLOSURE:
Any summary closure proceeding shall be based on evidence showing that nuisance
activities exist or have occurred on the property and that emergency action is
necessary to avoid an immediate threat to public welfare and safety.
Proceedings to obtain an order of summary closure shall be governed by the
provisions of ORCP 79 for obtaining temporary restraining orders. In the event
of summary closure, the City is not required to comply with the notification
procedures set forth in subsections
4-1-7-3A and B of this section. (Ord. 778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-7-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The court may authorize the City to physically secure the property
against all unauthorized access, use or occupancy in the event that the person
in charge fails to do so within the time specified by the court. In the event
that the City is authorized to secure the property, the City shall recover all
costs reasonably incurred by the City to physically secure the property as
provided by this section. The City department(s) physically securing the
property shall prepare a statement of costs, and the City shall thereafter
submit that statement to the court for its review as provided by ORCP 68.
   B.   The person in charge shall pay reasonable relocation costs of a tenant
as defined by Oregon Revised Statutes 90.100(45), if, without actual notice,
the tenant moved into the property after either:
      1.   A person in charge received notice of the determination of the
Police Department pursuant to subsection
4-1-7-3B of this chapter; or
      2.   A person in charge received notice of an action brought pursuant to
section
4-1-7-5 of this chapter.
   C.   A lien shall be created against the property for the amount of the
City's money judgment. In addition, any person who is assessed penalties under
subsection
4-1-7-4C of this chapter and/or costs under subsection A of this section shall
be personally liable for payment thereof to the City. Judgments imposed by this
chapter shall bear interest at the statutory rate. (Ord. 778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-7-7: ATTORNEY FEES:
The court may, in its discretion, award attorney fees to the prevailing party.
(Ord. 778, 9-4-2012)
4-1-8: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Unless otherwise established by statute or ordinance, violation of a provision
of this chapter is a Class B civil violation as provided under
title 1, chapter 4 of this Code.
   A.   Each day's violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a
separate offense. Only one notice will be given per violation. Any reoccurrence
of the same violation will be subject to penalties without additional notice.
   B.   If a party has three (3) or more violations of this chapter within a
three-year period, the violation will be increased to a Class A civil violation
as provided under
title 1, chapter 4 of this Code.
   C.   The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person of the duty to
abate the nuisance.
   D.   The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violation of this
chapter, but is an additional remedy. Private abatement within the time allowed
may relieve the person responsible from the imposition of any fine under
subsection A of this section. (Ord. 829, 10-2-2018)
CHAPTER 2
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL
SECTION:
4-2-1: Purpose, Policy And Scope
4-2-2: Definitions
4-2-3: Activities And Practices Regulated
4-2-4: Exclusive Franchise And Term Of Franchise
4-2-5: Practices Prohibited Without A Franchise
4-2-6: Responsibility Of Franchisee
4-2-7: Rates
4-2-8: Billing, Collection And Franchise Fee
4-2-9: Charges To The City
4-2-10: Ownership Of Recyclable Materials
4-2-11: Public Responsibility
4-2-12: Suspension, Modification Or Revocation Of Franchise
4-2-13: Interruption Of Franchisee's Service
4-2-14: Termination Of Service By Franchisee
4-2-15: Binding Arbitration
4-2-16: Penalties
4-2-1: PURPOSE, POLICY AND SCOPE:
It is declared to be the public policy of the city of Umatilla to regulate
solid waste management to:
   A.   Ensure safe, economical and comprehensive solid waste service;
   B.   Ensure rates that are just and reasonable and adequate to provide
necessary public services;
   C.   Prohibit rate preferences and any other practice that might be
discriminatory; and
   D.   Provide for technologically and economically feasible recycling and
resource recovery by and through the franchisee. (Ord. 749, 6-3-2008)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
   CITY: Where the city limits are extended, the city shall include such
extended geographic boundaries.
   COMPENSATION: Includes:
   A.   Any type of consideration paid for service including, but not limited
to, rent, the proceeds from resource recovery, any direct or indirect provision
for payment of money, goods, services or benefits by tenants, lessees,
occupants or similarly situated persons;
   B.   The exchange of service between persons; and
   C.   The flow of consideration from a person owning, possessing or
generating solid waste to another person who provides services or from a person
providing services to another person owning, possessing or generating solid
waste.
   COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Umatilla.
   FRANCHISEE: Sanitary Disposal, Inc., to whom a franchise is granted by the
city council pursuant to this chapter. Such franchise shall grant exclusive
rights to provide service and solid waste management service for compensation.
   GROSS RECEIPTS: All revenue received from providing solid waste management
service under this franchise.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL: Any material or group of materials that can be
collected and sold for recycling at a net cost equal to or less than the cost
of collection and disposal of the same material.
   RESOURCE RECOVERY: The process of obtaining useful material or energy
resources from solid waste, including energy recovery, material recovery,
recycling and reuse of solid waste.
   SERVICE: The collection, transportation, storage, transfer, disposal of or
the resource recovery from solid waste.
   SOLID WASTE: All putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, including, but not
limited to, garbage, rubbish, refuse, ashes, wastepaper, cardboard, grass
clippings, compost, tire, equipment and furniture; sewage sludge, septic tank
and cesspool pumping or other sludge; commercial, industrial, demolition and
construction wastes; discarded or abandoned vehicles or parts thereof;
discarded home or industrial appliances; manure, vegetable or animal solid and
semisolid wastes, dead animals, infectious waste as defined in Oregon Revised
Statutes 459.386, and other wastes; but the term does not include:
   A.   Hazardous waste as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 466.005.
   B.   Materials used for fertilizer or for other productive purposes or which
are salvageable as such materials are used on land in agricultural operations
and the growing or harvesting of crops and the raising of fowls or animals.
   C.   Beverage containers, subject to reuse or refund provisions, contained
in Oregon Revised Statutes 459A.700 to 459A.740.
   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT: The prevention or reduction of solid waste;
management of the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization
processing and final disposal of solid waste; or resource recovery from solid
waste; and facilities necessary or convenient to such activities.
   WASTE: Material that is no longer usable or wanted by the sources of the
material, which material is to be utilized or disposed of by another person.
For the purpose of this definition, "utilized" means the productive use of
wastes through recycling, reuse, salvage, resource recovery, energy recovery or
landfilling for reclamation, habilitation or rehabilitation of land. (Ord. 749,
6-3-2008)
4-2-3: ACTIVITIES AND PRACTICES REGULATED:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person other than the franchise holder under the provisions of section
4-2-4 of this chapter to provide solid waste management service in the city of
Umatilla for compensation.
   B.   Nothing in this franchise shall:
      1.   Prohibit a federal or state agency that collects, stores, transports
or disposes of waste, solid waste or recyclable materials, or those who
contract with such agencies to perform the service, but only insofar as the
service is performed by or for the federal or state agency;
      2.   Prohibit any person in the city from hauling his own waste, solid
waste or recyclable materials in a lawful manner; provided, however, that no
person will be permitted to haul such waste, solid waste or recyclable material
for any other person or firm;
      3.   Prohibit a generator of source separated recyclable material from
selling or exchanging such material to any person for fair market value for
recycling or reuse;
      4.   Prohibit any person from transporting, disposing of or resource
recovering, sewage sludge, septic pumping or cesspool pumping;
      5.   Prohibit any person licensed as a motor vehicle dismantler under
Oregon Revised Statutes 822.110 et seq., from collecting, transporting,
disposing of or utilizing motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts;
      6.   Prohibit any person transporting solid waste through the city that
is not collected within the city;
      7.   Prohibit a contractor registered under Oregon Revised Statutes
chapter 701 from hauling waste created in connection with demolition,
construction or remodeling of a building or structure or in connection with
land clearing and development. Such waste shall be hauled in equipment owned by
the contractor and operated by the contractor's employees;
      8.   Prohibit the collection, transportation and reuse of repairable or
cleanable discards by private charitable organizations regularly engaged in
such business or activity and not engaged in the regular business of collection
of putrescible solid waste;
      9.   Prohibit a nonprofit charitable, benevolent or civic organization
from collecting recyclable materials provided that such collection is not a
regular or periodic business of such organization. The organizations shall
comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter;
      10.   Prohibit a person from transporting or disposing of waste that is
produced as an incidental part of the regular carrying on of the business of
janitorial service, gardening or landscaping service, or rendering. (These
sources do not include the collection, transportation or disposal of
accumulated or stored wastes generated or produced by other persons.); and
      11.   Require franchisee to store, collect, transport, dispose of or
resource recover any hazardous waste as defined by or pursuant to Oregon
Revised Statutes chapter 466; provided, however, that franchisee may engage in
a separate business of handling such wastes separate and apart from this
franchise and chapter. (Ord. 749, 6-3-2008)
4-2-4: EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE AND TERM OF FRANCHISE:
There is hereby granted to Sanitary Disposal, Inc., an Oregon corporation, the
exclusive right, franchise and privilege of using the streets of the city to
provide solid waste management service for commercial, industrial and
residential establishments within the city of Umatilla. The rights, privileges
and franchise herein granted shall begin on July 1, 2008, and shall be
considered as a continuing five (5) year franchise. That is, beginning January
1 of each year, the franchise will be considered renewed for an additional five
(5) year term, unless at least thirty (30) days prior to January 1 of any year
either party shall notify the other party in writing of intent to terminate
further renewals of the franchise. Upon the giving of such notice of
termination, the franchisee shall have a franchise which will terminate five
(5) years from the date of the notice of termination of renewals. The council
may later extend the term or reinstate continuing renewals upon mutual
agreement with the franchisee. Nothing in this section restricts the council
from suspending, modifying or revoking the franchise for cause pursuant to
section 4-2-12 of this chapter. Such franchise may be transferred only upon
approval of the city council. The sale of shares, merger, consolidation,
reorganization or restructuring in which the current shareholders are no longer
the principal owners and managers shall be treated as a transfer of interest
requiring approval. (Ord. 749, 6-3-2008)
4-2-5: PRACTICES PROHIBITED WITHOUT A FRANCHISE:
Unless exempted by section
4-2-3 of this chapter or granted a franchise, no person shall:
   A.   Solicit for service customers,
   B.   Advertise the providing of service, or
   C.   Transport solid waste other than his own. (Ord. 749, 6-3-2008)
4-2-6: RESPONSIBILITY OF FRANCHISEE:
   A.   The franchisee shall provide collection service to any resident of the
city of Umatilla as long as the resident pays for said service.
   B.   The franchisee shall make available "solid waste management" service as
defined in section
4-2-2 of this chapter to customers in the city not less than once per week.
   C.   The franchisee shall use proper and suitable equipment for the hauling,
removal and transportation of solid waste. All equipment for transporting solid
waste on public roadways within the city of Umatilla shall be covered, and all
equipment for handling said waste material shall be equipped with a metal body,
watertight and drip proof to the greatest extent practicable. All equipment
shall be kept clean at all times, and sufficient equipment shall be kept on
hand to properly and adequately remove all solid waste, subject to the terms of
this chapter.
   D.   Lids shall be closed on all receptacles by the collector after emptying
the receptacle.
   E.   The franchisee shall use a disposal facility site that is approved by
the department of environmental quality (DEQ) and the city.
   F.   The franchisee shall, without charge to the city pick up, carry away
and dispose of any and all waste materials placed by the city of Umatilla in
suitable containers which hold solid waste generated by the city of Umatilla.
It is understood, however, that the franchisee may impose reasonable charges to
the city for extraordinary disposal activities such as the removal of
demolition materials.
   G.   The franchisee may subcontract with others to provide a portion of the
service where the franchisee does not have the necessary equipment or service
capability. Such a subcontract shall not relieve the franchisee of total
responsibility for providing and maintaining service and from compliance with
this chapter. Franchisee shall provide written notice to the city of its
intention to subcontract any portion of the service and receive city approval
prior to entering into such agreement. The subcontractor shall comply with all
provisions of this chapter.
   H.   The franchisee, in conjunction with the city shall develop and
implement an "opportunity to recycle" program that meets the mandated state
recycling program requirements.
   I.   The franchisee shall permit inspection by the city of the franchisee's
facilities, equipment and personnel at reasonable times. The franchisee shall
keep proper books and records covering solid waste collection, removal,
disposal and recycling operations, which books and records shall be open to
inspection by the city at reasonable times.
   J.   The franchisee shall comply with all laws relating to solid waste
management service.
   K.   The franchisee shall submit a certificate of public liability insurance
with a thirty (30) day notice of cancellation clause, acceptable to the city,
which will cover its business operation including each vehicle operated by said
franchisee. The insurance coverage shall be amounts not less than the minimum
requirements of the Oregon tort claims act as now enacted or hereafter amended.
The insurance shall indemnify and save the city harmless against liability or
damage which may arise or occur from an injury to persons or property as a
result of said franchisee's operation of the solid waste business. The city
shall be named as an additional insured.
   L.   The franchise granted under this chapter shall be conditioned upon the
franchisee indemnifying and saving harmless the city of Umatilla against any
liability or damage which may arise or occur to the city of Umatilla from any
injury to persons or property as a result of the franchise holder's operations
under this chapter. (Ord. 749, 6-3-2008)
4-2-7: RATES:
Any person who receives solid waste management service from franchisee shall be
responsible for payment of such service. The rates to be charged to all persons
by the franchisee shall be reasonable and uniform, taking into consideration
the cost of performing the service rendering by the franchisee, the anticipated
increase in the cost of providing this service, the necessity that the
franchisee have a reasonable operating margin, and rates and fees charged in
other and similar municipalities. The rates may be changed by resolution during
the term of the franchise if approved by the city council. Said rates shall be
on file at the recorder's office for public inspection. (Ord. 749, 6-3-2008)
4-2-8: BILLING, COLLECTION AND FRANCHISE FEE:
The city shall do the billing and collecting of solid waste service fees and
shall retain sixteen percent (16%) of the gross collections in payment of five
percent (5%) franchise fee and eleven percent (11%) for billing and collection
service, and pay the balance to Sanitary Disposal, Inc. Such percentage shall
be reviewed and may be changed by action of council at any time when the
franchisee submits a request for rate review. (Ord. 749, 6-3-2008)
4-2-9: CHARGES TO THE CITY:
The city can request the franchisee provide drop boxes, haul and disposal of
waste generated on city owned properties for a charge equal to the disposal
costs the transfer station pays Finley Buttes Landfill for disposing of the
waste. The franchisee shall provide the city a copy of the Finley Buttes
Landfill rates whenever there is a rate adjustment. (Ord. 749, 6-3-2008)
4-2-10: OWNERSHIP OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS:
All recyclable materials located, placed or deposited in a container, drop box
or receptacle intended to be collected by the franchisee shall belong to the
franchisee. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the franchisee to
remove recyclable material from such receptacles, and any person removing such
materials in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
subject to the penalties defined in section
4-2-16 of this chapter. (Ord. 749, 6-3-2008)
4-2-11: PUBLIC RESPONSIBILITY:
In addition to and not in lieu of compliance with Oregon Revised Statutes
chapter 459 and other applicable laws and regulations:
   A.   Customers shall take appropriate actions to ensure that hazardous
materials, chemicals, paint, corrosive materials, infectious waste or hot ashes
are not put into a can, cart, container or drop box. When materials or customer
abuse, fire or vandalism causes excessive wear or damage to a cart, container
or drop box, the cost of repair or replacement may be charged to the customer.
   B.   No unauthorized person shall place materials in or remove materials
from a solid waste collection container without permission of the owner of the
container. For the purpose of this section the franchisee is the "owner" of
containers supplied by franchisee. Persons to whom the franchisee supplies
containers shall be authorized persons within the meaning of this section.
   C.   No unauthorized person shall remove solid waste placed out for
collection and resource recovery.
   D.   Unless permitted by the franchisee, no person shall install or use any
container over thirty two (32) gallons in capacity for pick up by franchisee
other than those supplied by franchisee. The purpose of this subsection is to
ensure safe equipment, sizes and weights, and facilitate franchisee utilizing
the most efficient collection equipment and methods.
   E.   The franchisee is not required to service an underground container
unless the person responsible for it places the container above the ground
prior to the time for collection.
   F.   Each customer shall provide safe access to the solid waste container or
waste without risk or hazard to franchisee's employees, the public or
franchisee.
   G.   No container designed for mechanical pick up shall exceed safe loading
weights or volumes as established by the franchisee to protect service workers,
the customer, the public and the collection equipment.
   H.   All customers shall use mechanically emptied containers furnished by
franchisee and shall provide a smooth, level, hard surfaced area approved by
the franchisee for the container.
   I.   Unless special service or service equipment is provided by the
franchisee for handling unconfined waste, materials such as rubbish and refuse,
brush, leaves, tree cuttings and other debris for manual pick up and collection
shall be in securely tied bundles or in boxes, sacks or other receptacles, and
solid waste so bundled, tied or contained shall not exceed sixty (60) pounds in
weight.
   J.   Where a customer requires an unusual volume of service or a special
type of container requiring substantial investment in equipment, the franchisee
may require a contract with the customer as necessary to finance and assure
amortization of such equipment. The purpose of this provision is to assure that
such equipment does not become a charge against other rate payers who are not
benefited. In no event shall such a contract be in effect longer than this
chapter.
   K.   Stationary compacting devices for solid wastes shall comply with
federal and state safety standards and provide adequate protection to the user
and franchisee.
   L.   Any vehicle used by a person to transport solid waste shall be so
loaded and operated as to prevent the wastes from dropping, sifting, leaking,
blowing or otherwise escaping from the vehicle onto any public right of way or
lands adjacent.
   M.   No person shall block access to any container or drop box or roll off
box supplied by franchisee.
   N.   Every person who generates or produces solid waste shall have removed
all putrescible solid waste at least every seven (7) days. More frequent
removal may be required where a facility or service involves the public health.
All solid waste shall be removed in sufficient frequency as to prevent health
hazards or pollution.
   O.   All putrescible materials shall be stored in manually emptied
containers supplied by the generator or producer or in mechanically emptied
containers or drop boxes supplied by the franchisee. When manually or
mechanically emptied containers are used, they shall be covered except during
loading and emptying. When drop boxes are used, all putrescible materials shall
be placed in plastic bags and tied.
   P.   The producer or generator of solid waste shall clean containers and
shall keep the area around such container free of accumulated solid waste or
wastes. The franchisee shall provide maintenance as required to containers
supplied by franchisee.
   Q.   Approved disposal methods shall be as follows:
      1.   No person shall burn, dump, bury, collect, remove or in any other
manner dispose of solid waste upon any street, alley, public place or private
property within the city except as provided in this chapter.
      2.   Wastepaper, boxes, rubbish and debris, brush, leaves, grass, wood
and cuttings from trees, lawns, shrubs and gardens (excepting paper, cardboard
or wood containers in commercial quantities) may be burned on private property
only if the method of burning is approved by the city and is done in accordance
with Oregon department of environmental quality rules and regulations.
   R.   All putrescible solid waste must be drained of excess liquids and
wrapped.
   S.   Ashes will be taken only if placed in a plastic bag and tied. (Ord.
749, 6-3-2008)
4-2-12: SUSPENSION, MODIFICATION OR REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   Failure to provide necessary service or otherwise comply with the
provisions of this chapter after written notice and a reasonable opportunity to
comply shall be grounds for modification, suspension or revocation of the
franchise.
   B.   After written notice from the council that such grounds exist, the
franchisee shall have twenty (20) days from the date of mailing of the notice
in which to comply or request a public hearing before the council.
   C.   At the public hearing, the franchisee and other interested persons
shall have an opportunity to present oral, written or documentary evidence to
the council.
   D.   If the franchisee fails to comply within the time specified or if the
council hearing is held, with the order of the council entered upon the basis
of findings at the public hearing, the council may suspend, modify or revoke
the franchise or make such action contingent upon continued noncompliance.
(Ord. 749, 6-3-2008)
4-2-13: INTERRUPTION OF FRANCHISEE'S SERVICE:
The franchisee agrees, as a condition of this franchise, that whenever the city
council finds that the failure of service or threatened failure of service
would result in creation of an immediate and serious health hazard or serious
public nuisance, the city council may, after a minimum of twenty four (24)
hours' actual notice to the franchisee and a public hearing if the franchisee
requests it, provide or authorize another person to temporarily provide the
service or to use and operate the land, facilities and equipment of the
franchisee to provide emergency service. If a public hearing is requested by
the franchisee, it may be held immediately by the city council after compliance
with the minimum notice requirements for such meetings established by the
Oregon public meetings law. The city council shall return any seized property
and business upon abatement of actual or threatened interruption of service and
after payment to the city for any net cost incurred in the operation of the
solid waste service. (Ord. 749, 6-3-2008)
4-2-14: TERMINATION OF SERVICE BY FRANCHISEE:
The franchisee shall not terminate service to all or a portion of the customers
unless:
   A.   The street or road access is blocked, and there is no alternate route
and provided that the franchisee shall restore service no later than twenty
four (24) hours after street or road access is opened;
   B.   As determined by the franchisee, excessive weather conditions render
providing service unduly hazardous to persons providing service or to the
public or such termination is caused by accidents or casualties caused by an
act of God, a public enemy or a vandal, or road access is blocked;
   C.   A customer has not paid for provided service after a regular billing
and after a written notice to said customer, which notice shall be sent not
less than fifteen (15) days after the first regular billing;
   D.   Ninety (90) days' written notice is given to the city council and to
affected customers, and written approval is obtained from the city council; or
   E.   The customer does not comply with the service standards of section 4-2-
11 of this chapter. (Ord. 749, 6-3-2008)
4-2-15: BINDING ARBITRATION:
In the event that an irreconcilable difference arises between the city and
franchisee on their respective duties and responsibilities under the franchise
or this chapter, an arbitration board shall be chosen, consisting of three (3)
persons, one chosen by the city, one by the franchisee and one chosen by the
two (2) appointed arbiters who must be approved by both the city and
franchisee. The arbiters shall choose a time, date and place within thirty (30)
days of appointment of the last arbiter, to hear both sides of the dispute and
promptly render a decision that is binding on both the city and the franchisee.
Where good cause is shown and recorded in the minutes, the time for decision
may be extended as absolutely necessary. Procedure chosen may be that of the
American Arbitration Association or that specified in Oregon Revised Statutes
chapter 36 for court supervised arbitration. Costs shall be split equally
between the city and franchisee unless the arbitrators make an award of costs
including, without limitation, arbiter's time. (Ord. 749, 6-3-2008)
4-2-16: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
Every day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute
a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. Franchise holders
shall be subject to the penalties provided herein for the violation of the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 749, 6-3-2008)
CHAPTER 3
NOISE CONTROL
SECTION:
4-3-1: Title
4-3-2: Definitions
4-3-3: Noise Disturbance Prohibited
4-3-4: Specific Noises Prohibited
4-3-5: General Exceptions
4-3-6: Additional To Other Laws
4-3-7: Penalties For Violation
4-3-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the UMATILLA NOISE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 712, 11-6-
2001)
4-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
   CHIEF OF POLICE: Umatilla chief of police, or the chief's designee.
   COMMUNITY EVENT: Any event the city of Umatilla has approved prior to its
occurrence and that is sponsored or attended by a local organization or group
of people.
   CONSTRUCTION, STREET WORK, STREET REPAIR, DRILLING OR DEMOLITION TOOLS OR
EQUIPMENT: Machines or mechanically powered items that are typically used on
commercial construction projects and involve more than routine repairs or work
on residential property.
   DOMESTIC POWER TOOL: A mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder,
lawn or garden tool, snowblower, leaf blower or similar device that is used in
residential areas for work that is typically done by or for residential
occupants.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE: Any sound which: a) injures or endangers the safety or
health of humans; or b) annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal
sensitivities.
   NOISE SENSITIVE UNIT: Any building, structure, or portion thereof that has
the doors and windows closed and that is used as a church, daycare center,
hospital, nursing care center or school, or place of overnight accommodation,
including, but not limited to, individual homes, apartments and mobile homes.
   OUTDOOR ACTIVITY: An athletic, entertainment or similar activity.
   PERMIT, PERMITTING OR PERMISSION: To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by
failure to prevent, or expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.
   PERSON: An individual person, association, trust, partnership, firm or
corporation.
   PLAINLY AUDIBLE: Any sound, the content of which can be clearly heard by a
listener of ordinary hearing capabilities. (Ord. 712, 11-6-2001)
4-3-3: NOISE DISTURBANCE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, make, or to assist in making any
noise disturbances in the city. A noise disturbance is presumed to have
occurred when two (2) or more of the following circumstances exist:
   A.   The noise is made between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M.;
   B.   The noise is plainly audible within a noise sensitive unit that is not
the source of the noise;
   C.   The noise is amplified by a machine or object;
   D.   The tone of the noise is abnormally high or low according to the
perception of a listener with normal hearing capabilities;
   E.   The noise remains constant for at least five (5) minutes; or
   F.   The noise is repeated at least three (3) times during a thirty (30)
minute time period. (Ord. 755, 6-1-2010)
4-3-4: SPECIFIC NOISES PROHIBITED:
The following acts are violations of this chapter:
   A.   The use, operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph,
compact disc player, tape player, loudspeaker, musical instrument, or other
similar machine or device that is used for the production of noise between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. when the noise is
plainly audible within a dwelling unit or any noise sensitive unit that is not
the source of the noise; or to operate such device on public property or on a
public right of way so as to be plainly audible fifty feet (50') or more from
such device;
   B.   The loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes,
crates, containers, building materials, or similar objects between the hours of
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. when the noise is plainly
audible within a noise sensitive unit that is not the source of the noise;
   C.   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other kind of vehicle in a
manner that creates loud grating, grinding, revving, rattling or other similar
noise;
   D.   The use of exhaust brakes or dynamic braking device commonly known as
"jake brakes", except when used in an emergency to stop or slow a vehicle so as
to avoid a collision;
   E.   The discharging of exhaust from any steam engine, stationary internal
combustion engine, motor boat, motorcycle or motor vehicle except through a
muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive
noises;
   F.   The making of, or assisting with the making of, noise on a public beach
or in a public park when the noise is plainly audible within a noise sensitive
unit that is not the source of the noise;
   G.   The use of construction, street work, street repair, drilling or
demolition tools or equipment between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M.;
   H.   The use of domestic power tools between the hours of ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.;
   I.   Noise created by dogs and other animals including birds, when it
violates the standards in subsection 5-3-8A6 of this code. (Ord. 755, 6-1-2010)
4-3-5: GENERAL EXCEPTIONS:
The following acts are exceptions to the prohibition in this chapter:
   A.   Noise emanating from aircraft and aircraft operations, railway
locomotives and nonstationary farming equipment;
   B.   Noise created by the normal operation of construction, street work,
street repair, drilling or demolition tools or equipment provided the
construction, street work, street repair, drilling or demolition work occurs
between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.;
   C.   Noise created by the operation of any domestic power tool provided that
operation of the domestic power tool occurs between the hours of six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.;
   D.   Noise created by a community outdoor activity or event conducted on
public parks, playgrounds, and public or private school grounds;
   E.   Noise created by an animal that does not violate subsection 5-3-8A6 of
this code;
   F.   Noise that constitutes constitutionally protected speech;
   G.   Operation of any device designed for sound production or reproduction
in a city park or on public right of way with a permit granted by the city
manager or designee;
   H.   Noise caused by the performance of emergency work, or by the ordinary
and accepted use of emergency apparatus and equipment. (Ord. 755, 6-1-2010)
4-3-6: ADDITIONAL TO OTHER LAWS:
The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and nonexclusive and shall
not affect any other claim, cause of action or remedy; nor, unless specifically
provided, shall it be deemed to repeal, amend or modify any law, ordinance or
regulation relating to noise or sound, that shall be deemed additional to
existing legislation and common law on such subject. (Ord. 712, 11-6-2001)
4-3-7: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION 1 :
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply
with any requirement of this chapter. Violation of section 4-3-3 and
subsections 4-3-4A, B, G, H, and I of this chapter is punishable by the
imposition of a class C civil fine. Violation of subsections 4-3-4C through F
of this chapter is punishable by the imposition of a class D civil fine. Each
such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during
any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted by such person and may be punished
accordingly. (Ord. 712, 11-6-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
CHAPTER 4
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
4-4-1: Permit Required
4-4-2: Permissible Burning
4-4-3: Penalty
4-4-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or cause to be burned any refuse,
paper, lumber, garbage or other material in any open fire within the city
without having first secured a permit from the fire department of the city. No
permits shall be issued for industrial burning. When the population of the city
is four thousand (4,000) or more persons, permits may be issued for residential
use only. Rules and regulations on burning may be promulgated by the fire
department or the fire chief. (Ord. 755, 6-1-2010)
4-4-2: PERMISSIBLE BURNING:
Burning is permissible in a hearth, fireplace, stove or other container
approved by the fire department. All approved containers shall have a minimum
setback of twenty feet (20') of public rights of way. (Ord. 755, 6-1-2010)
4-4-3: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by the imposition of a class A
civil fine 1 . (Ord. 755, 6-1-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
CHAPTER 5
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Illegal Fireworks Prohibited
4-5-2: Definitions
4-5-3: Penalty
4-5-1:  ILLEGAL FIREWORKS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, expose for sale,
possess, use, explode or allow to be exploded any fireworks except as permitted
under the provisions of Oregon Revised Statutes 480.111 through Oregon Revised
Statutes 480.165. (Ord. 838, 9-3-2019)
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in subsection (4-5-1) above, the term "fireworks" shall mean as defined
in Oregon Revised Statutes 480.111. (Ord. 838, 9-3-2019)
4-5-3: PENALTY:
A.   Violation of subsection (4-5-1) above, shall be a class B civil violation
punishable as provided in Code Section 1-4-1.
B.   Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
C.   The City may confiscate, destroy, remove or have removed, at the owner's
expense, all stocks of fireworks in violation of this chapter when necessary to
preserve public safety.
D.   A person in violation of this section may be required to pay restitution
pursuant to Code Section 1-4-2. (Ord. 838, 9-3-2019)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-1-1: Short Title
5-1-2: Offenses Against The State And Public Justice
5-1-3: Use Of Weapons
5-1-4: Offenses Against Public Health And Decency
5-1-5: Camping Regulations
5-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be referred to as GENERAL OFFENSES. (Ord. 725, 1-13-2004)
5-1-2: OFFENSES AGAINST THE STATE AND PUBLIC JUSTICE:
   A.   Interference With Legislative Operations:
      1.   Interfering With Legislative Operations: Any person not a member of
the Umatilla city council who conducts himself in or near the city council
members or in or near any meeting of the joint, standing, interim or special
committee of the Umatilla city council, whenever held, with the intention of
interrupting, disrupting or otherwise interfering with the orderly conduct of
business therein, shall be guilty of a violation.
      2.   Unlawful Legislative Lobbying: A person commits the offense of
unlawful legislative lobbying if, having an interest in the passage or defeat
of a measure being considered by the Umatilla city council, as either an agent
or principal, he knowingly attempts to influence a member of the Umatilla city
council in relation to the measure without first disclosing completely to the
member his/her true interest therein, or that of his/her principal and his/her
own agency therein, shall be guilty of a violation. (Ord. 725, 1-13-2004)
5-1-3: USE OF WEAPONS:
   A.   Discharging A Weapon:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge an air gun, BB gun,
bow and arrow, bean shooter, blowgun, paintball gun, slingshot or other similar
weapon or device on public property or any premises open to the public.
      2.   The offense described in this section, discharging air guns and
nonfirearm weapons, is a class C violation.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any type of
firearm; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall apply to any
police officer while acting in the performance of duties or to any person
lawfully using a firearm in defense of himself or protecting the life of
another or to any person firing on a target range which has been constructed to
standards as determined by pertinent building codes of the city, providing
absolute entrapment of all fire rounds and control of all offensive noises.
      4.   The offense described in this section, discharging of firearms, is a
class A violation. (Ord. 783, 8-5-2013)
5-1-4: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND DECENCY:
   A.   Controlled Substances:
      1.   Any person who delivers, for no consideration, less than five grams
(5 g) of the dried leaves, stems and flowers of the plant Cannabis family
Moraceae is guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine of not less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
      2.   Any person who knowingly or intentionally is in unlawful possession
of a controlled substance in schedule V is guilty of a violation.
      3.   Any person who knowingly or intentionally is in unlawful possession
of less than one avoirdupois ounce of the dried leaves, stems and flowers of
the plant Cannabis family Moraceae is guilty of a violation, punishable by a
fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   B.   Drug Paraphernalia:
      1.   Definitions: For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind which
are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance, as defined by Oregon
Revised Statutes 475.005, in violation of this chapter. It includes, but is not
limited to:
         a.   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
         b.   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances;
         c.   Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use
in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;
         d.   Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;
         e.   Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances;
         f.   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances;
         g.   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed
for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marijuana;
         h.   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
         i.   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances;
         j.   Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
         k.   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
            (1)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic
pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured
metal bowls;
            (2)   Water pipes;
            (3)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
            (4)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
            (5)   "Roach clips", meaning objects used to hold burning material,
such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand;
            (6)   Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;
            (7)   Chamber pipes;
            (8)   Carburetor pipes;
            (9)   Electric pipes;
            (10)   Air driven pipes;
            (11)   Chillums;
            (12)   Bongs;
            (13)   Ice pipes or chillers;
            (14)   Meth tooters or meth pipes.
      2.   Determinations Of Objects: In determining whether an object is drug
paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all
other logically relevant factors, the following:
         a.   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
         b.   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control
of the object, under any city, state, or federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
         c.   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of this chapter;
         d.   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
         e.   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
         f.   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use;
         g.   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
         h.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community;
         i.   Expert testimony concerning its use.
      3.   Possession:
         a.   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent
to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance, as defined by Oregon Revised
Statutes 475.005, in violation of this chapter.
         b.   This section does not apply to manufacturers, practitioners,
pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct was in
accordance with appropriate statutes.
         c.   Any drug paraphernalia used in violation of this section shall be
seized and disposed of in accordance with Oregon Revised Statutes 133.623 to
133.653.
         d.   Any person who knowingly or intentionally is in possession of
unlawful drug paraphernalia commits a class A violation. (Ord. 725, 1-13-2004)
   C.   Urinating In Public:
      1.   No person shall urinate while in, or in view of, any public place,
except in restrooms provided for that purpose.
      2.   Urinating in public is a class B violation. (Ord. 755, 6-1-2010)
5-1-5: CAMPING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Unlawful Camping On Public Property Within The City Limits Of The City
Of Umatilla:
      1.   It shall be illegal to camp on any public property for any purpose
within the city limits of the city of Umatilla outside of an established
campground.
      2.   Organized youth groups may be exempted from this provision in
municipal parks after having obtained permission from the city manager.
   B.   Unlawful Camping On Private Property Within The City Limits Of The City
Of Umatilla:
      1.   It shall be illegal to camp on private property within the city
limits of the city of Umatilla:
         a.   With the intention of establishing a living quarters within a
tent, travel trailer, vehicle or other contrivance outside of an established
home. (See also section 6-2-3-1 of this code.)
         b.   Without the permission or knowledge of the owner of the private
property. (Ord. 806, 9-1-2015)
CHAPTER 2
CURFEW
SECTION:
5-2-1: Curfew Hours for Minors
5-2-2: Parent's Responsibility
5-2-3: Custody of Minors Violating Curfew
5-2-4: Penalty
5-2-1: CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS:
No minor shall be in or upon any street, highway, park, alley or other public
place between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and four o'clock (4:00)
A.M. of the following morning on the days of Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday
and Thursday and between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and four
o'clock (4:00) A.M. of the following morning on Fridays and Saturdays, unless:
   A.   The minor is accompanied by a parent, a guardian or other person
eighteen (18) years of age or over and authorized by the parent or by law to
have care and custody of the minor;
   B.   The minor is then engaged in a lawful pursuit or activity which
requires the presence of the minor in public places during the hours specified
in this Section, such as, working at a place of employment or attending a
school event or in going to or therefrom; or
   C.   The minor is emancipated pursuant to ORS 109.550 to 109.565. (Ord. 573,
5-21-90)
5-2-2: PARENT'S RESPONSIBILITY:
No parent, guardian or person having the care and custody of a minor under the
age of eighteen (18) years shall allow such minor to be in or upon any street,
highway, park, alley or other public place between the hours specified in
Section 5-2-1 of this Chapter, except as otherwise provided in that Section.
(Ord. 573, 5-21-90)
5-2-3: CUSTODY OF MINORS VIOLATING CURFEW:
Any minor who violates Section 5-2-1 of this Chapter may be taken into
temporary custody by a peace officer. As soon as practicable after the minor is
taken into custody, the peace officer shall notify the minor's parent, guardian
or other person responsible for the minor and release the minor to the custody
of the minor's parent, guardian or other person responsible for the minor.
(Ord. 573, 5-21-90)
5-2-4: PENALTY:
A parent, guardian or person having the care and custody of a minor who allows
a minor under the age eighteen (18) years to be in or upon any street, highway,
park, alley or other public place between the hours specified in Section 5-2-
1 of this Chapter, except as otherwise provided in that Section, shall, upon
conviction, be punished by the imposition of a Class C civil fine 1 .  (Ord.
573, 5-21-90; 1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
CHAPTER 3
DOG CONTROL ORDINANCE
SECTION:
5-3-1: Title
5-3-2: Definitions
5-3-3: Personal Property
5-3-4: License Required; Tags
5-3-5: Fees
5-3-6: Rabies Inoculation
5-3-7: Dogs Running At Large
5-3-8: Nuisances
5-3-9: Impoundment Procedures
5-3-10: Killing Certain Dogs
5-3-11: Dangerous Dogs
5-3-12: Parent Responsibility
5-3-13: Penalties
5-3-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the DOG CONTROL ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 755, 6-1-2010)
5-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this section:
   AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE: The defendant has the burden of proving the defense by
a preponderance of the evidence.
   ALLOW: To neglect to restrain, or permit.
   ATTEMPTS TO BITE: The overt actions of a dog which constitute a substantial
step towards the actual biting of one or more persons.
   CITY: The city of Umatilla, Oregon, a municipal corporation.
   COURT: A court of law having jurisdiction of charter and ordinance
violations of the city.
   DOG: Any animal of the canine species.
   GUIDE DOG: Any dog specifically trained for and in actual use as an aide to
a blind person.
   IMPOUNDMENT FEE: The charge made for placing a dog in the animal shelter.
   INVITEE: A person who comes upon the premises at the occupant's invitation,
express or implied, upon business which concerns the occupant, or who comes
upon the premises after the occupant, expressly or impliedly, had led such
person to believe that the premises were intended to be used by the visitor.
For the purpose of this chapter, "invitee" shall also include a licensee (a
person who comes upon the premises for his/her own purposes with the express or
implied consent of the occupant) such as postal carriers, meter readers,
firefighters and police officers.
   LEASH: A cord, chain, strap or other flexible material, not over eight feet
(8') in length, of sufficient strength to control the dog.
   LICENSE: The license required by this chapter and Oregon Revised Statutes
chapter 609.
   NEUTERED DOG: A male dog incapable of producing young.
ON A LEASH: Having a leash, securely attached to the dog and held by the person
in charge of the dog.
   OWN OR OWNING: Having a right of property in a dog, caring for or acting as
the custodian for a dog, or knowingly permitting a dog to remain on or about
premises occupied by that person.
   OWNER: Any person having a right of property in a dog or who harbors a dog
or who has it in his care, or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits a
dog to remain on or about the "owner's" premises.
   PERSON: A human being and, where appropriate, a public or private
corporation, an unincorporated association, a partnership, a government or
governmental instrumentality.
   RUNNING AT LARGE: Any dog shall be considered running at large when it is
off or outside of the premises belonging to the owner or keeper of such dog, or
not under the control of its owner or keeper by means of a leash, or contained
in or on any vehicle.
   SERVICE DOG: Any dog specifically trained for and in actual use as an aide
to a disabled person.
   SPAYED: A female dog incapable of producing young.
   UNLICENSED: Any dog not on the property of its owner and not wearing a
current dog license as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 755, 6-1-2010)
5-3-3: PERSONAL PROPERTY:
Dogs are hereby declared to be personal property. (Ord. 553, 9-12-1988)
5-3-4: LICENSE REQUIRED; TAGS:
   A.   License Required: Every person owning or keeping any dog in the city
which has a set of permanent canine teeth or is six (6) months old, whichever
comes first, and who intends to take the dog off of his/her property, shall not
later than March 1 of each year or within ten (10) days after bringing or
keeping any such dog within the city, shall procure from the city a license for
the dog by paying to the city a license fee. At the time of licensing, the
applicant shall furnish information for such dog to include the breed,
coloring, sex and name. A dog license shall entitle such person to take the
licensed dog off the owner's premises until March 1 next succeeding the date of
said license. (Ord. 585, 7-1-1991)
   B.   Tags: The city shall, at time of issuing a license, supply the
licensee, at no additional charge, with a suitable identification tag, which
shall be fastened by the licensee to a collar and worn about the neck of the
dog at all times. The tag will be of durable substance upon which appears the
name of the city, the year for which the license is valid and the number of
such license.
   C.   Violation: Any dog owner failing to comply with a provision of this
section shall be guilty of a violation. (Ord. 553, 9-12-1988)
5-3-5: FEES:
   A.   Set By Resolution 1 : All rates, fees 2 , or other charges provided for
by this chapter shall be subject to the approval of the city council and may be
established by resolution of the city council.
   B.   Exemption From Fees: Any dog used primarily as a guide for a blind or
deaf person shall be licensed at no cost to the owner. (Ord. 553, 9-12-1988)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 1-12-4 of this code.
2 2. See also subsection 5-3-13D4 of this chapter.
5-3-6: RABIES INOCULATION:
An applicant for a dog license must present a current certificate of rabies
inoculation to the city before the city may issue a license for the dog. If a
dog is too young to receive a rabies shot, the city may issue a license
conditioned upon the city's receipt of a valid rabies inoculation as soon as
mandated and in no case more than six (6) months from licensing. (Ord. 553, 9-
12-1988)
5-3-7: DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE:
Every person owning a dog shall ensure that such dog does not run at large in
the city. Any person owning a dog running at large in the city shall be guilty
of a violation of this section 1 . (Ord. 553, 9-12-1988)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 5-3-13 of this chapter.
5-3-8: NUISANCES:
   A.   Nuisance: A dog is a public nuisance if it:
      1.   Bites or attempts to bite one or more persons;
      2.   Chases a vehicle or person;
      3.   Damages or destroys property of a person other than the owner of the
dog;
      4.   Scatters garbage;
      5.   Trespasses on private property of person(s) other than the owner of
the dog;
      6.   Disturbs any person by frequent or prolonged noises; or
      7.   Is a female in heat and running at large.
   B.   Violation: The owner of a dog shall be guilty of a violation if the dog
is a public nuisance under subsection A of this section.
   C.   Defenses: In a prosecution under this section, it is an affirmative
defense that:
      1.   The dog's owner did not allow the dog to be a public nuisance;
      2.   The dog bites or attempts to bite a person wrongfully provoking or
assaulting the dog's owner; or
      3.   The dog bites a person or attempts to bite a person trespassing upon
premises occupied by the dog's owner. (Ord. 553, 9-12-1988)
5-3-9: IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Impoundment; Citation: When any dog is running at large, is unlicensed,
or is a public nuisance as described by section 5-3-8 of this chapter, the dog
may be impounded or the owner may be cited to court or both.
   B.   Notice Of Impoundment; Redemption; Disposal:
      1.   Notice Of Impoundment; Redemption: Reasonable inquiry shall be made
as to the ownership of any dog impounded and such owner or keeper will be
notified that the dog is impounded, the location of the animal shelter, the
amount of the impoundment fee, and that the dog will be destroyed as provided
herein. Unless claimed by the owner, a dog shall be impounded for at least
three (3) days, if the dog is without a license or identification tag and for
at least five (5) days if it has a license or identification tag. If the dog is
unlicensed, the owner shall also purchase a license and pay the applicable
penalty for failure to have a license. A reasonable effort shall be made to
notify the owner of a dog before the dog is removed from impoundment.
      2.   Disposal: If the owner does not redeem the dog within the allotted
time, it may be disposed of in a humane manner prescribed by the impounding
facility for the city. Any impounded dog may be released to a responsible
person upon assurance that the person will properly care for the dog and not
allow it to be a nuisance, and upon payment of the fees and costs provided in
this section, and upon agreeing to provide a suitable home. The person
thereafter shall be liable as owner of the dog as provided by ordinance.
Provided, however, a dog impounded for being a public nuisance under subsection
5-3-8A1 of this chapter shall not be released to its owner or other person
except by order of the court.
   C.   Confinement Of Biting Dog: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection
B of this section, any dog impounded for biting a person shall be held for not
less than ten (10) days before its redemption or its destruction to determine
if the dog is rabid.
   D.   Fee Reduction: The city council may provide by resolution for lesser
fees or fines under this section for senior citizens. (Ord. 553, 9-12-1988)
5-3-10: KILLING CERTAIN DOGS:
A dog which is displaying obvious or classic symptoms of being rabid or so
vicious that it cannot be impounded without risk to human safety and/or life,
or that is so seriously injured that its suffering warrants its destruction,
may be summarily dispatched by any police officer of the city. (Ord. 755, 6-1-
2010)
5-3-11: DANGEROUS DOGS:
The following provisions of this chapter are to establish a procedure whereby
dogs that pose a reasonably significant threat of causing serious injury to
humans, other animals or property are identified and subjected to precautionary
restrictions before any such serious injury has occurred.
   A.   Reporting Potentially Dangerous Dogs: Any person who observes or has
evidence of behavior described herein shall forthwith notify the police chief
and/or code enforcement officer. (Ord. 755, 6-1-2010)
   B.   Classification Of Levels Of Dangerousness: A dog shall be classified as
potentially dangerous based upon specific behaviors exhibited by the dog. For
purposes of this chapter behaviors establishing various levels of potentially
dangerousness are as follows:
      1.   Level 1 behavior is established if a dog at large is found to
menace, chase, display threatening or aggressive behavior or otherwise threaten
or endanger the safety of any domestic animal.
      2.   Level 2 behavior is established if a dog at large is found to
menace, chase, display threatening or aggressive behavior or otherwise threaten
or endanger the safety of any person or if dog on the owner's premises is found
to menace, chase, display threatening or aggressive behavior or otherwise
threaten or endanger the safety of any invitee.
      3.   Level 3 behavior is established if a dog, while confined,
aggressively bites any person.
      4.   Level 4 behavior is established if a dog, while at large,
aggressively bites or causes physical injury to any person or domestic animal.
      5.   Level 5 behavior is established if:
         a.   A dog, whether or not confined, causes the serious injury or
death of any person;
         b.   A dog, while at large, kills any domestic animal;
         c.   A dog engages in or is found to have been trained to engage in
exhibitions of fighting; or
         d.   A dog that has been classified as a level 4 potentially dangerous
dog repeats the behavior described in subsection B4 of this section after the
owner receives notice of the level 4 classification.
      6.   Notwithstanding subsections B1 through B5 of this section, the
police chief shall have discretionary authority to refrain from classifying a
dog as potentially dangerous, even if the dog has engaged in the behaviors
specified in subsections B1 through B5 of this section, if the police chief
determines that the behavior was the result of the victim abusing or tormenting
the dog or other extenuating circumstances. In any case, no dog shall be
classified as potentially dangerous if the behavior in question was directed
against a trespasser inside any fully enclosed building on private property if
all exterior doors of the building were locked at the time the trespass
occurred, nor if the behavior in question was directed against any person
inside any motor vehicle interior (not including the open bed of a vehicle or
truck) who entered the vehicle without permission of the owner or driver of the
vehicle.
   C.   Identification; Appeals; Restrictions Pending Appeal:
      1.   The police chief shall have authority to determine whether any dog
has engaged in the behaviors specified in this chapter. This determination
shall be based upon an investigation that includes observation of and testimony
about the dog's behavior, including the dog's upbringing and the owner's
control of the dog. These observations and testimony can be provided by
Umatilla police officers, other employees of the city, or by other witnesses
who personally observed the behavior. Each witness shall sign a written
statement attesting to the observed behavior and agree to provide testimony
regarding the dog's behavior if necessary.
      2.   The police chief shall give the dog's owner written notice, by
certified mail or personal service, of the dog's specified behavior, of the
dog's classification as a potentially dangerous dog and of the additional
restrictions applicable to that dog by reason of its classification. If the
owner denies that the behavior in question occurred, the owner may appeal the
police chief's decision to the city administrator by filing a written request
for a hearing with the police chief within ten (10) days of the date the notice
was mailed to the owner by certified mail or the owner was personally served.
      3.   The city administrator shall hold a public hearing on any appeal
from the police chief's decision to classify a dog as potentially dangerous.
The owner and any other persons having relevant evidence concerning the dog's
behavior shall be allowed to present testimony. The city administrator shall
determine whether behavior specified in this chapter was exhibited by the dog
in question. The city administrator shall issue an order containing the city
administrator's determination, which shall be final unless the owner files a
written request for a hearing before the city council with the city
administrator within ten (10) days of the date the city administrator's order
was issued.
      4.   When the city administrator's order is appealed to the city council,
the city council shall hold a public hearing and shall review the police
chief's determination that a dog has engaged in any of the behaviors specified
in this chapter. The city council shall consider all written material that was
available to the police chief and the city administrator, the city
administrator's order and all information offered by the owner or other persons
having evidence concerning the issue of whether the dog engaged in any of the
behaviors specified in this chapter. The city council shall issue an order
continuing its decision, which shall be final.
      5.   Once the owner has received notice of the dog's classification as a
level 1, 2, 3 or 4 potentially dangerous dog pursuant to this chapter, the
owner shall comply with the restrictions specified in the notice until such
time as the police chief's and city administrator's decision may be reversed on
appeal. Failure to comply with the specified restrictions pending the
completion of all appeals shall be a violation of this chapter for which a fine
can be imposed. Additionally, the police chief shall have the authority to
impound the dog pending completion of all appeals.
      6.   To ensure correct identification, all dogs that have been classified
as potentially dangerous shall be marked with a permanent identifying mark. The
police chief shall adopt rules specifying the character, location and manner of
this marking.
   D.   Regulation Of Potentially Dangerous Dogs: In addition to the other
requirements of city ordinances, the owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall
comply with the following regulations:
      1.   If the dog has engaged in level 1 behavior, the dog shall be
restrained by a physical device or structure that prevents the dog from
reaching any public sidewalk or adjoining property whenever that dog is outside
the owner's home and not on a leash. The police chief shall adopt
administrative rules establishing specifications for the required device or
structure.
      2.   If the dog has engaged in level 2 behavior, the owner shall confine
the dog within a secure enclosure whenever the dog is not on a leash or inside
the home of the owner. The secure enclosure must be located so as not to
interfere with the public's legal access to the owner's property.
      3.   If the dog has engaged in level 3 behavior, the owner shall meet the
requirements of subsection D2 of this section, and shall also post warning
signs on the property where the dog is kept, in conformance with administrative
rules to be adopted by the police chief.
      4.   If the dog has engaged in level 4 behavior, the owner shall meet the
requirements of subsections D2 and D3 of this section and shall, additionally,
not permit the dog to be off the owner's property unless the dog is muzzled and
restrained by an adequate leash and under the control of a capable person.
      5.   Any dog that has been found to have engaged in level 5 behavior
shall be euthanized. In addition, the police chief may suspend, for a period of
time specified by the police chief that dog owner's right to be the owner of
any dog in Umatilla, including dogs currently owned by that person.
      6.   In addition to the normal licensing fees, there shall be an annual
fee of three (3) times the normal fee for dogs that have been classified as
potentially dangerous. This additional fee shall be imposed at the time the
license of the potentially dangerous dog expires, and shall be payable at the
time the license is renewed. If any case, no dog shall be classified as
potentially dangerous if the behavior in question was directed against a person
engaged in criminal behavior at the time of the attack.
      7.   Any dog owner failing to comply with a provision of this section
shall be guilty of a violation. (Ord. 553, 9-12-1988)
5-3-12: PARENT RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be no defense of any violation of this chapter when the true or
registered owner of a dog is of such minor age as to prohibit appearing to
answer such charge(s) in court, and upon such occurrence, the parent or
guardian of such minor owner shall be required to appear instead and assume the
full responsibility of the actions of their minor owner. (Ord. 553, 9-12-1988)
5-3-13: PENALTIES:
   A.   Violation Of Specific Sections: Violation of section
5-3-8, "Nuisances", of this chapter is punishable by the imposition of a class
B civil fine, but the fine shall not be less than twenty five dollars ($25.00)
for the first violation and not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
additional violation occurring within six (6) months of a violation of section
5-3-8 of this chapter. In addition to any fines, if a dog has been found to be
a public nuisance under section
5-3-8 of this chapter, the court may order such disposition of the dog as the
court considers necessary for the safety or health of the public. Violation of
section
5-3-4, "License Required; Tags", of this chapter is punishable by the
imposition of a class B civil fine. Violation of section
5-3-7, "Dogs Running At Large", of this chapter is punishable by the imposition
of a class C civil fine. Violation of subsection
5-3-11C, "Identification; Appeals; Restrictions Pending Appeal", or
5-3-11D, "Regulation Of Potentially Dangerous Dogs", of this chapter is
punishable by the imposition of a class A civil fine 1 . (Ord. 553, 9-12-1988;
amd. 1993 Code)
   B.   Separate Offenses: Every full day during which an activity continues to
be conducted in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate
offense.
   C.   Offenses Tried In Municipal Court: Offenses under this section shall be
tried in the municipal court as a violation and not as a crime. As a violation
there is no right to jury trial or court appointed counsel.
   D.   Additional Remedies:
      1.   In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, the city may
sue in a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain a judgment by execution.
      2.   The city may seek an injunction to prohibit a person from violating
this chapter.
      3.   In an action authorized by this section, if the city prevails, it
shall recover reasonable attorney fees to be set by the court in addition to
its costs and disbursements. These fees are recoverable at all levels of trial
and appeal.
      4.   Whenever a fee required by this chapter is not paid when due, the
city recorder shall add a penalty to the fee of an amount equal to ten percent
(10%) of the fee for each month or part thereof during which the fee and
accumulated penalty amounts remain unpaid. The total amount of the fee and
accumulated penalties shall not exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the
original fee. (Ord. 553, 9-12-1988)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
CHAPTER 4
FAILING TO SUPERVISE A MINOR
SECTION:
5-4-1: Title
5-4-2: Prohibited
5-4-3: Affirmative Defense
5-4-4: Penalty
5-4-1: TITLE:
This chapter provides regulations for failing to supervise a minor. (Ord. 756,
6-1-2010)
5-4-2: PROHIBITED:
A person commits the offense of failing to supervise a minor if the person is
the parent, legal guardian or person with legal responsibility for the safety
and welfare of a child under eighteen (18) years of age and the child violates
a provision of this code, Oregon state law or regulation, federal law or rule.
Nothing in this section applies to a child caring agency as defined in Oregon
Revised Statutes 418.205 or to foster parents. (Ord. 756, 6-1-2010)
5-4-3: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE:
In a prosecution of a person for failing to supervise a child under section 5-
4-2 of this chapter, it is an affirmative defense that the person:
   A.   Is the victim of the act that violated a provision of this code;
   B.   Reported the act to the appropriate authorities; or
   C.   Took reasonable steps to control the conduct of the child at the time
the person is alleged to have failed to supervise the child. (Ord. 756, 6-1-
2010)
5-4-4: PENALTY:
The offense described in this chapter, failing to supervise a minor, is a class
A violation.
In addition to any fine or penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter, the court
may order the person to pay any restitution to a victim of the minor's conduct.
The amount of restitution ordered pursuant to this section shall not exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). The municipal court shall credit the
person ordered to pay restitution the actual dollars paid by the minor pursuant
to any juvenile court order or juvenile code agreement. (Ord. 756, 6-1-2010)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Definitions
6-1-2: Administration and Enforcement
6-1-3: General Regulations
6-1-4: Signs and Signals
6-1-5: Bicycles, Rollerskates and Skateboards
6-1-6: Penalties
6-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
In addition to those definitions contained in the Oregon Vehicle Code, ORS
chapters 801 to 822, the following words or phrases, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning, shall mean:
   ALLEY: A street through the middle of a block primarily intended to provide
access to the rear or side of lots or buildings.
   BUS STOP: A designated area in the roadway adjacent to the curb to be
occupied exclusively by buses for layover in operating schedules or waiting for
passengers.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is used or maintained for the
transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit or which is
designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
   CURB: The extreme edge of the roadway.
   DISMANTLED VEHICLE: A vehicle from which parts have been removed, except for
minor repairs (as oil changes, windshield wiper replacements, tire rotations or
the like) made within an eight (8) hour period, or a vehicle which does not
have a current and valid license or a motor vehicle which is unable to propel
itself.
   DWELLING: A building used for occupancy, including eating and sleeping, by a
family. It includes an apartment, mobile home, multi-family dwelling and single
family dwelling.
   FARM TRACTOR: Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use in
agricultural operations for drawing or operating plows, mowing machines and
other farm equipment or implements of husbandry.
   FIXED LOAD VEHICLE: Vehicles with or without motive power that are neither
designed nor used primarily for the transportation of persons or property over
public highways or streets.
   GROSS WEIGHT: The light weight of the vehicle plus the weight of the maximum
load which the vehicle may carry; or the weight of a vehicle or combination of
vehicles, or wheel, or axle, or tandem axles or group of axles, without load
plus the weight of any load thereon.
   HIGHWAY, ROAD or STREET: Every public way, thoroughfare and place, including
bridges, viaducts or other structures used or intended for the use of the
general public for vehicles.
   HOLIDAY: New Year's Day, Martin Luther King's Day, President's Day, Memorial
Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veteran's Day, Thanksgiving Day and the day
after, Christmas Day, Sundays, and any other day proclaimed by the City Council
to be a holiday.
   LIGHT WEIGHT: The weight of a vehicle when fully equipped for moving over
the highway.
   LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or material or freight.
   MOBILE HOME: (Excluding a modular home, prefabricated home and tent
trailer). Trailer or structure that:
   A.   Is designed to be transported or used upon the highways;
   B.   Is capable of being used for human habitation or for business,
commercial or office purposes;
   C.   Is not a travel trailer; and
   D.   Is not a special use trailer.
   MOTOR BUS: Every motor vehicle designed or used for carrying passengers and
their personal baggage and express for compensation, except taxicabs and
vehicles commonly known and used as private passenger vehicles and not operated
for compensation except in the transportation of students to or from school.
   MOTOR HOME: A motor vehicle that:
   A.   Is originally designed, reconstructed or permanently altered to provide
facilities for human habitation; or
   B.   Has a camper permanently attached to it.
   MOTOR TRUCK: Every motor vehicle designed or used for carrying, conveying or
moving over the highways of this State any freight, property, article or thing,
and having a combined weight of vehicle and maximum load to be carried thereon
of more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled or vehicle designed for
self-propulsion.
   MOTORCYCLE: Any self-propelled cycle.
   OFF-ROAD VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle, except licensed road vehicles, used off
public roads for recreational purposes.
   PARK or PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading property or passengers.
   PASSENGER TRANSPORT VEHICLE: A worker transport bus.
   PERSON: Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
   PUBLIC HIGHWAY: Every street, alley, road, highway and thoroughfare used by
the public and dedicated or appropriated to public use.
   PUBLIC WAY: Every way or place of whatever nature open to the use of the
public, including but not limited to roads, streets, alleys, lanes, trails,
beaches, parks and recreational use areas owned or operated by the City for use
by the general public.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vacation trailer or other unit with or without
motive power which is designed for human occupancy and to be used temporarily
for recreational or emergency purposes and has a floor space of less than two
hundred twenty (220) square feet, excluding built-in equipment such as
wardrobes, closets, cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures and bath or toilet
rooms.
   ROAD: The entire right of way of any public or private way that provides
ingress to or egress from property by means of vehicles or other means or that
provides travel between places by means of vehicles. "Road" includes, but is
not limited to:
   A.   Ways described as streets, highways, thoroughways or alleys;
   B.   Road related structures that are in the right of way such as tunnels,
culverts or similar structures; and
   C.   Structures that provide for continuity of the right of way such as
bridges.
   ROADWAY: Portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder. In the event a highway includes
two (2) or more separate roadways the term "highway" shall refer to any such
roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
   SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and
operated for the transportation of children to or from school, or privately
owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or
from school, or a bus operated for transporting children to and from church or
an activity or function authorized by a church, or any vehicle used in the
transportation of persons for hire by a nonprofit entity referred to in ORS
767.025(15).
   SEMI-TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power (including pole or pipe
dollies) which:
   A.   Has a combined weight of vehicle and maximum load to be carried thereon
or more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds;
   B.   Is designed for carrying property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle; and
   C.   Is so constructed that some part of its weight and the weight of its
load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
   SHOULDER: Portion of the highway, whether paved or unpaved, contiguous to
the roadway primarily for use by pedestrians, for the accommodation of stopped
vehicles, for emergency use and for lateral support of base and surface
courses.
   SIDEWALK: A. On the side of the highway which has a shoulder, that portion
of the highway between the outside lateral line of the shoulder and the
adjacent property line capable of being used by a pedestrian; or
   B.   On the side of a highway which has no shoulder, that portion of the
highway between the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line
capable of being used by a pedestrian.
   SPECIAL USE TRAILER: A trailer described under any of the following:
   A.   A trailer that is eight feet (8') or less in width and of any length
and that is used for commercial or business purposes.
   B.   A trailer that is used temporarily on a construction site for office
purposes only.
   STREET: Every public way, thoroughfare and place, including bridges,
viaducts and other structures within the City used or intended for the use of
the general public for vehicles.
   TAXICAB STAND: A designated area in the roadway adjacent to the curb set
aside for taxicabs to stand or wait for passengers.
   THOROUGHWAY: Every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or
occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to
or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be
determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway,
street or roadway.
   TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing
vehicle.
   TRAVEL TRAILER: (Including a tent trailer). A trailer that:
   A.   Is of a type designed to be used on the highways.
   B.   Is capable of being used for human habitation.
   C.   Is not more than eight feet (8') wide and is six feet (6') or more in
height from floor to ceiling.
   D.   Except in the case of a tent trailer, has four (4) permanent walls when
it is in the usual travel position.
   TRUCK TRACTOR: Any motor vehicle used or designed for use with a semitrailer
for carrying, conveying or moving over the highways any freight, property,
article or thing, and having a combined weight of vehicle and maximum load to
be carried thereon of more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds.
   TRUCK TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power (except a tractor trailer)
which:
   A.   Has a combined weight of vehicle and maximum load to be carried thereon
of more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds;
   B.   Is designed for carrying property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle; and
   C.   Is so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing
vehicle.
   UTILITY TRAILER: Every vehicle designed like a balanced trailer having a
length not in excess of fifteen feet (15') and a gross weight not in excess of
eight thousand (8,000) pounds.
   VEHICLE: Every mechanical device moving by any power over the highways,
except devices that:
   A.   Move exclusively on stationary rail tracks; or
   B.   Are powered exclusively by human power. (Ord. 576, 8-22-90)
6-1-2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Powers of the City Council: Subject to State laws, the City Council
shall exercise all local traffic authority and may designate by ordinance or
resolution any parking and traffic controls, which shall become effective upon
passage of the ordinance or resolution, whether or not any traffic control
devices, parking signs or designations are installed. Parking and traffic
controls include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Designation of through streets.
      2.   Designation of one-way streets.
      3.   Designation of truck routes.
      4.   Designation of parking meter zones and the denomination of coins to
be used or deposited in parking meters.
      5.   Restriction of the use of certain streets by any class or kind of
vehicle to protect the streets from damage or excess traffic.
      6.   Authorization of greater maximum weights or lengths than specified
by State law for vehicles using City streets.
      7.   Initiation of proceedings to change speed zones.
      8.   Revision of speed limits in parks.
      9.   Temporary closure or blocking of streets.
      10.   Designation of streets, or portions thereof, upon which either
parking or standing or both shall be prohibited, or prohibited during certain
hours.
      11.   Designation of the time limit for legal parking in limited parking
areas.
      12.   Designation of the angle of parking if other than parallel to the
curb.
      13.   Designation of city owned or leased property on which public
parking will be permitted.
      14.   Designation of bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and loading
zones.
      15.   Designation of turn lanes and turning regulations at intersections
and driveways.
      16.   Designation of marked pedestrian crosswalks and safety zones.
      17.   Designation of play streets and the hours during which they may be
so used.
   B.   Authority Of Police And Fire Officers:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the chief of police and of the police
officers to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   In the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or
to safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic as conditions may
require notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
      3.   Members of the Umatilla rural fire department, when at the scene of
a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic. (Ord. 576, 8-22-
1990)
6-1-3: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Damaging Sidewalks And Curbs:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive on a sidewalk or roadside
planting strip area except to cross at a permanent or temporary driveway.
      2.   No person shall place any dirt, wood or other material in the gutter
or space next to the curb of any street with the intention of using the same as
a driveway.
      3.   No person shall remove or damage in any way any portion of any curb
or move a motor vehicle or thing onto a curb or sidewalk without first
obtaining authorization and posting a bond, if required. Any person who
violates the provisions of this subsection A shall be held responsible for any
and all damage in addition to any penalties imposed upon conviction.
   B.   Obstructions On Sidewalks And Streets Prohibited: No person shall park
or leave on any street, including an alley, parking strip, sidewalk, or curb,
any vehicle or any vehicle part, trailer, box, ware, merchandise of any
description, or any other thing that in any way impedes traffic or obstructs
the view, except as is allowed by this chapter or other ordinances of this
city.
   C.   Removing Glass And Debris: Any party to a collision or other vehicular
accident or any person causing broken glass or other debris to be upon any
street shall immediately remove or cause to be removed from such street all
glass and other foreign substance.
   D.   Motor Truck Use Of City Streets: No person shall drive a motor truck
over any city street unless the street has been designated as a truck route.
Motor trucks may use city streets for the specific purpose of picking up and
delivering goods and property at any business establishment or residence
located on other than a designated truck route.
   E.   Play Streets: No person shall drive a vehicle upon a street during the
hours of the day when it has been designated as a play street unless an
occupant of the vehicle has a business or residence on the street. (Ord. 576,
8-22-1990)
   F.   Unlawful Transfer:
      1.   A person commits the offense of unlawful transfer on a highway if
the person:
         a.   While a driver or passenger in a vehicle in a traveling lane on a
highway within the boundaries of the city of Umatilla, creates a traffic hazard
by giving or relinquishing possession or control of, or allowing another person
in the vehicle to give or relinquish possession or control of, any money or
tangible personal property to a pedestrian; or
         b.   While a pedestrian, creates a traffic hazard by accepting,
receiving or retaining possession or control of any money or tangible personal
property from a driver or passenger in a vehicle in a traveling lane on a
highway within the boundaries of the city of Umatilla.
      2.   This subsection does not apply if the vehicle or person is:
         a.   Legally parked out of the travel lane.
         b.   A police officer, as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 161.015,
acting in their official capacities.
         c.   A person or vehicle participating in a "pedestrian activity" as
defined in OAR 734, division 58, for which a permit has been issued by the
Oregon department of transportation, so long as all terms of such permit are
being met.
         d.   A person or vehicle participating in an event approved by the
city council where event fees, passes, documents or other materials are passed
between event staff and vehicle operators in the conduct of the event and the
event is limited to a specific date, time and location. (Ord. 812, 7-5-2016)
6-1-4: SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
   A.   Unlawful Tampering: No unauthorized person shall move, remove, deface,
tamper with, or alter the position of any barrier, marker, parking sign or
parking designation.
   B.   Private Marking Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person to
letter, mark or paint in any manner any letters, marks or signs on any
sidewalk, curb, street or alley, or to post on a parking strip anything
designed or intended to prohibit or restrict parking in front of any sidewalk,
dwelling, house, business, or in any alley, except by resolution of the city
council.
   C.   Existing Signs And Designations: All official parking signs, parking
designations and traffic control devices existing at the time of enactment of
this chapter are approved and shall continue to be in full force and effect.
(Ord. 576, 8-22-1990)
6-1-5: BICYCLES, ROLLER SKATES AND SKATEBOARDS:
   A.   Parental Responsibility: No parent of any minor child and no guardian
of any minor ward shall authorize or knowingly permit any such minor child or
ward to violate any of the provisions of this section.
   B.   Bicycle Regulations:
      1.   Secondhand Dealer 1  Records: Every person engaged in the business
of buying secondhand bicycles shall maintain a record of every bicycle
purchased, giving the name and address of the person from whom purchased, a
description of such bicycle by name or make, the frame number thereof, and the
license number, if any, found thereon.
      2.   Rentals: A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for
rent unless such bicycle is equipped with all equipment required by the motor
vehicle laws of Oregon 2 .
      3.   Riding On Sidewalk Prohibited: No person shall ride or operate any
bicycle upon a sidewalk along Sixth Street or along the east side of Willamette
Avenue between John Day Street and the McNary Golf Course.
      4.   Racing Regulated: No person shall engage in, or cause others to be
engaged in, any bicycle racing upon the streets or other public property in
this city without first obtaining a permit from the chief of police.
      5.   Parking Regulation: No person shall park a bicycle upon a street or
sidewalk except in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or curb
in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
   C.   Rollerskating And Skateboarding Prohibited: No person shall rollerskate
or skateboard on sidewalks along Sixth Street or along the east side of
Willamette Avenue between John Day Street and the McNary Golf Course. (Ord.
576, 8-22-1990)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 3, chapter 4 of this code.
2 2. ORS 815.280.
6-1-6: PENALTIES:
Violation of any provisions of this chapter is punishable by the imposition of
a class C civil fine 1 . (Ord. 576, 8-22-1990; amd. 1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 1, chapter 4 of this code. 
CHAPTER 2
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Method Of Parking
6-2-2: Emergency Removal Of Vehicles
6-2-3: Prohibited Parking
6-2-3-1: Illegally Using Or Renting A Recreational Vehicle For Living Quarters;
Permits
6-2-4: Time Limits
6-2-5: Loading Zone
6-2-6: Parking Zone Designation
6-2-7: Buses And Taxicabs
6-2-8: Parking Lights
6-2-9: Public Vehicle Exemption
6-2-10: Impoundment Of Vehicles
6-2-11: Parking Citations And Owner Responsibility
6-2-12: Penalties
6-2-1: METHOD OF PARKING:
Where parking spaces are designated on a street or public lot, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle other than in the indicated direction of traffic flow
and within a single marked space, unless the size or shape of such vehicle
makes compliance impossible. (Ord. 576, 8-22-1990)
6-2-2: EMERGENCY REMOVAL OF VEHICLES:
Whenever the driver of a vehicle discovers that such vehicle is parked
immediately in front of or close to a building to which the fire department has
been summoned, the driver shall immediately remove such vehicle from the area
unless otherwise directed by police or fire officers. (Ord. 576, 8-22-1990)
6-2-3: PROHIBITED PARKING:
In addition to provisions of the motor vehicle laws of Oregon prohibiting
parking, no person shall park:
   A.   Service Stations, Car Washes: On any curb line adjacent to property
used for gasoline service stations, or car washes within the city.
   B.   Police Station: Forty feet (40') along the curb before the entrance to
the city police station except for police vehicles.
   C.   Areas Designated By Resolution: Additional areas designated by
resolution of the city council as "no parking at any time".
   D.   Alleys: A vehicle in any alley except to load or unload persons or
materials not to exceed twenty (20) consecutive minutes in any two (2) hour
period.
   E.   Streets: A vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of:
      1.   Displaying such vehicle for sale.
      2.   Greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an
emergency.
      3.   Selling merchandise from a vehicle except in a duly established
marketplace or when so authorized or licensed under the ordinance of this city.
   F.   Private Property: A vehicle upon private property without the consent
of the owners or persons in charge of such private property.
   G.   Trucks, Tractors, Trailers: A farm tractor, fixed load vehicle, motor
truck, semitrailer, special use trailer, trailer, truck tractor and truck
trailer upon any public way, highway, road, roadway, shoulder, sidewalk, street
or thoroughway adjacent to any church, dwelling, hospital, park, playground or
school.
   H.   Trucks, Trailers At Intersections: A horse trailer, motor home, motor
truck, passenger transport vehicle, recreational vehicle, semitrailer, special
use trailer, truck tractor, truck trailer or utility trailer within twenty feet
(20') of an intersection.
   I.   Dismantled Vehicles: A dismantled vehicle on any city street for more
than twelve (12) hours. (Ord. 576, 8-22-1990)
   J.   Certain Parked And/Or Stored Vehicles: Any vehicle that does not have
an unexpired registration sticker lawfully affixed to it shall not be parked or
stored on private property other than in completely enclosed buildings or sight
obscuring fence. It shall be a defense to any prosecution under this subsection
that the defendant lawfully conducted a business involving the parking and
storing of vehicles, such as an auto service station, truck stop, car lot,
automotive or truck repair, junkyard, towing and wrecking service, etc., on the
real property where the offense occurred. The owner or lessor of the property
where a parked or stored vehicle is currently being repaired shall have thirty
(30) days to complete repairs and may request a thirty (30) day extension from
the city administrator if proof of repair progress is presented. (Ord. 644, 6-
4-1996)
   K.   Private Mailbox: A vehicle within ten feet (10') of a private mailbox
during the hours of mail delivery. (Ord. 651, 3-4-1997)
6-2-3-1: ILLEGALLY USING OR RENTING A RECREATIONAL VEHICLE FOR LIVING QUARTERS;
PERMITS:
   A.   A person commits the offense of illegally using a recreational vehicle
for living quarters if:
      1.   The person uses a recreational vehicle for human habitation,
including eating and sleeping, for more than three (3) days within a six (6)
month period without a permit for using a recreational vehicle for living
quarters issued by the city.
      2.   The person uses a recreational vehicle for human habitation,
including eating and sleeping, in violation of a permit for using a
recreational vehicle for living quarters issued by the city.
      3.   The person is the owner of a recreational vehicle used for human
habitation, including eating and sleeping, for more than three (3) days within
a six (6) month period without a permit for using a recreational vehicle for
living quarters issued by the city.
      4.   The person is the owner of a recreational vehicle used for human
habitation, including eating and sleeping, in violation of a permit for using a
recreational vehicle for living quarters issued by the city.
   B.   A person commits the offense of illegally charging rent for using a
recreational vehicle for living quarters if the person charges a fee for
parking or living in the recreational vehicle in connection with the location
where it is used as living quarters.
   C.   A person commits the offense of illegal utility connection if the
person connects the free flowing discharge end of a supply line connected to
city water to the water tank of a recreational vehicle without first obtaining
a permit and approval of the plumbing inspector. This section does not prevent
a person from filling a water tank with city water so long as there is an air
gap separation between the free flowing discharge end of the water supply line
to the water tank.
   D.   For purposes of this section, a "recreational vehicle" is a vehicle
with or without motive power, which is capable of being used for human
habitation, and is used temporarily for living quarters as sleeping and eating.
A "recreational vehicle" includes a camper, mobile home, motor home, a
recreational vehicle as defined by Oregon Revised Statutes 801.407, and a
travel trailer.
   E.   This section does not apply to recreational vehicles parked in
recreational vehicle parks, public or private campgrounds, or other property
that is licensed or permitted for the parking of recreational vehicles under
federal or state laws or regulations or by county or city ordinance.
   F.   The city administrator or his or her designee shall provide for the
issuance of permits for using recreational vehicles as living quarters in a
manner consistent with this section. There shall be two (2) classes of permits,
a general permit and a construction site permit.
   G.   A general permit will allow living in a recreational vehicle for up to
fourteen (14) days during any six (6) month period. A general permit may be
extended for up to fourteen (14) days during any one year period. The first
general permit issued to a person in a six (6) month period is free. A fee will
be charged for the extension period.
   H.   A construction site permit will allow living in a recreational vehicle
at a construction site for up to one hundred eighty (180) days. A construction
site permit may only be issued and is only valid if there is a valid building
permit for the construction at the site where the recreational vehicle is to be
or is parked. A construction site permit may be extended for up to one hundred
eighty (180) days or the length of extension of the building permit whichever
is less. If the recreational vehicle is to be connected to city water and
sewer, any system development charges applicable to the construction site must
be paid before such connection is made. Sewer and water connections must meet
applicable plumbing code requirements and be approved by the plumbing
inspector. Upon completion of the project or the expiration or invalidation of
the permit, any temporary sewer or water connection must be immediately
removed, subject to approval of the plumbing inspector.
   I.   The city council shall set the fees for issuance of permits for using
recreational vehicles as living quarters by resolution.
   J.   It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution of the owner of a
recreational vehicle under subsections A2 and A4 of this section that the owner
did not authorize the use of the vehicle, either expressly or by implication.
(Ord. 715, 6-4-2002)
6-2-4: TIME LIMITS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or to permit a vehicle to
remain parked along the street in any block on Sixth Street for more than two
(2) consecutive hours between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
P.M., except on Sundays and Holidays.
   B.   No person shall park any vehicle on any street of the City for a period
of time longer than forty eight (48) hours.
   C.   The moving of a vehicle within a block shall not extend the permissible
time limit for that vehicle. (Ord. 576, 8-22-1990)
6-2-5: LOADING ZONE:
No driver of a vehicle shall stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time
longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers, not to
exceed fifteen (15) minutes, or stand any freight carrying vehicle for a period
of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials, not to
exceed thirty (30) minutes, between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. at any place designated as a loading zone and marked as
such, or in any of the following designated places:
   A.   At any place not to exceed one hundred feet (100') along the curb
before the entrance to any hospital or medical clinic at any time.
   B.   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time that the
theater is open for business.
   C.   At any place not to exceed forty feet (40') along the curb before the
entrance to City Hall.
   D.   At any place not to exceed one hundred feet (100') along the curb
before the entrance to any school or kindergarten.
   E.   At any place not to exceed forty feet (40') along the curb before the
entrance to a liquor store. (Ord. 576, 8-22-1990)
6-2-6: PARKING ZONE DESIGNATION:
The curbing in "no parking zones" and the curbing in "loading zones" shall be
painted yellow. (Ord. 589, 3-17-1992)
6-2-7: BUSES AND TAXICABS:
   A.   Stopping, Standing Or Parking: The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not
stand or park such vehicle upon any street in any business district at any
place other than at a bus stand or taxicab stand, respectively, except that
this provision shall not prevent the driver of any taxicab from temporarily
stopping for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or
unloading of passengers.
   B.   Restricted Use Of Stands: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle
other than a bus in a bus stand or other than a taxicab on a taxicab stand,
except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when
such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or
about to enter such zone. (Ord. 576, 8-22-1990)
6-2-8: PARKING LIGHTS:
No lights need be displayed on any vehicle parked in accordance with this
Chapter on a street where there is sufficient light to reveal a person or
object at a distance of at least five hundred feet (500') from such vehicle.
(Ord. 576, 8-22-1990)
6-2-9: PUBLIC VEHICLE EXEMPTION:
The provisions of this Chapter regulating the parking or standing of vehicles
shall not apply to any vehicle of a City department or public utility
necessarily in use for construction or repair work, or to any vehicle owned by
the United States while in use for the collection, transportation, or delivery
of United States Mail. (Ord. 576, 8-22-1990)
6-2-10: IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Grounds: Without prior notice to the owner of motor vehicle, a police
officer may order a vehicle impounded until a person with right to possession
of the vehicle complies with the conditions for release or the vehicle is
ordered released by the Municipal Judge:
      1.   When the police officer reasonably believes that a person is driving
an uninsured vehicle in violation of ORS 806.010.
      2.   When the police officer reasonably believes the driver's license of
the person driving the vehicle is suspended or revoked under the terms of the
Oregon Motor Vehicle Code.
      3.   When the police officer has arrested the driver for driving under
the influence of intoxicants, unless a person who is entitled to lawful
possession of the motor vehicle requests in writing that the motor vehicle be
placed in the custody of a competent person present at the scene of the arrest.
      4.   When the vehicle is illegally parked on a public or private street
in a conspicuously restricted space, zone or traffic lane where parking is
limited or prohibited to designated classes of vehicles or periods of time, or
at any time when the vehicle interferes with the intended use of such space,
zone or traffic lane.
      5.   When the vehicle obstructs the entrance of any post office or postal
station, or is within ten feet (10') of a private mailbox during the hours of
delivery.
      6.   When the Municipal Judge orders the impoundment of a vehicle used in
committing a traffic or parking violation for which an unserved warrant or
citation is on file with the Municipal Court.
      7.   When the police officer reasonably believes the vehicle operator is
driving without driving privileges in violation of the Oregon Vehicle Code,
except where the operator's driver's license is invalid for the sole reason of
being expired for less than one year.
      8.   When the police officer reasonably believes that a firearm has been
discharged from the vehicle within the last forty eight (48) hours.
   B.   Impoundment Notice:
      1.   Notice: Written notice that the vehicle has been impounded along
with an explanation of procedures for the vehicle's release shall be delivered
to the operator, if present at the impound scene, and by certified mail within
forty eight (48) hours of the removal, to the owners of the vehicle and any
lessors or security interest holders as shown in the records of the Department
of Transportation. The notice shall state that the vehicle has been taken into
custody and shall give the location of the vehicle and describe procedures for
release of the vehicle and for obtaining a hearing for its release. The 48-hour
period under this subsection does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays.
      2.   Form Of Notice: Any notice given under this Section after a vehicle
is taken into custody and removed shall state all of the following:
         a.   That the vehicle has been taken into custody and removed, that
the vehicle has been impounded by the Police Department and the ordinance under
which the vehicle has been impounded.
         b.   The location of the vehicle or the telephone number and address
of the appropriate party that will provide that information.
         c.   That the vehicle is subject to towing and storage charges,
including the amount for towing and the daily storage charges.
         d.   That the vehicle and its contents are subject to a lien for
payment of the towing and storage charges and the vehicle and its contents will
be sold to cover the charges if the charges are not paid by a date of time
period specified in the notice.
         e.   That the owner, lawful possessor or person having a legal
interest in the vehicle and its contents is entitled to a prompt hearing to
contest the validity of taking the vehicle into custody and removing it and to
contest the reasonableness of the charges for towing and storage if a hearing
is requested.
         f.   The time within which a hearing must be requested and the method
for requesting a hearing.
         g.   That the vehicle and its contents may be immediately reclaimed by
presentation to the Police Department of satisfactory proof of ownership or
right to possession and proof of liability insurance or other proof of
compliance with financial responsibility requirements of the Oregon Vehicle
Code, and payment of the towing and storage charges to the appropriate towing
business or by depositing cash security or a bond equal to the charges with the
Municipal Court. (Ord. 638, 2-6-1996)
   C.   Immediate Release: A vehicle impounded under subsection A of this
Section shall be released to a person entitled to lawful possession upon proof
of compliance with financial responsibility requirements for the vehicle,
payment of the City impound fee and payment of any towing and storage charges.
Proof shall be presented to the Police Department, which shall authorize the
person storing the vehicle to release it upon payment of the charges. (Ord.
615, 3-1-1994)
   D.   Request For Hearing: A person entitled to lawful possession of or
having a legal interest in a vehicle or its contents impounded under subsection
A of Section 6-2-10 may request a hearing to contest the validity of the
impoundment. An oral or written request must be made within five (5) business
days of when notice of impoundment was mailed or delivered. The request shall
be made to the Municipal Court. (Ord. 638, 2-6-1996)
   E.   Hearing Scheduled: When a timely request for a hearing is made, a
hearing shall be held before the Municipal Judge. The hearing shall be set for
four (4) calendar days after the request is received, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays, but may be postponed at the request of the person asking
for the hearing. If the person requesting the hearing does not appear at the
scheduled hearing, the Municipal Judge may enter an order supporting the
impound and assessment of the impound fee and the towing and storage cost.
   F.   Proof At Hearing: The Chief of Police shall have the burden of proving
by a preponderance of the evidence that there were reasonable grounds for
impounding the vehicle in violation of subsection A of this Section. The police
officer who ordered the vehicle impounded may submit an affidavit to the
Municipal Judge in lieu of making a personal appearance at the hearing.
   G.   Court Approves Impound: If the Municipal Judge finds that the
impoundment of the vehicle was proper, the Municipal Judge shall enter an order
supporting the removal and shall find that the owner or person entitled to
possession of the vehicle is liable for usual and customary towing and storage
costs plus the impoundment fee. The Municipal Judge may also find the owner or
person entitled to possession of the vehicle liable for the costs of the
hearing.
   H.   Court Disapproves Impound: If the Municipal Judge finds that
impoundment of the vehicle was improper, the Municipal Judge shall order the
vehicle released to the person entitled to possession and shall enter a finding
that the owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle is not liable
for any impound fee, towing or storage costs resulting from the impoundment. If
there is a lien on the vehicle for towing and storage charges, the Municipal
Judge shall order it paid by the City.
   I.   Setting Fees: The amount of the impound fee referred to in subsection C
of this Section and the amount of the hearing fee referred to in subsection G
above shall be set by resolution of the Council. (Ord. 615, 3-1-1994)
   J.   Lien: A person who, at the request of a police officer, takes a vehicle
into custody under subsection A of Section 6-2-10 or the City if it retains
custody of the vehicle, shall have a lien on the vehicle and its contents for
its towing and storage charges as provided in subsection I of Section 6-2-10,
may retain possession of the vehicle and its contents until the charges are
paid, and may sell the vehicle and its contents at public auction to satisfy
the lien. The lien that attaches to the vehicle and its contents shall be
foreclosed as authorized by Oregon lien law. (Ord. 638, 2-6-1996)
   K.   Cumulative Remedies: Impounding a vehicle does not preclude issuance or
enforcement of a citation for violation of a provision of Title 6 of the City
Code. (Ord. 615, 3-1-1994)
6-2-11: PARKING CITATIONS AND OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Form Of Citation: In all prosecutions for any parking violation of any
provision of this Title, it shall be sufficient to charge the defendant by an
unsworn written notice that clearly states:
      1.   The date, place and nature of the charge;
      2.   The time and place for defendant's appearance in court;
      3.   The name of the issuing officer; and
      4.   The license number of the vehicle.
   B.   Traffic Infraction Procedure: A duplicate original of the notice shall
serve as the complaint in the case when it is filed with the court. In all
other respects the procedure now provided by law for traffic infractions shall
be followed, but ORS 810.365 does not apply. The officer need not have observed
the act of parking, but need only have observed that the car was parked in
violation of this Title.
   C.   Citation Issued Compliance:
      1.   Citation Compliance: The citation provided for in subsection A of
this Section, shall either be delivered to the defendant or placed in a
conspicuous place upon the vehicle involved in the parking violation. The
citation shall instruct the operator to answer to the charge or pay the penalty
imposed within fourteen (14) days, during specific hours, and at specific
place.
      2.   Failure To Comply: If the operator does not respond to a parking
citation attached to the vehicle within ten (10) working days, the Court Clerk
shall send a letter to the owner of the vehicle informing the owner of the
violation and giving notice that if the citation is disregarded for a period of
thirty (30) days:
         a.   The fine will be doubled; and
         b.   If the vehicle has four (4) or more outstanding citations or one
hundred dollars ($100.00) or more in unpaid fines, it may be impounded, and an
impounded vehicle shall not be released until all outstanding fines and charges
are paid.
   D.   Owner Responsibility: The owner of a vehicle that is in violation of a
parking restriction shall be responsible for the offense unless the operator
used the vehicle without the owner's consent.
   E.   Registered Owner Presumption: In a proceeding charging violation of a
parking restriction against a vehicle owner, proof that the vehicle was
registered to the defendant at the time of the violation constitutes a
presumption that the defendant was the owner. (Ord. 576, 8-22-1990)
6-2-12: PENALTIES:
Violation of any sections of this Chapter is punishable by the imposition of a
Class C civil fine 1 . (Ord. 576, 8-22-1990; 1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
SECTION:
6-3-1: Schedule I - Stop Streets
6-3-2: Schedule II - One-Way Streets
6-3-3: Schedule III - Truck Traffic
6-3-4: Schedule IV - Speed Limits
6-3-5: Schedule V - No Parking At All Times
6-3-6: Schedule VI - Parking Time Limits
6-3-7: Schedule VII - Diagonal Parking
6-3-8: Schedule VIII - Size Limits Of Vehicles
6-3-9: Schedule IX - Bus Loading Zones
6-3-10: Schedule X - Traffic-Control Devices
6-3-11: Schedule XI - Bike Paths
6-3-1: SCHEDULE I - STOP STREETS:
 
A. Stop Streets:
   Stop Streets                    Location          Res. No.
   Cliff Street and Martin Drive   Northeast corner  11-81
   Naches Court and Naches Avenue  Northeast corner  19-80
   Walla Walla Street and          Northeast corner  19-80
   Naches Avenue
B. Two-Way Stop:
   Stop Streets                                      Res. No.
   Walla Walla Street and Cowlitz Avenue             26-86
   2nd Street and Lewis Street                       23-89
C. Four-Way Stop:
   Stop Streets                                      Res. No.
   Walla Walla Street and Deschutes Avenue           26-86
   8th Street and "I" Street                         3-88
 
6-3-2: SCHEDULE II - ONE-WAY STREETS:
 
Street         Direction  Res. No.
Yakima Street  Easterly   6-76
 
6-3-3: SCHEDULE III - TRUCK TRAFFIC:
Through truck traffic is prohibited on the following:
 
Streets                              Res. No.
Willamette Avenue and intersections  6-81
 
6-3-4: SCHEDULE IV - SPEED LIMITS:
 
Street          From                         Speed   Res. No.
Powerline Road  Highway 730 to Tyler Avenue  35 mph  11-96
 
(Ord. 667, 12-2-1997)
6-3-5: SCHEDULE V - NO PARKING AT ALL TIMES:
No parking at any place not to exceed fifty feet (50') along the curb before
the entrance to the bus depot.
 
Street  Restricted Area  Res. No.
Apple Court                    Except in designated parking spaces        14-88
Birch Court                    Except in designated parking spaces        14-88
Cedar Court                    Except in designated parking spaces        14-88
                               Between Willamette Avenue and Chinook
Columbia Street                Avenue, a distance of approximately 1,055  27-90
                               feet
Driftwood Court                Except in designated parking spaces        14-88
Elderberry Court               Except in designated parking spaces        14-88
Fir Court                      Except in designated parking spaces        14-88
Ginger Court                   Except in designated parking spaces        14-88
Hemlock Court                  Except in designated parking spaces        14-88
Ilex Court                     Except in designated parking spaces        14-88
Juniper Court                  Except in designated parking spaces        14-88
Kiwi Court                     Except in designated parking spaces        14-88
Klickitat Street (north side)  From Umatilla Avenue to Cowlitz Avenue     19-85
Larch Court                    Except in designated parking spaces        14-88
Riverview Lane                 Entire block                               11-81
6th Street                     Southern side of 6th Street between "B"    9-79
                               and "C" Streets
                               From Jane Street east to the City limits   6-82
                               Three passenger vehicle only parking
                               spaces be created along the southerly
                               curb of 6th Street beginning at a point
                               12 feet from the "L" Street curb and
                               extending 72 feet east. The remainder of   11-89
                               the curb extending to Switzler Avenue
                               shall prohibit parking at any time,
                               except for one 24 feet space beginning 12
                               foot from the Switzler Avenue curb.
 
6-3-6: PARKING TIME LIMITS:
   A.   Certain Times Limited Parking:
 
Street                  From                          Time             Res. No.
Columbia Street (north  Chinook Street 125 feet west
side)                   to the McNary School          2:30PM – 4:00PM04-92
                        entrance
 
   B.   15 Minute Limited Parking:
      1.   At any place not to exceed 40 feet along the curb before the
entrance to the auto parts store.
      2.   At any place not to exceed 40 feet along the curb before the
entrance to the library.
      3.   At any place not to exceed 40 feet along the curb before the
entrance to the fire station. (Res. 6-82, 10-5-81)
6-3-7: SCHEDULE VII - DIAGONAL PARKING:
For further terms and conditions regarding each of the following diagonal
parking areas, please see corresponding resolution:
 
Streets                           Location                             Res. No.
"G" Street (east and west sides)  South of 8th Street                  21-79
"G" Street (west side)            Between 6th Street and 7th Street    6-80
                                  From northeast corner of its
7th Street (north side)           intersection with "F" Street to a    19-79
                                  point of 100 feet easterly from the
                                  intersection
7th Street (south side)           Between Sloan Street and "L" Street  7-80
8th Street (south side)           Adjacent to Umatilla Hospital        21-79
 
6-3-8: SCHEDULE VIII - SIZE LIMITS OF VEHICLES:
No vehicles over seven feet (7') wide, twenty five feet (25') long or twelve
feet (12') high shall be permitted to park:
 
Street        From                        Time                        Res. No.
              East boundary line of the
6th Street    City Cemetery east to 100   6:00AM - 6:00PM 7 days per
(north side)  feet past the intersection  week                        6-82
              of Jane Street and 6th
              Street
6th Street    "B" Street to the           6:00AM - 6:00PM 7 days per
(south side)  intersection of 6th Street  week                        6-82
              and Old River Road
 
6-3-9: SCHEDULE IX - BUS LOADING ZONES:
 
Streets     Location                                                   Res. No.
6th Street  South curb of 6th Street intersecting Switzler Avenue for  9-90
            a distance of 94 feet
 
6-3-10: SCHEDULE X - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES:
 
Intersection              Direction  Res. No.
"I" Street and 8th Street Northbound 16-82
                          Southbound 19-82
 
6-3-11: SCHEDULE XI - BIKE PATHS:
 
Bike Path                               Res. No.
Columbia Street (north and south sides) 18-90
 
CHAPTER 4
PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Permit Required
6-4-2: Application for Permit
6-4-3: Permit Issuance or Denial
6-4-4: Appeal
6-4-5: Permit Revocable
6-4-6: Interference Prohibited
6-4-7: Funeral Processions
6-4-8: Penalties
6-4-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall organize or participate in a parade that may disrupt or
interfere with traffic without a permit. A permit shall be required for a
procession using the public right of way that consists of fifty (50) or more
persons or ten (10) or more vehicles. (Ord. 576, 8-22-90)
6-4-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Application for a parade permit shall be made to the Chief of Police at
least sixty three (63) days before the date of parade unless the time limit is
waived by the Chief of Police.
   B.   The application shall be signed by the person designated as the
chairperson of the parade and shall include the following:
      1.   The name and address of the person responsible for the parade.
      2.   The date of the parade.
      3.   The desired route, including assembling and disbursal points.
      4.   The number of persons, vehicles and animals that will participate.
      5.   The proposed starting and ending time. (Ord. 576, 8-22-90; 1993
Code)
6-4-3: PERMIT ISSUANCE OR DENIAL:
   A.   The Chief of Police shall issue a parade permit condition on the
applicant's written agreement to comply with the terms of the permit unless the
Chief of Police finds that:
      1.   The time, route and size of the parade will disrupt the movement of
other traffic to an unreasonable extent.
      2.   The parade is of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so
greatly number of law enforcement officers to properly police the line of
movement and contiguous areas that allowing the parade would deny reasonable
law enforcement protection to the City.
      3.   The parade will interfere with another parade or other activity for
which a permit has been issued.
      4.   Information contained in the application is found to be false or
immaterial detail is omitted.
      5.   The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all
conditions of the permit.
   B.   If one or more of the conditions listed in subsection A of this
Section, other than subsection A5, exists, the Chief of Police may include
provision in the permit that are necessary to alleviate the conditions,
including but not limited to:
      1.   Requiring an alternate date.
      2.   Requiring an alternate route.
      3.   Restricting the size of the parade.
   C.   The Chief of Police shall notify the applicant of the decision in
writing within seven (7) days after receipt of the application.
   D.   If the Chief of Police proposes alternatives or refuses to issue a
permit, the applicant may appeal the decision to the City Council. (Ord. 576,
8-22-90; 1993 Code)
6-4-4: APPEAL:
   A.   Filing: An applicant may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police by
filing a written request of appeal with the City Recorder within five (5) days
after the Chief of Police has proposed alternative or refused to issue a
permit.
   B.   Hearing: The City Council shall schedule a hearing, which shall not be
later than the second regular meeting following the filing of written appeal,
and shall notify the applicant of the date and time. (Ord. 576, 8-22-90)
6-4-5: PERMIT REVOCABLE:
The Chief of Police may revoke a parade permit if circumstance clearly show
that the parade no longer can be conducted consistent with public safety. (Ord.
576, 8-22-90)
6-4-6: INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED:
   A.   Interference by Person: No person shall unreasonably interfere with a
parade or a parade participant.
   B.   Interference by Vehicle: No person shall operate a vehicle that is not
a part of a parade between the vehicles or persons in the parade. (Ord. 576, 8-
22-90)
6-4-7: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS:
   A.   No permit is required for a funeral procession.
   B.   A funeral procession shall proceed to the place of interment by the
most direct route that is both legal and practical.
   C.   The procession shall be accompanied by adequate escort vehicles for
traffic control.
   D.   All motor vehicles in the funeral procession shall be operated with
their lights on.
   E.   No person shall unreasonably interfere with a funeral procession.
   F.   No person shall operate a vehicle that is not a part of the procession
between the vehicles of a funeral procession. (Ord. 576, 8-22-90)
6-4-8: PENALTIES:
Violation of Section
6-4-1 of this Chapter is punishable by the imposition of a Class C civil fine.
Violation of other sections of this Chapter is punishable by the imposition of
a Class D civil fine 1 . (Ord. 576, 8-22-90; 1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
CHAPTER 5
GOLF CARTS
SECTION:
6-5-1: Definitions
6-5-2: Permitted Use
6-5-3: Use Prohibited
6-5-4: Regulations for Use
6-5-5: Registration and Licensing Exemption
6-5-6: Penalties
6-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them:
   GOLF CART: A motor vehicle that has not less than three (3) wheels in
contact with the ground, has an unloaded weight less than one thousand three
hundred (1,300) pounds, is designed to be and is operated at not more than
fifteen (15) miles per hour and is designed to carry golf equipment and not
more than two (2) persons including the driver.
   MCNARY TOWNSITE: McNary Townsite is the area platted as McNary Townsite in
Subdivision numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, as filed with Umatilla County.
(Ord. 567, 2-12-90)
6-5-2: PERMITTED USE:
Golf carts are permitted to use all of the streets in the area known as McNary
Townsite as described in Section 6-5-1 of this Chapter. No permission is
intended or implied for any public way other than those within the boundaries
described. (Ord. 567, 2-12-90)
6-5-3: USE PROHIBITED:
The operation of golf carts shall not be allowed of any portion of the public
highway known as U.S. Highway 730. (Ord. 567, 2-12-90)
6-5-4: REGULATIONS FOR USE:
   A.   Hours of Operation: The operation of golf carts is hereby permitted
during daylight hours on any public street which is located in McNary Townsite,
provided the provisions of this Section are complied with and appropriate signs
giving notice thereof are posted at the entry of McNary Townsite.
   B.   Age Restrictions; Traffic Law Compliance: Every person operating a golf
cart upon or in McNary Townsite permitted by this Section shall be at least
sixteen (16) years of age and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable
to the driver of a vehicle by the traffic laws of this State or by the traffic
laws of this City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those
provisions of the law with respect to the vehicle licensing, registration,
equipment or condition.
   C.   Speed: No person shall operate a golf cart at a greater speed than 
fifteen (15) miles per hour and as is reasonable and prudent under the
conditions then existing.
   D.   Driving on Right Side of Road: Every person operating a golf cart in
the McNary Townsite upon a public street shall drive as near to the right-hand
side of the street as practicable and shall obey all pertinent traffic
regulations. (Ord. 567, 2-12-90; 1993 Code)
6-5-5: REGISTRATION AND LICENSING EXEMPTION:
Golf carts operated under this Chapter be exempt from registration and
licensing as provided in ORS 810.070 and 820.210. (Ord. 567, 2-12-90)
6-5-6: PENALTIES:
Violation of any section of this Chapter is punishable by the imposition of a
Class C civil fine 1 . (1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Adoption Of Public Works Standards
7-1-1: ADOPTION OF PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS:
Public Works Standards for the City of Umatilla, Oregon, may be adopted or
amended by resolution of the Council. Three (3) copies of said Standards shall
be available for public inspection in the office of the City Recorder. (Ord.
676, 9-1-1998)
CHAPTER 2
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
ARTICLE A.  LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
7-2A-1: Short Title
7-2A-2: Definitions
7-2A-3: Initiating Improvements
7-2A-4: City Engineer's Report
7-2A-5: City Council's Action on the Report
7-2A-6: Resolution and Notice of Hearing
7-2A-7: Remonstrance Against Formation of Local Improvement District
7-2A-8: Consideration of Testimony; Hearing Continuance
7-2A-9: Creation of District
7-2A-10: Modification of Proposed Improvements
7-2A-11: Construction of Improvements; Costs
7-2A-12: Assessment Method and Alternative Methods of Financing
7-2A-13: Assessment Ordinance
7-2A-14: Notice of Assessment
7-2A-15: Validity of Assessments
7-2A-16: Interest Rates
7-2A-17: Lien Record and Foreclosure Proceedings
7-2A-18: Error in Assessment Calculation
7-2A-19: Supplemental Assessments
7-2A-20: Rebates
7-2A-21: Abandonment of Proceedings
7-2A-22: Reassessment
7-2A-23: Delinquent Assessment; Withholding Building Permit
7-2A-24: Partition
7-2A-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the
LOCAL IMPROVEMENT ORDINANCE.  (Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
   ACTUAL COST: Has the meaning given the term under ORS 310.140.
   CAPITAL CONSTRUCTION PROJECT: A project for capital construction as defined
under ORS 310.140.
   ESTIMATED ASSESSMENT: Means, with respect to each property to be assessed in
connection with a local improvement, the total assessment that, at the time of
giving notice of the assessment and the right to object or remonstrate, the
governmental unit estimates will be levied against the property following
completion of the local improvement. The estimate shall be based on the
governmental unit's estimate at that time of the actual costs of the local
improvement and the proposed formula for apportioning the actual costs to the
property.
   ESTIMATED ASSESSMENT: Shall be determined by:
   A.   Excluding  from estimated actual costs the estimated financing costs
associated with any bonds issued to accommodate the payment of the assessment
in installments; and
   B.   Including in estimated actual costs the estimated financing costs
associated with interim financing of the local improvement.
   FINAL ASSESSMENT: Means, with respect to each property to be assessed in
connection with a local improvement, the total assessment levied against the
property following completion of the local improvement. The total assessment
shall be based on the actual costs of the local improvement and the formula
for  apportioning the actual costs to the property.
   FINANCING: All costs necessary or attributable to acquiring and preserving
interim or permanent financing of a local improvement.
   A.   The costs of financing may include the salaries, wages and benefits
payable to employees of the governmental unit to the extent the same are
reasonably allocable to the work or services performed by the employees in
connection with the financing of a local improvement or any part thereof.
However, as a condition to inclusion of any salaries, wages or benefits payable
to employees of a governmental unit as financing costs of a local improvement
or any part thereof, the governmental unit shall establish a record keeping
system to track the actual work done  or services performed by each employee on
or in connection with such local improvement.
   B.   Financing costs that are to be incurred after the levy of a final
assessment may be included in the final assessment based on the governmental
unit's reasonable estimate of the financing costs if the governmental unit
first documents the basis for the estimate and makes the documentation
available to interested persons on request.
   GOVERNING BODY: The Council, commission, board or other controlling body,
however designated, in which the legislative powers of a governmental unit are
vested.
   GOVERNMENTAL UNIT: A city, county, district as described under ORS 198.010
or 198.180, or any other municipal, quasi- municipal or public corporation with
authority to undertake the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, repair,
betterment or extension of a local improvement but does not include a common or
union high school district, education service district, community college
district, community college service district or other unit providing public
elementary, secondary or post-secondary education or any combination thereof.
   INSTALLMENT APPLICATION: An application filed by a property owner to have a
final assessment paid in installments over a period of years.
   LOCAL IMPROVEMENT: Has the meaning given the term under ORS 310.140.
   LOT: A lot, block or parcel of land.
   OWNER: The owner of the title to real property or the contract purchaser of
real property of record as shown on the last available complete assessment roll
in the office of the County Assessor.
   STRUCTURE: Has the meaning given the term under ORS 310.140.  (Ord. 601, 5-
18-93)
7-2A-3: INITIATING IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   When the City Council considers it necessary to make a local
improvement and to pay for such local improvement in whole or in part by
special assessment according to benefits conferred, the City Council shall by
resolution declare its intention to make the local improvement and direct the
City Engineer or other appropriate City employee to cause a survey and report
to be made of the improvement and to file the survey and report with the City
Recorder.
   B.   When the owners of one-half (1/2) of the property that will benefit by
a local improvement request by written petition that the City Council initiate
an improvement, the City Engineer or other appropriate City employee shall
determine the costs and expenses of the City in connection with preparing the
report and survey and advise the City Council. If in response to a written
petition the City Council considers it necessary or appropriate to make a local
improvement and to pay for such improvement by special assessment, the City
Council shall declare its intention to make the local improvement, and may
require the petitioners to pay in advance a nonrefundable deposit to cover all
or some portion of the costs and expenses of the City in connection with
preparing the report and survey. The City Council shall direct the City
Engineer or other appropriate City employee upon payment of the required
deposit to cause a survey and report to be made of the improvement and to file
the survey and report with the City Recorder.  (Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-4: CITY ENGINEER'S REPORT:
   A.   Unless the City Council directs otherwise, the City Engineer's report
shall contain the following:
      1.   A plat or map showing the general nature, location and extent of the
proposed improvements and the lands to be specially benefited assessed to pay
all or any part of the cost thereof;
      2.   Preliminary plans and estimates of the work to be done;
      3.   An estimate of the probable cost of the improvements including
legal, administrative and engineering costs attributable thereto;
      4.   A recommendation as to the method of assessment to be used to arrive
at a fair apportionment of the whole or any portion of the cost of the
improvement to the property specially benefited;
      5.   An estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the specially
benefited properties, using the recommended method of assessment;
      6.   A description of the location and assessed value of each parcel of
land or portion thereof, to be specially benefited by the improvement, with the
names of the record owners thereof as herein defined;
      7.   A recommendation of the payment schedule and rate of interest to be
charged on assessments paid in installments;
      8.   A statement showing outstanding assessments against property to be
assessed;
      9.   A statement showing whether the proposed improvements will have
significant impact on present or future land uses and if so, how the
improvements comply with the Comprehensive Plan; and
      10.   Any other information required by the City Council.
   B.   Where the proposed improvement project is intended to be carried out in
cooperation with any other governmental agency, the City Engineer may rely on
the design, estimates and other information of such agency or agencies.
   C.   Where any of the parcels proposed to be assessed has a current assessed
value after deducting unpaid property taxes, deferred property taxes and other
special assessments, which is less than one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the
estimated amount of the proposed assessment, then a recommendation shall be
made concerning additional security to cover the risk of future nonpayment of
the proposed assessment. The City Engineer shall evaluate any available
relevant information concerning any parcel subject to this Section and may
recommend conditioning participation by the owner of such a parcel on
additional assurances, excluding the parcel from the district or not proceeding
with the district. Assurances include but are not limited to cash, cash in
escrow, irrevocable letters of credit and mortgage securities on other parcels
where the property value exceeds prior encumbrances by two hundred percent
(200%). (Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-5: CITY COUNCIL'S ACTION ON THE REPORT:
After the City Engineer's report is filed with the City Recorder, the matter
shall be referred to the City Council which may thereafter approve the report,
modify the report and approve it as modified, require additional or different
information for the improvement to be obtained or abandon the improvement. 
(Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-6: RESOLUTION AND NOTICE OF HEARING:
   A.   After the City Council has approved the report as submitted or as
modified, the City Council shall declare by resolution that it intends to make
the improvement and direct the City Recorder to give notice of the City
Council's intent by publication, not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to
the public hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and by
mailing copies of the notice by regular mail not less than twenty (20) calendar
days prior to the public hearing to the owner of any lots which would be
property benefited by the proposed improvement. The notice shall contain the
following:
      1.   That the report of the City Engineer or other City employee is on
file in the office of the City Recorder and is subject to public examination.
      2.   That the City Council will hold a public hearing on the proposed
improvement on a specified date at which time objections and remonstrances to
the improvement will be heard by the City Council.
      3.   A general description of the proposed improvement and a description
of the benefited property sufficient for the average reader to determine the
general location.
      4.   The estimate of the total cost of the improvement, the portion to be
paid by special assessment, the estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to
the property benefited, and that the City Council may adopt, correct, modify or
revise the assessment against each lot according to special and peculiar
benefits accruing to it from the improvement.
   B.   In addition to the requirements of subsection A of this Section, where
the proposed improvements will have a significant impact on present or future
land uses, notice shall be provided to the owners of record of property on the
most recent property tax assessment roll and within one hundred feet (100') of
the property which is proposed to be benefited by the improvement. The notice
provided under this subsection shall in addition to the information required
under subsection A of this Section, state that failure of an issue to be raised
in the hearing, in person or by letter, or failure to provide sufficient
specificity to afford the decision maker an opportunity to respond to the issue
precludes appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals based on that issue. Persons
entitled to notice under this Section, but not under subsection A of this
Section shall not be entitled to remonstrate against formation of the local
improvement district.
   C.   For purposes of this Section it shall be sufficient to describe the
property to be benefited and proposed to be assessed by the tax account number
assigned to the property and used by the County Department of Assessment and
Taxation.
   D.   For purposes of mailing notice to the parcel owner under this Section,
any mistake, error, omission or failure with respect to such mailing shall not
be jurisdictional or invalidate the assessment proceedings. (Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-7: REMONSTRANCE AGAINST FORMATION OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT:
   A.   If written, signed objections to the establishment of a local
improvement district are filed with the City Recorder no later than the end of
the public hearing on the establishment of the district by the owners of lots
which represent fifty percent (50%) of the property proposed to be assessed for
the local improvement, the City Council shall not make the proposed improvement
nor shall the City Council reinitiate formation of the district until at least
six (6) months after the date of the public hearing, unless  the improvement
consists of a sidewalk or unless the City  Council unanimously declares the
improvement to be needed because of an emergency.
   B.   If there is multiple ownership of a lot, each remonstrating multiple
owner shall be counted as a fraction to the same extent as the owner's interest
in the lot bears in relation to the other multiple owners.
   C.   Any person acting as agent or attorney with power to act in signing a
remonstrance shall, in addition to describing the property affected, file with
the remonstrance a copy in writing of the authority to represent the owner of
the property. (Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-8: CONSIDERATION OF TESTIMONY; HEARING CONTINUANCE:
The City Council shall hear and consider testimony, both oral and written, on
the proposed improvement and may continue the hearing as it deems necessary.
(Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-9: CREATION OF DISTRICT:
If written remonstrances are less than the amount required to defeat the
proposed improvement, the City Council may by resolution at the close of the
hearing or within sixty (60) days thereafter, based on the public testimony,
declare the improvement district created in accordance with the Engineer's
report or abandon the improvement. (Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-10: MODIFICATION OF PROPOSED IMPROVEMENTS:
After the public hearing, the City Council may direct a modification of the
proposed local improvement by revising the scope of the improvement, by
reducing or enlarging the local improvement district which it deems will be
benefited by the improvement or by making such other modifications in the
proceedings as it finds reasonable. In such case, a revised report shall be
made, notices mailed and published, and a second hearing held, all as set forth
in Sections
7-2A-4 through
7-2A-9. (Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-11: CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENT; COSTS:
   A.   Construction: The City Council may direct the City Engineer to proceed
under applicable public improvement contract rules and procedures for such
improvement or portions thereof as it has approved or the City itself may
proceed to make said improvement or any portion thereof. If the City Council
finds that the cost of the improvement would be ten percent (10%) in excess of
the estimate, it may provide for holding a special hearing to consider
objections to proceeding with a higher project cost.
   B.   Costs: The costs and expenses of a local improvement that may be
assessed against the property benefited shall include,  but not be limited to,
costs of construction of the improvement, engineering and administrative costs
of creating the district and letting the bids, design costs, inspection costs,
construction financing costs including interest, costs of acquisition of any
easements or other property and attorney fees. (Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-12: ASSESSMENT METHOD AND ALTERATIVE METHODS OF FINANCING:
   A.   The City Council, in adopting a method of assessing the cost of the
improvement may:
      1.   Use any just and reasonable method to determine the boundaries of an
improvement district consistent with the benefits derived.
      2.   Use any just and reasonable method to apportion the sum to be
assessed among the benefited properties.
      3.   Authorize payment by the City of all or part of the cost of an
improvement when in the opinion of the City Council the topographical or
physical conditions, unusual or excessive public travel or other character of
the work warrants only partial payment or no payment of the cost by owners of
benefited properties.
   B.   Nothing contained in this Section shall preclude the City Council from
using other means of financing improvements, including Federal and State
grants-in-aid, revenue bonds, general obligation bonds, systems development
charges or other legal means of finance. If other means of finance are used,
the City Council may levy special assessments according to benefits derived to
cover any remaining cost.
   C.   Notwithstanding other provisions of this Chapter, the City Council
hereby authorizes the financing of local improvements by the issuance of
general obligation improvement warrants in accordance with the procedures and
with the same effect as such warrants are provided by State law. The City
Council may, as part of a resolution establishing a local improvement district,
authorize the issuance of general obligation improvement warrants and if so
authorized, such warrants shall constitute a limited general obligation of the
City as consistent with State law. If warrants are authorized to be issued, the
City Administrator or his/her designee shall, on behalf of the City, seek
competitive bids or quotes and/or negotiate the necessary terms of such
warrants. Warrants include but are not limited to refinancing warrants and
other short term Municipal promissory notes. (Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-13: ASSESSMENT ORDINANCE:
   A.   When the estimated cost is determined on the basis of contract award or
City Engineer's reported cost or after the work is completed and the cost has
been actually determined, the City Council shall decide whether the benefited
property shall bear all or a portion of the cost. The City Engineer shall
prepare the proposed assessment for each lot or portion thereof within the
local improvement district and file the proposed assessments in the City
Recorder's office.
   B.   Notice of the proposed assessment shall be mailed by regular first
class mail to the owner of each lot proposed to be assessed at the address
shown on the last available complete assessment roll in the office of the
County Assessor. The notice shall state the amount of assessment proposed on
the property and fix a date by which time written objections shall be filed
with the City Recorder. The date of filing such objections shall be any time
within thirty (30) days of the mailing of such notices. An objection shall be
in writing, timely filed and shall state the grounds for the objection. The
notice shall also specify the date of the City Council meeting at which the
City Council will conduct a public hearing, consider the proposed assessments
and objections thereto and if approved, adopt an ordinance levying assessments
against benefited property.
   C.   At the hearing the City Council shall:
      1.   Consider objections and may adopt, correct, modify or revise the
assessment against each lot in the district according to special and peculiar
benefits accruing to it from the improvement.
      2.   By ordinance, declare and levy the assessment and direct the City
Recorder to enter a statement thereof in the docket of City liens as provided
in Section 7-2A-17 of this Chapter.  (Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-14: NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT:
   A.   Within ten (10) days after the ordinance levying assessments has been
passed, the City Recorder shall cause a notice of assessment to be sent to each
owner of assessed property by certified mail. The City Recorder shall also
cause notice of the assessment to be published twice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City. The first publication of notice shall be not later
than twenty (20) days after the date the assessment ordinance was enacted.
   B.   The notice of assessment shall include the name of the property owner,
a description of the assessed property, the amount of the assessment and the
date of the assessment ordinance, and shall state that interest will begin to
run on the assessment and the property will be subject to foreclosure unless
the owner either makes application to pay the assessment in installments within
ten (10) days after the date of the first publication of notice or pays the
assessment in full within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the
assessment ordinance.
   C.   Assessments shall be paid in accordance with this Section.  (Ord. 601,
5-18-93)
7-2A-15: VALIDITY OF ASSESSMENTS:
No assessment made pursuant to this Chapter shall be invalid by reason of a
failure to give, in any report, in the proposed assessment, in the ordinance
making the assessment, in the lien docket or elsewhere in the proceedings, the
name of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land or the name of any person
having a lien upon or interest therein or by a mistake in the name of any such
person or the entry of a name other than the name of such owner or other person
having a lien upon or interest in such property, or by reason of any error,
mistake, delay, omission, irregularity or other act, jurisdictional or
otherwise, in any of the proceedings or steps hereinbefore specified, unless it
appears that reasonable notice has not been given of the hearing upon the
proposed assessment or that the assessment as made, insofar as it affects the
person complaining, is unfair and unjust, and the City council shall have power
and authority to remedy and correct all such matters by suitable action and
proceedings.  (Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-16: INTEREST RATES:
   A.   Interest on funds expended by the City in connection with the
construction or financing of a local improvement shall be charged. There is
established for the purpose of computing interest the following distinct
interest rate classifications:
      1.   Construction Financing: Interest charged for construction financing
begins the date the funds are first subject to and incur financing charges in
connection with a project and ends on the day after substitute financing is
secured.
      2.   Bancroft Installment Financing: Interest charged to property owners
choosing to pay the assessment in installments under the Bancroft Bonding Act
procedures whose accounts are kept current.
      3.   Delinquent Assessment Payment: Interest charged to property owners
choosing to pay the assessment in installments under Bancroft Bonding
procedures who fail to pay two (2) consecutive installment payments. This
interest rate will be assessed beginning the day after the due date of the
second installment payment which comes due after an installment payment is
unpaid. The interest due will be computed at this delinquent rate on the entire
principal balance and this rate will continue to be charged until all
outstanding billings are paid in full. This interest rate is also charged to
those property owners not choosing to pay in installments that have not paid
the assessment as required by Section 7-2a-14 of this Chapter. For such
accounts the rate begins on the thirty first day after entry of the assessment
in the lien docket and is computed from the original date of entry in the lien
docket.
      4.   System Development Charge Financing: Interest charged to persons
financing a system development charge through the Bancroft Bonding Act
procedures.
   B.   The City Council shall, by resolution, establish the interest rate
applicable to the interest classifications identified in subsections A2, A3 and
A4 of this Section. Such interest rate shall not exceed the maximum allowed by
any applicable law. In the event that the rate established is found to exceed
such legal maximum, then that maximum shall be used as the applicable rate
until the resolution establishing rates is revised.  (Ord. 601, 5-18-93)]
7-2A-17: LIEN RECORD AND FORECLOSURE PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   After the assessment ordinance is adopted and becomes effective, the
City Recorder shall enter into the docket of liens a statement of the amount
assessed on each lot, a description of the improvement, names of property
owners and the date of the assessment ordinance. Upon entry into the lien
docket the amounts shall become liens on the lots that have been assessed for
improvement.
   B.   Assessment liens of the City together with accrued interest shall be
superior and prior to all other liens or encumbrances on property insofar as
State law permits.
   C.   Thirty (30) days after the effective date of the assessment ordinance,
interest shall be charged at the rate set by the City Council, and the City may
foreclose or enforce collection of assessment liens in any manner provided by
State law.
   D.   The City may enter a bid on property being offered at a foreclosure
sale. The City shall have priority over all bids except those made by persons
who would be entitled under State law to redeem the property. (Ord. 601, 5-18-
93)
7-2A-18: ERROR IN ASSESSMENT CALCULATION:
Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the
attention of the City Recorder, who shall determine whether there has been an
error. If there has been an error, the City Recorder shall recommend to the
City Council as amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct the error. On
enactment of the amendment, the City Recorder shall make the necessary
correction in the docket of liens and send a corrected notice of assessment by
certified mail. (Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-19: SUPPLEMENTAL ASSESSMENTS:
If an assessment is made before the total cost of the improvement is determined
and if the amount of the assessment is insufficient to defray expenses of the
improvements, the City Council may declare the insufficiency by resolution and
prepare a proposed supplemental assessment. The City Council shall set a time
for hearing objections to the supplemental assessment, direct the City Recorder
to provide notice of the hearing and hold a hearing and consider objections as
in the case of an initial assessment, Section
7-2A-13 of this Chapter. After the hearing the City Council shall make a just
and equitable supplemental assessment by ordinance, which shall be entered in
the docket of liens as provided by Section
7-2A-17 of this Chapter. Notice of the supplemental assessment shall be mailed
in accordance with Section
7-2A-14 of this Chapter and collection of the supplemental assessment shall be
made in accordance with Section
7-2A-17 of this Chapter.  (Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-20: REBATES:
On completion of the improvement project, if the assessment previously levied
on any property is found to be more than sufficient to pay the cost of the
improvement, the City Council shall determine the excess and declare it by
ordinance. When declared, the excess amounts must be entered in the lien docket
as a credit on the appropriate assessment. If an assessment has been paid, the
person who paid it or that person's legal representative shall be entitled to
payment of the rebate credit. (Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-21: ABANDONMENT OF PROCEEDINGS:
The City Council may abandon proceedings for improvements at any time before
final completion of the improvements. If liens have been placed on property
under this procedure, they shall be canceled, and payments made on assessments
shall be refunded to the person who paid them or to that person's legal
representative. (Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-22: REASSESSMENT:
When an assessment, supplemental assessment or reassessment for an improvement
made by the City has been set aside, annulled, declared or rendered void or its
enforcement restrained by a court of this State or by a Federal Court having
jurisdiction or when the City Council doubts the validity of the assessment,
supplemental assessment, reassessment or any part of it, the City Council may
make a reassessment in the manner provided by State law. (Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-23: DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS; WITHHOLDING BUILDING PERMIT:
If payments on assessments are delinquent, no building permit shall be issued
for improvement of the benefited real property. (Ord. 601, 5-18-93)
7-2A-24: PARTITION:
When there has been an approved division of land or a parcel and that parcel
has outstanding a special assessment remaining wholly or partially unpaid, and
full payment or an installment payment is not due, then any owner, mortgagee or
lien holder of any property affected by this land division may apply for an
apportionment of the special assessment, provided the property for which
apportionment is to be made was assessed as a unit and entered accordingly in
the docket of liens and provided further that portions of the property proposed
to be dedicated for public use shall not be assessed. Apportionment of the
special assessment shall be done by resolution of the City Council, and that
resolution shall be filed with the lien docket. Where the special assessment is
being paid in installments, the installments remaining unpaid shall be prorated
among those smaller parcels so that each parcel shall be charged with the
percentage of the remaining installment payments equal to the percentage of the
unpaid assessment charged to the parcel upon apportionment. Where apportionment
would result in a parcel receiving an assessment of less than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), then installment payment of such assessment shall not be
permitted. A fee in an amount established by City Council resolution shall be
paid in advance of an application for apportionment, except in cases where
property is being dedicated to the public and accepted by the City. (Ord. 601,
5-18-93)
ARTICLE B.  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
SECTION:
7-2B-1: Definitions
7-2B-2: Responsibilities Of Property Owners
7-2B-3: Permit Requirements
7-2B-4: Supervision
7-2B-5: Standards And Specifications
7-2B-6: Barricades And Lights
7-2B-7: Sidewalk Repairs
7-2B-8: Prohibited Installations
7-2B-9: Penalties
7-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them:
   CITY: The City of Umatilla, Oregon.
   OWNER: Owner includes a mortgagee in possession and means one or more
persons, jointly or severally in whom is vested:
   A.   All or part of the legal title to property; or
   B.   All or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and
enjoyment of the premises.
   PERSON: A natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, joint
venture or other legal entity. Where appropriate singular usage includes the
plural, and the masculine gender includes neuter and feminine.
   SIDEWALK: The part of the street right of way between the curb lines or the
lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines that is intended for
the use of pedestrians. (Ord. 545, 1-4-1988)
7-2B-2: RESPONSIBILITIES OF PROPERTY OWNERS:
   A.   Maintenance: It is hereby made the duty of all owners of land adjoining
any street in the City to reconstruct, repair and maintain in good condition
the sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters in front of, along or abutting said lands.
   B.   Repairs: The expense of maintaining sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters in
good repair shall be borne by and apportioned among the lots and premises
abutting on or along the sidewalk, curb and/or gutter which needs repair. (Ord.
545, 1-4-1988)
   C.   New Construction:
      1.   If an owner builds, constructs or erects a building on a vacant lot
or expands, remodels, or alters an existing building, the owner shall be
required to install sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters along the property abutting
a City street or streets according to the requirements in this Chapter, the
Zoning Ordinance 1 , the Public Works Standards 2 , and other applicable
standards and specifications adopted by the City Council.
      2.   The installation of sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters may be deferred
by the City if the owner agrees to sign a nonremonstrance agreement with the
City which states that the owner would not object to an LID assessment for
improvements within the public right of way, including, but not limited to,
construction of the street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, and drainage facilities.
      3.   A concrete or asphalt concrete driveway, with curb cut and approach
conforming to City Public Works Standards, shall be constructed for all single-
family new residences, whether site built or manufactured dwellings. (Ord. 694,
10-5-1999)
   D.   Liability For Sidewalk Injuries:
      1.   The owner of land adjoining any street shall be liable for all
damages arising from defects in or for want of repairs or maintenance to the
sidewalks or curbs in front of, along or abutting upon the land of such owner
or owners.
      2.   If the City is required to pay damages for any injury to persons or
property caused by the failure of a person to perform the duty which this
Section imposes, the person shall compensate the City for the amount of any
damages thus paid. The City may maintain an action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 545, 1-4-1988)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 10 of this Code.
2 2. See Chapter 1 of this Title.
7-2B-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person may construct, repair or alter a sidewalk or
curb without first obtaining a permit from the City.
   B.   Conformity To Standards: Persons shall construct, repair or alter a
sidewalk or curb to conform to the general standards and specifications
provided in this Article and any other standards and specifications adopted by
the City Council and currently on file with the City Recorder.
   C.   Application; Issuance Of Permits:
      1.   Application: Persons shall apply for a permit to construct, repair
or alter a sidewalk or curb with the City.
      2.   Issuance: If the proposed improvement conforms to the applicable
standards and specifications the City shall issue a permit after confirming
conformation with the Public Works Superintendent.
      3.   Project Permit: When a sidewalk or curb is constructed, repaired or
altered in connection with improvements or alterations such as a curb cut,
driveway approach, sidewalk section or street excavation, the City shall issue
one permit for the entire project. (Ord. 545, 1-4-1988)
7-2B-4: SUPERVISION:
The Public Works Superintendent may inspect any materials and construction
details as in his/her judgment may be required to ensure compliance with the
permit and with the applicable standards and specifications. (Ord. 545, 1-4-
1988)
7-2B-5: STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Public Works Standards 1 : Persons shall construct, repair or alter a
sidewalk or curb to conform to the Public Works Standards adopted by the City.
   B.   Additional Requirements: Additional sidewalk requirements shall be as
follows:
      1.   Ten foot (10') sidewalks on Sixth Street from Umatilla River east to
the River Road-Sixth Street intersection.
      2.   No less than five foot (5') sidewalks in all other commercial zones.
      3.   No less than four foot (4') sidewalks in all residentially zoned
areas, except SR, PD, R-4 and also except M1 and M2 unless adjacent zoning is
other than M1 or M2, in which case a four foot (4') sidewalk is required. (Ord.
545, 1-4-1988)
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 1 of this Title.
7-2B-6: BARRICADES AND LIGHTS:
A person who excavates or alters a sidewalk or parking strip and thereby
creates a condition which endangers pedestrian traffic shall maintain adequate
barriers and/or lights in accordance with State standards around the
construction site to protect the public. (Ord. 545, 1-4-1988)
7-2B-7: SIDEWALK REPAIRS:
   A.   Notice To Repair:
      1.   The Public Works Superintendent should make an inspection of all
sidewalks in the City at least once per year. He/she will report his/her
findings to the City Council. If the Council decides a sidewalk needs repair,
it shall direct the City Recorder to issue a notice and prepare a certified
copy of the notice.
      2.   The notice shall require the owner of the property abutting the
defective sidewalk to obtain a permit and begin repairs within thirty (30) days
after the date of service of the notice, and thereafter to diligently complete
repairs. The notice shall also state that if the repair is not made by the
owner, within the thirty (30) days, the City may repair the sidewalk and the
cost of the repair will be assessed against the property adjacent to the
sidewalk.
      3.   The City Recorder shall cause a copy of the notice to be personally
served upon the owner of the property adjacent to the defective sidewalk. If
after diligent search the owner is not discovered, the City Recorder may cause
a copy of the notice to be mailed to the owner at his last known address by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and a copy of the notice to be posted
in a conspicuous place on the property. The mailing and posting of notices
shall constitute prima facie evidence against an owner denying responsibility
for the cost of repairs assessed against his land.
      4.   The person serving the notice shall file with the City Recorder a
statement stating the time, place and manner of service of notice.
   B.   City May Make Repairs: If the repair of the sidewalk is not started and
diligently pursued within thirty (30) days after the service of notice to
repair, the Public Works Superintendent may repair or complete the repair of
the sidewalk. Upon completion of the repair of the sidewalk, the Public Works
Superintendent will submit a report to the Council. The report shall contain an
itemized statement of the cost of the repair and the proportionate share of the
cost on each lot or parcel of land adjacent to the sidewalk upon which the
repair has been made.
   C.   Assessment For Repairs By City:
      1.   Upon receipt of the report, the Council shall place a lien on the
lot and premises of the owner. The City Recorder shall be directed to make a
written notice stating the time and manner of making the repair and the cost of
the repair. The City Recorder shall attach the notice to the original notice to
repair, both of which are part of the record of lien for the improvement. The
City Recorder shall enter both records, together with the expenses, in the City
lien docket.
      2.   The lien shall be for the full amount of the costs and expenses,
plus interest at the statutory rate on the unpaid balance from the date of
entry in lien docket. No interest shall be computed if the lien is paid within
thirty (30) days of entry. The City may proceed to foreclose the lien in the
manner provided by law, sixty (60) days after the date of entry. (Ord. 545, 1-
4-1988)
   D.   Liability: Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to impose any
liability upon any member of the City Council or the City or any of its
officers or employees nor to relieve the owner of any private property from the
duty to maintain and repair sidewalks, curbs and gutters in accordance with
this Title. (1993 Code)
7-2B-8: PROHIBITED INSTALLATIONS:
No person may install a gasoline, fuel oil or other dispensing device on the
sidewalk, street right of way or other public property. (Ord. 545, 1-4-1988)
7-2B-9: PENALTIES:
   A.   Fines:
      1.   Violation of subsections
7-2B-2C,
7-2B-5A, and
7-2B-5B and Sections
7-2B-3,
7-2B-6, and
7-2B-8 of this Article is punishable as a Class C civil fine 1 .
   B.   Suspension Of Water Service: The Municipal Judge may suspend water
service to any real property or building owned, leased, or occupied by a person
punished under subsection A of this Section until the penalty is paid or until
the violation is corrected or both. If the court orders water service suspended
until the violation is corrected, the suspension of water service will continue
notwithstanding a change of ownership, renters, or occupiers of the real
property or building unless the new owner, renter, or occupier obtains a
temporary permit from the City Administrator under Section
8-1-7 of this Code. (Ord. 678, 10-6-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
ARTICLE C.  EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
7-2C-1: Short Title
7-2C-2: Definitions
7-2C-3: Permit Requirements
7-2C-4: Penalty for Excavating Newly Surfaced Streets
7-2C-5: Excavation Protection Requirements
7-2C-6: Excavation Procedures
7-2C-7: Backfilling
7-2C-8: Prompt Cleanup and Restoration
7-2C-9: Emergency Excavations
7-2C-10: Preservation of Monuments
7-2C-11: Inspections
7-2C-12: Maintenance of Substructure Records
7-2C-13: Liability of City
7-2C-14: Penalties
7-2C-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the STREET EXCAVATION ORDINANCE
of the City. (Ord. 423, 5-15-78)
7-2C-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words and
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number and word in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
   CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The City Administrator of the City, or his/her duly
appointed agent, including the City Engineer and others.
   EXCAVATION: Any opening in the surface of a public place made in any manner
whatsoever, except an opening into a lawful structure of a public place, the
top of which is flush with the adjoining surface and so constructed as to
permit frequent opening without injury or damage to the public place.
   FACILITY: Pipe, pipeline, tube, main, service trap, vent, vault, manhole,
meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, pole, pole line, anchor,
cable, junction box, transformer or any other material, structure or object of
any kind or character, whether enumerated herein or not, which is or may be
lawfully constructed, left, placed or maintained in, upon, along, across, under
or over any public place.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organizations of any kind.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any public street, street right of way, place, alley,
sidewalk, park, square, plaza or any other public property owned or controlled
by the City.
   SUBSTRUCTURE: Any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole, vault, buried cable
or wire, or any other structure located below the surface of any public place.
   VITAL STRUCTURES: Those elements of the fire and safety protection system of
the City, and those elements of public and private utility systems, which are
vital to the health and safety of the City. (Ord. 423, 5-15-78)
7-2C-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Excavation Permit: No person shall make an excavation or fill an
excavation in a public place without first obtaining a permit from the City
Administrator except as otherwise provided in this Article. No permit to make
an excavation or fill an excavation in a public place shall be issued except as
provided in this Article.
   B.   Applications: Applications for such permits shall be made to the Public
Works Superintendent and shall describe the location of the intended
excavation, the size thereof, the purpose therefor, the person doing the actual
work and the person for whom the work is being done, and shall contain an
agreement the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating to
the work to be done. (Ord. 423, 5-15-78; 1993 Code)
   C.   Fees: The application for an excavation permit shall be accompanied by
an application fee as may be set by resolution 1 . (Ord. 423, 5-15-78; amd.
Ord. 518, 10-21-85)
   D.   Surety Bond and Insurance: Before an excavation permit, as herein
provided is issued, the applicant shall:
      1.   Deposit with the City Administrator a corporate surety bond written
in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or the estimated cost of
backfilling the excavation and resurfacing the street, whichever sum is the
greater. Said corporate surety bond shall be in the form of a performance bond
insuring the applicant's performance of all the terms and conditions for an
excavation permit as set forth in this Article, and specifically including
provisions of Section 7-2C-8 of this Article.
      2.   Deposit with the City Administrator a certificate of comprehensive
public liability insurance covering the work to be done by the applicant under
the excavation permit, if issued. The amount of coverage of said policy shall
not be less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for any one
occurrence,  one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one person and
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) property damages. This policy shall protect
and save harmless the City, its officers and employees against any and all
claims, demands, judgments or otherwise arising from the excavation and other
work covered by the excavation permit. The policy shall further provide that
the applicant and his/her insurance company shall defend and pay all costs of
defending the City, its officers and employees, in any suit or action or other
proceeding which may be filed against them, or any of them, as a result of
permittee's work and activities under the excavation permit.
   E.   Municipal Departments: The requirements for permits, bonds, insurance,
deposits and fees shall not apply to street excavations made by Municipal
departments, but the City Administrator shall see that utilities, protection of
adjoining property, care of materials, making of excavations and backfilling of
same, are met as provided in this Article. (Ord. 423, 5-15-78; 1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section 1-12-4 of this Code; see section 6 of Ordinance 518.
7-2C-4: PENALTY FOR EXCAVATING NEWLY SURFACED STREETS:
In order to conserve new paving and resurfacing of streets, pavement cuts are
prohibited therein except for emergency repairs or upon payment of a penalty
charge. The maximum period of time for which such penalty shall apply to such a
street shall be five (5) years. The penalty shall be five (5) times the cost of
restoring the pavement surface during the first year, four (4) times the
restoration cost during the second year, three (3) times the restoration cost
during the third year, two (2) times the restoration costs during the fourth
year and equal to the restoration costs during the fifth year. This penalty fee
shall be computed in addition to normal resurfacing charge, and shall be
computed from the date at which the City accepted the newly paved surface. In
order to avoid the necessity of these penalties, the City shall inform City
franchised utilities by mail before new paving or resurfacing is performed.
Affected property owners shall be notified by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation. Failure of any person to receive notice shall not exempt
such person from imposition of the penalty fee. Application for a waiver of
this Section may be submitted to the City Administrator for installation of
service lines designed to serve a single lot or parcel of land. (Ord. 423, 5-
15-78)
7-2C-5: EXCAVATION PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Routing and Protection of Traffic:
      1.   The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during
the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as near normal as
practicable shall be maintained at all times so as to cause as little
inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting property and to the
general public. The City Council may permit the closing of streets and alleys
to all traffic for specific period of time if the permittee can demonstrate
necessity.
      2.   The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for two (2) lanes of
vehicle traffic at all street intersections where possible and safe crossings
for pedestrians at intervals of not more than three hundred feet (300'). If an
excavation is made across a public street, alley or sidewalk, at least one safe
crossing shall be maintained when possible for vehicles and pedestrians. If the
street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using part of
the adjacent sidewalk, a passageway at least one-half (1/2) of the sidewalk
width shall be maintained along such a sidewalk line.
      3.   It shall be the duty of every person making an excavation in or upon
any public place to place and maintain such barriers and warning devices
necessary for safety of the general public. Warning lights shall be electrical
markers or flashers used to indicate a hazard to traffic from sunset of each
day to sunrise of the next day.  Electrical markers or flashers shall emit
light at sufficient intensity and frequency to be visible at a reasonable
distance for safety. Reflectors or reflecting materials may be used to
supplement, but not replace, light sources.
      4.   The permit for a street excavation may require that the permittee
give notification to various public agencies and to the general public. In such
case, such permit shall not be valid until such notice is given.
   B.   Protection of Adjoining Property:
      1.   The permittee shall at all times, at his/her own expense, preserve
and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations
and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection of
such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of
taking appropriate protection measures, the permittee shall obtain a license
from the owner of such private property for such purpose and if the permittee
cannot obtain a license from such owner, the City Administrator may authorize
the permittee to enter the private premises at reasonable hours solely for the
purpose of making the property safe.
      2.   The permittee shall, at the permittee's expense, shore upon and
protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged
during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all
damage resulting from his/her failure properly to protect and carry out said
work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn
area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have
been backfilled as required in this Article. All construction and maintenance
work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth
and debris and in a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed
before such work began. Access to driveways shall be kept open insofar as
possible during the performance of work by the permittee.
      3.   When it is found desirable by the City Administrator, the permittee
shall be instructed to send notice by mail of work to be performed to abutting
property owners. This shall be done in order to minimize inconvenience to such
property owners in their normal usage of the public streets.
   C.   Protection of Watercourses:
      1.   The permittee shall maintain all gutters free and unobstructed for
the full depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot (1') in width
from the face of such curb at the gutterline. Whenever a gutter crosses an
intersecting street, an adequate waterway shall be provided and all times
maintained.
      2.   The permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus
water, muck, silt, slicking or other run-off pumped from excavations or
resulting from sluicing or other operations and shall be responsible for any
damage resulting from his/her failure to so provide. (Ord. 423, 5-15-78; 1993
Code)
7-2C-6: EXCAVATION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Care of Excavated Material:
      1.   All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the
trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to
endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians, or users of the streets, and
so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets
and adjoining property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too
narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, the
permittee shall haul the excavated material to a storage site and then rehaul
it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the permittee's
responsibility to secure the necessary permission and make all necessary
arrangements for all required storage and disposal sites.
      2.   Whenever necessary in order to expedite the flow of traffic or to
abate the dirt or dust nuisance, two (2) boards or bins shall be required by
the City Administrator to prevent the spreading of dirt into traffic lanes.
   B.   Noise 1 , Dust 2  and Debris: Each permittee shall conduct excavation
work in such a manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to
the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall
take appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the
performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris, and
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
shall not use, except in case of an emergency as herein otherwise provided, any
tool, appliance, or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb
the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property.
   C.   Breaking Through Pavement:
      1.   Heavy duty pavement breakers may be prohibited by the City when the
use may endanger existing substructures or other property.
      2.   Cutting of pavement surfaces ahead of excavations shall be done in
such a manner as to confine pavement damage to the limits of the trench.
Pavement wearing surface cuts shall be made with a sharp edge tool which will
result in a smooth edge along the side of the excavation.
      3.   Sections of sidewalks shall be removed to the nearest score line or
saw cut edge.
      4.   Unstable pavement shall be removed over cave-outs and over-breakers
and the subgrade shall be treated as the main trench.
      5.   Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly
aligned with the center line of the trench.
      6.   Cutouts outside of the trench lines must be normal or parallel to
the trench line.
      7.   Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of new pavement may be
required by the City Administrator.
      8.   The permittee shall not be required to repair damage existing prior
to excavation unless his/her cut results in small floating sections that may be
unstable, in which case the permittee shall remove and refill the area.
   D.   Depth of Structures: No person shall, without written permission of the
City Administrator, install substructures, except manholes, vaults, valve
casings, culverts and catch basins at a distance less than:
      1.   Streets: Thirty inches (30") below the established street or alley
grade.
      2.   Parkways:
         a.   The minimum depth of any substructure shall be twenty four inches
(24") below established street or alley grade when said substructure parallels
the parkway.
         b.   The minimum depth of any substructure shall be twenty four inches
(24") below the top of the established sidewalk or curb when such substructure
is at right angles to the parkway.
      3.   Other Public Places: The minimum depth of any substructure in any
other public place shall be twenty four inches (24") below the surface;
provided, however, that the City Administrator may permit a lesser depth in
special cases.
Nothing in this subsection shall impose a duty upon the permittee to maintain
said specifications as required herein upon subsequent changes of grade in the
surface unless the grade in said substructure interferes with the maintenance
of, or travel on, a public street.
   E.   Trenches in Pipe Laying: The maximum length of open trench permissible
at any time shall be no more than two hundred feet (200'), and no greater
length shall be open for pavement removal, excavation, construction,
backfilling, patching and all other operations.
   F.   Clearance for Vital Structures: The excavation work shall not interfere
with access to vital structures.
   G.   Relocation and Protection of City-Owned Utilities:
      1.   The permittee shall not interfere with any existing City- owned
utility without written consent of the City Administrator. If it becomes
necessary to relocate an existing City-owned utility, this shall be done by the
City. No utility owned by the City shall be moved to accommodate the permittee
unless the cost of such work be borne by the permittee.
      2.   The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all
substructures, which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and do
everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or
across said work. In case any substructures should be damaged, and for this
purpose, pipe coating or other encasement or devices are to be considered as
part of a substructure, they shall be repaired by the owner and the expense of
such repairs shall be charged to the permittee, and the permittee's bond shall
be liable therefor. The permittee and his/her surety shall be liable for any
damage done to any public property by reason of breaking of any water pipes,
sewers or other City owned utility, and the permittee's bond shall be liable
therefor.
      3.   When it is found desirable by the City Administrator, other
utilities will be notified by the permittee of his/her intention to make an
excavation. This will be done in order that these utilities may make
arrangements to perform any work planned for that same area at time the
excavation is made. The City shall not be made a party to any action because of
this subsection.
   H.   Abandonment of Structures: Whenever the use of a substructure is
abandoned, except the abandonment of a service line designed to serve a single
property owner, the person owning, using, controlling, or having an interest
therein, shall within thirty (30) days after such abandonment file with the
City Administrator a statement in writing giving in detail the location of the
substructure so abandoned. If such abandoned substructure is in the way, or
subsequently becomes in the way, of an installation of the City or any other
public body, the owner shall remove such abandoned substructure or pay the cost
of its removal during the course of excavation for construction of the facility
by the City or any other public body. (Ord. 423, 5-15-78)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Title 4, Chapter 3 of this Code.
2 2. See also Title 8, Chapter 5 of this Code.
7-2C-7: BACKFILLING:
The Public Works Superintendent may require soil tests to be furnished by a
recognized soil testing laboratory or registered professional engineer
specializing in soil mechanics when, in his/her opinion, backfill for any
excavation is not being adequately compacted. In order for the resurfacing to
be permitted, such tests shall show that the backfill material meets the
minimum requirements as prescribed by this Article. All expenses of such tests
shall be borne by the permittee. (Ord. 423, 5-15-78; 1993 Code)
7-2C-8: PROMPT CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
After an excavation is commenced, the permittee shall prosecute with diligence
and speed all excavation work covered by the excavation permit and shall
promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original condition,
or as near as may be, so as not to obstruct the public place or travel thereon
more than is reasonably necessary.
   A.   Cleanup: As the excavation work progresses, all streets shall be kept
thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris
resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such
excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be
complete. From time to time, as may be ordered by the Public Works
Superintendent and in any event immediately after completion of said work, the
permittee shall, at permittee's expense, clean up and remove all refuse and
unused materials of any kind resulting from said work, and upon failure to do
so within twenty four (24) hours after having been notified to do so by the
Public Works Superintendent said work may be done by the City and the cost
thereof charged to the permittee.
   B.   Restoration of Surface:
      1.   Permanent resurfacing of excavations shall be made by the permittee
or his contractor approved by the City. Such resurfacing shall be at the
expense of the permittee.
      2.   The permittee shall maintain temporary paving after all backfilling
is completed, and shall keep same safe for pedestrian and vehicular traffic
until the excavation has been resurfaced with permanent paving, except that if
it is impractical to maintain the surface of the temporary paving in a safe
condition for pedestrian travel or vehicular traffic, than the permittee shall
maintain barriers and light where required herein.
      3.   The permittee shall guarantee in writing to the City that the bond
required in subsection 7-2C-3D of this Article shall continue in force for one
year after completion of the resurfacing. The bond shall cover the replacement
or repair of the surfacing if defects in the surfacing appear during that time.
   C.   Acceptance of Restoration: Acceptance or approval of any excavation
work by the Public Works Superintendent shall not prevent the City from
asserting a claim against the permittee and his/her surety under the surety
bond required hereunder for incomplete or defective work if discovered within
twelve (12) months from the completion of the excavation work. The presence of
City officials during the performance of excavation work shall not relieve the
permittee of his/her responsibilities hereunder. (Ord. 423, 5-15-78; 1993 Code)
7-2C-9: EMERGENCY EXCAVATIONS:
   A.   Urgent Work: When traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the
traveling public, or the public interest require that the excavation is
granted, that a crew of men and adequate facilities by employed by the
permittee twenty four (24) hours a day to the end that such excavation work may
be completed as soon as possible.
   B.   Emergency Action: Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent
the making of such excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life
or property or for the location of trouble in a conduit or pipe, or for making
repairs, provided that the person making such excavation shall apply to the
City Administrator for such a permit on the first working day after such work
is commenced. (Ord. 423, 5-15-78)
7-2C-10: PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS:
Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any
street or property subdivision, or a precise survey reference point, or a
permanent survey bench mark within the City, shall not be removed or disturbed
or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission in
writing from the City to so do. Permission to remove or disturb such monument,
reference points, or bench marks shall only be granted upon condition that the
person applying for such permission shall pay all expenses incident to the
proper replacement of this monument by the City. (Ord. 423, 5-15-78)
7-2C-11: INSPECTIONS:
The City Administrator shall have such inspections made as are reasonably
necessary in the enforcement of this Article. The permittee shall notify the
City, prior to backfilling an excavation so that proper inspection may be made.
(Ord. 423, 5-15-78)
7-2C-12: MAINTENANCE OF SUBSTRUCTURE RECORDS:
Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in substructures
under the surface of any public place used for the purpose of supplying or
conveying gas, electricity, communication impulse, water, steam, ammonia or oil
in the City, shall file with the City Recorder, within one hundred twenty (120)
days after adoption of this Chapter, a map or set of maps each drawn to a scale
of not less than one inch to two hundred feet (1" = 200') showing in detail the
location, size, description and date of installation, if known, of all
substructures, except service lines designed to serve a single property owner,
beneath the surface of the public place belonging to, used by, or under the
control of such person having any interest, and shall file with the City
Recorder within fifteen (15) days after the first day of January of each and
every year a corrected map or set of maps each drawn to said scale including
all installations made during the previous year to and including the last day
of such year; provided, however, that a public utility owner may at its option
provide corrected atlas sheets at more frequent intervals. (Ord. 423, 5-15-78)
7-2C-13: LIABILITY OF CITY:
This Article shall not be construed as imposing upon the City or any official
or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured
by the performance of any excavation work for which an excavation permit is
issued hereunder, nor shall the City or any official or employee thereof be
deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of
inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit, or by the
approval of any excavation work. (Ord. 423, 5-15-78)
7-2C-14: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon
conviction, be punished by the imposition of a Class A civil fine 1 .
   B.   In addition to any other remedies, the City shall place a lien against
any properties which derive a benefit from the use for which the excavation was
permitted, in those cases for which the City is not reimbursed for the required
resurfacing and repairs. (Ord. 423, 5-15-78; 1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
ARTICLE D.  PARKWAY BEAUTIFICATION
SECTION:
7-2D-1: Ratification
7-2D-2: Definitions
7-2D-3: Duty to Maintain Parkway
7-2D-4: Planting of Trees
7-2D-5: Removal or Trimming of Trees
7-2D-6: Penalties
7-2D-1: RATIFICATION:
The Parkway Beautification Project Agreement entered into on October 18, 1983,
by and between the State and the City Administrator is hereby ratified and
approved and shall be known as the 1983 UMATILLA PARKWAY BEAUTIFICATION
PROJECT. (Ord. 497, 5-7-84)
7-2D-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them:
   CITY: The City of Umatilla, Oregon.
   LANDOWNER: Includes a lessor, sublessor and a mortgagee in possession, and
means one or more persons, joint or severally, in whom is vested:
   A.   All or part of the legal title to the property; or
   B.   All or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and
enjoyment of the premises.
   PARKWAY: That part of the street right of way between the curb lines or the
lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property line.
   PERSON: A natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, joint
venture or other legal entity. Where appropriate, single usage includes the
plural, and the masculine gender includes neuter and feminine. (Ord. 497, 5-7-
84; 1993 Code)
7-2D-3: DUTY TO MAINTAIN PARKWAY:
Landowners shall furnish all necessary water, fertilizer and insecticides
necessary to maintain any tree in a healthy condition which is planted in the
parkway adjacent to the landowner. (Ord. 497, 5-7-84)
7-2D-4: PLANTING OF TREES:
The City will furnish all necessary labor and equipment for the planting of
trees in the 1983 Umatilla Parkway Beautification Project. (Ord. 497, 5-7-84)
7-2D-5: REMOVAL OR TRIMMING OF TREES:
No person may remove or trim any tree which is planted in a parkway without
first obtaining written permission of the City. (Ord. 497, 5-7-84)
7-2D-6: PENALTIES:
Violation of Sections
7-2D-3 and
7-2D-5 of this Article is punishable by the imposition of a Class B civil fine
1 . (Ord. 497, 5-7-84; 1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code. 
ARTICLE E.  ADDRESSING AND STREET NAMING
SECTION:
7-2E-1: Purpose
7-2E-2: Exceptions
7-2E-3: Base Lines
7-2E-4: Prefixes
7-2E-5: Suffixes
7-2E-6: Street Naming
7-2E-7: Changes To Street Names
7-2E-8: Notification
7-2E-9: Address System
7-2E-10: Address Changes
7-2E-11: Penalty
7-2E-1: PURPOSE:
To establish and enforce a permanent, systematic and Citywide address and
street naming system that is necessary for the protection of health, safety,
and welfare of the residents of the City. A systematic addressing plan will
facilitate the location by emergency services and others of dwellings,
businesses, and other buildings of interest and importance by a site address
and identifiable street name. Naming or renaming private lanes or public roads
not currently in the City's maintenance system shall not mean that the City
accepts or will maintain these roads or lanes. (Ord. 693, 10-5-1999)
7-2E-2: EXCEPTIONS:
This Article does not pertain to areas outside the urban growth boundary or
other areas deemed necessary and appropriate by the City Council. (Ord. 693,
10-5-1999)
7-2E-3: BASE LINES:
The east-west base line shall be the Columbia River. The center line of the
Umatilla River extended to the south along the west line of section 17 T5N,
R28E, shall be the north- south base line for naming streets running north and
south and numbering structures on east-west streets. (Ord. 693, 10-5-1999)
7-2E-4: PREFIXES:
   A.   All streets running in an easterly and westerly direction that cross
the base line shall bear the prefix "West" and may be designated by the letter
"W" if west of the base line or "East" and may be designated by the letter "E"
if east of the base line.
   B.   An "East" or "West" designation need not be used to identify streets
that do not cross the base line.
   C.   Streets running in a northerly and southerly direction shall bear no
prefix. (Ord. 693, 10-5-1999)
7-2E-5: SUFFIXES:
   A.   All streets running in a northerly and southerly direction shall be
designated "Street".
   B.   All streets running in a northerly and southerly direction and lying
between two (2) consecutively named streets shall be designated "Place".
   C.   All streets running in an easterly and westerly direction shall be
designated "Avenue".
   D.   All streets running in an easterly and westerly direction and lying
between two (2) consecutively numbered streets shall be designated "Court" and
shall take the lesser number of said two (2) numbered streets. (Ord. 693, 10-5-
1999)
7-2E-6: STREET NAMING:
The City Administrator shall approve all street names proposed on subdivision
plats or requested by property owners, based on the standards set forth in this
Article. At the City Administrator's discretion, a street naming proposal may
be referred to the City Council for decision. Any affected party may appeal the
City Administrator's decision to the City Council.
   A.   Existing street names shall be retained, modified as to directional
reference, and extended when appropriate to the urban growth boundary area.
   B.   When a street crosses jurisdiction lines, the existing street name
shall be maintained unless the City and neighboring jurisdiction agree to a
change in name.
   C.   Streets shall have the same name throughout their entire length except
that:
      1.   A separate name for a street segment may be applied if there is a
major direction change and at least three (3) buildings require an address on
that segment.
      2.   The street is interrupted or separated by a major barrier such as a
major highway or topographical feature, where street connection is unlikely and
confusion would be minimized by different names.
   D.   The proposed street name shall be limited by a maximum of fifteen (15)
letters and shall not duplicate or sound similar to a street name within the
City.
   E.   Street names shall utilize and maintain historical references when
possible.
   F.   Private lanes with three (3) or more buildings may be named in
accordance with provisions of this Article. The cost and maintenance of a
street sign shall be the responsibility of the property owners abutting the
private lane. (Ord. 693, 10-5-1999)
7-2E-7: CHANGES TO STREET NAMES:
A change to a street name may be initiated by the City or other public agency
or by an abutting property owner. The City Administrator may approve a change
to a street name if requested by all property owners abutting the street and if
the proposed name complies with standards of Section 7-2E-6 of this Article and
other provisions of this Code. Abutting property owners shall pay any costs
relating to the name change, including the cost of a new street sign. (Ord.
693, 10-5-1999)
7-2E-8: NOTIFICATION:
Notification of naming or renaming of streets shall be sent to the following,
and any other agencies or jurisdictions as necessary:
   A.   Public Works Department.
   B.   Assessor's office.
   C.   Post office.
   D.   County Clerk's office.
   E.   Utility companies including, but not limited to, telephone, electrical
service provider, gas company, sewer and water districts, and television cable
company.
   F.   Affected Fire Department or district.
   G.   Local school district.
   H.   County Surveyor.
   I.   Police agency.
   J.   911 dispatch.
   K.   Building Department.
   L.   Hospital(s).
   M.   Ambulance services. (Ord. 693, 10-5-1999)
7-2E-9: ADDRESS SYSTEM:
The City Administrator shall assign addresses to all new lots, buildings, and
structures within the City in accordance with standards of this Article.
Address numbers shall be displayed on a building or structure in a manner,
form, and size that is clearly visible from the public street.
   A.   Consistent With Current System: All addresses assigned within the City
shall be numbered consistent with the current numbering system and generally
based upon a grid established by the base lines and following the established
block pattern in the older part of City, with the number "1" beginning at the
base line and extending east-west from the base line.
   B.   Numbers Assigned: A number shall be assigned for each lot, building, or
structure, with one number for each ten feet (10') of frontage.
   C.   Consecutive: All numbers shall run consecutively.
   D.   Blocks: A new "100" shall begin with each block or approximately every
two hundred feet (200'). Ease of locating a lot or building shall guide
establishing a new address, rather than strict adherence to an arbitrary grid
pattern.
   E.   Even, Odd Numbers: Lots or buildings on the south and west side of each
street shall bear even numbers and on the north and east side shall bear odd
numbers.
   F.   Annexed Properties: Annexed properties shall change addresses to become
consistent to the City's addressing system.
   G.   Exception: Lots and structures within the "McNary Area" shall be
addressed within the system established for the area. (Ord. 693, 10-5-1999)
7-2E-10: ADDRESS CHANGES:
The City or other agency or a property owner may request a change of address
number. The City Administrator may grant the request if it is consistent with
the standards of this Article. The City Administrator may refer any request for
change of address number to the City Council for decision and any decision of
the City Administrator may be appealed to the City Council. (Ord. 693, 10-5-
1999)
7-2E-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any section of this Article shall, upon conviction, be
punished by the imposition of a Class C civil fine 1 . (Ord. 693, 10-5-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
ARTICLE F.  PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
7-2F-1: Definitions
7-2F-2: Jurisdiction
7-2F-3: Scope Of Regulatory Control
7-2F-4: City Permission Requirement
7-2F-5: Obligations Of The City
7-2F-6: License For Use Of Unused Public Rights Of Way In Residential Areas
7-2F-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
   PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY: Includes, but is not limited to, streets, roads,
highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all
other public ways or areas, including subsurface and air space over these
areas.
   WITHIN CITY: Territory over which the City now has or acquires jurisdiction
for the exercise of its powers. (Ord. 649, 3-4-1997)
7-2F-2: JURISDICTION:
The City has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over all public
rights of way within the City under the authority of the City Charter and State
law. (Ord. 649, 3-4-1997)
7-2F-3: SCOPE OF REGULATORY CONTROL:
The City has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over each public
right of way whether the City has a fee, easement or other legal interest in
the right of way. The City has jurisdiction and regulatory control over each
right of way whether the legal interest in the right of way was obtained by
grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation,
foreclosure or other means. (Ord. 649, 3-4-1997)
7-2F-4: CITY PERMISSION REQUIREMENT:
No person may occupy or encroach on a public right of way without the
permission of the City. The City grants permission to use rights of way by
franchises, licenses and permits. (Ord. 649, 3-4-1997)
7-2F-5: OBLIGATIONS OF THE CITY:
The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory control over a public right of way
by the City is not official acceptance of the right of way, and does not
obligate the City to maintain or repair any part of the right of way. (Ord.
649, 3-4-1997)
7-2F-6: LICENSE FOR USE OF UNUSED PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
The City Administrator is authorized to permit use of portions of dedicated,
but currently unused, public rights of way in residential areas as extensions
of contiguous yards, subject to the following prerequisites and conditions:
   A.   A written permit shall be issued setting out conditions established by
the City Administrator to which the adjacent property owner and any tenant must
agree in writing to abide by. A permit shall be binding on and shall inure to
the benefit of the successors in interest of the parties.
   B.   If fences are to be used to enclose the area as a portion of a fenced
yard, such fence shall comply with existing ordinances governing fences. A
fence shall be placed no closer than seven feet (7') from a road surface where
there is no curb and sidewalk, but a fence may be placed adjacent to a
sidewalk.
   C.   By acceptance of the permit, the adjacent property owner and tenant
acknowledge that the public right of way remains public into perpetuity, until
vacated. Should the public property portions of any yard area be required for
public usage at a future time, the permittee shall immediately remove any
improvements or enhancements upon notification by the City Administrator.
   D.   The permittee shall guarantee the City access to utilities, meters and
other services. Any interference by the permittee with such access by the City
or its agents are grounds for nullifying the permit and the City Administrator
may require the permittee to remove any improvements or enhancements. (Ord.
649, 3-4-1997)
CHAPTER 3
CEMETERY
SECTION:
7-3-1: Applicability
7-3-2: Permits Required
7-3-3: Prices
7-3-4: General Supervision
7-3-5: Conveyance of Lots
7-3-6: Perpetual Care
7-3-7: Ownership Restrictions
7-3-8: Prohibited Ornamentation
7-3-9: Monuments
7-3-10: Funerals
7-3-11: Conduct of Persons within Cemeteries
7-3-1: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   The rules and regulations hereinafter set forth apply to all Umatilla
cemeteries except as to areas specifically exempted from certain rules or
covered by special rules.
   B.   No further interments of bodies of deceased persons shall be permitted
in the cemetery in block 38 of the original town, located on Sixth Street,
except for persons already having lots in this cemetery. (Ord. 260, 5-7-56)
7-3-2: PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Permits Required; Application: A permit must be secured from the City
Recorder prior to the interment of any deceased person, the removal of any body
from the cemetery or the transfer of any body from one part of the cemetery to
another. Written application for permit shall be made by the owner of the lot
to be used and applicant shall state the full name of deceased, place of
nativity, age, date and place of decease, date of interment, name of
undertaker, outside size of coffin or box, cause of death, lot and grave used.
In case of interment of a deceased owner of a lot, the application shall be
signed by some person known to be of his/her family or household, or by his/her
physician.
   B.   Issuance of Permit: No permit shall be issued unless all moneys due the
City have been paid. The permit must be filed with the Recorder at least twelve
(12) hours before the time of the funeral and notice of the funeral must be
given at the same time.
   C.   Disinterments: In case of disinterments, the written consent of the
owner or owners of the lot or surviving wife, husband, children (if of age), or
parents of the deceased must be secured, but if consent of any such person
cannot be obtained, the consent of the County Court shall be sufficient. (Ord.
260, 5-7-56; 1993 Code)
7-3-3: PRICES:
The City Council shall, by resolution 1 , establish the schedule of prices to
be charged for lots, graves, openings and other services and privileges. (Ord.
260, 5-7-56)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section 1-12-4 of this Code.
7-3-4: GENERAL SUPERVISION:
   A.   Superintendent:
      1.   The City Public Works Superintendent shall have full charge and
general supervision over the cemetery, its operation and upkeep and other
duties as prescribed by the City Council.
      2.   All graves must be opened and closed under the direction of the
Superintendent. No grave shall be opened for interment, removal or transfer of
a body until the proper permits have been presented to the Superintendent.
   B.   Records Kept:
      1.   The City Recorder shall receive all moneys due the City from the
sale of lots, services furnished and from all other services and shall issue
proper receipts for the same.
      2.   The Recorder shall issue in the name of the City, all permits
required; shall keep competent records of all matters pertaining to lots,
graves or other plots of ground; a record of all burial permits issued, showing
the full name of the deceased, the place of nativity (if known), date and place
of decease, age (if known), date of interment, cause of death, the number and
date of permit, name of undertaker, lot or grave in which buried and the
outside size of coffin or box. (Ord. 260, 5-7-56; 1993 Code)
7-3-5: CONVEYANCE OF LOTS:
Every conveyance of a lot in the cemetery shall be by deed, executed by the
Mayor and the City Recorder but such a deed shall only have the effect of
giving the perpetual use of a lot for burial purposes, subject to the laws of
the State of Oregon, and the Charter and ordinances of the City. No grave, lot
or plot which has been deeded can be sold, transferred, assigned, or exchanged
for other graves except with the written consent of the City Recorder. Lots in
the improved portion of the cemetery can be exchanged for other lots in the
unimproved portion of the cemetery, provided the applicant shall submit with
his/her petition such documentary evidence as shall be deemed sufficient to
show ownership of his/her lots and shall submit a quit claim deed conveying
his/her lots to the City and shall submit payment for the lots secured. (Ord.
260, 5-7-56; 1993 Code)
7-3-6: PERPETUAL CARE:
   A.   Subject to availability of water, the perpetual care and maintenance of
all graves shall consist of keeping them sown in grass which shall be kept
watered and trimmed and all avenues surrounding them shall be kept free of
obstructions.
   B.   All monuments and markers shall be kept in proper positions and no one
shall be permitted to make any alterations to monuments or markers or surface
of soil, without first obtaining permission from the City Recorder. (Ord. 260,
5-7-56; 1993 Code)
7-3-7: OWNERSHIP RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The owner of a grave in the improved portion of the cemetery will be
allowed to remove the body from said grave, and re-inter it in any other grave
in said improved portion which he/she owns and will be allowed the price paid
for such relinquished grave, provided it is not more than the price of grave
selected and upon submitting a quit claim deed therefore, and upon payment of
ten percent (10%) handling charge. The owner of the lot may, with the consent
of the City Recorder, allow the burial of a friend, or other person in his/her
grave, but to allow such burial for a compensation is strictly forbidden.
   B.   The price of all graves includes perpetual care of same and is payable
in advance before any interment is permitted. Subdivisions of graves or lots by
owners is not allowed. Planting of trees, shrubbery or flowers will not be
permitted by lot owners. Graves or plots may be purchased on the installment
plan at the rate of at least five dollars ($5.00) per payment, but must be paid
in full before interment is made. (Ord. 260, 5-7-56)
7-3-8: PROHIBITED ORNAMENTATION:
No parcel of ground shall be surrounded by any fence, railing, coping, hedge,
slab, stone or marker excepted as permitted herein under Section 7-3-9 of this
Chapter, covering monuments. The Superintendent shall have entire charge of
planting of trees and shrubs in accordance with the general plan or
ornamentation of the ground and the removal of the same. No tree or shrub shall
be planted on any grave or lot. (Ord. 260, 5-7-56)
7-3-9: MONUMENTS:
   A.   Upright monuments may be permitted in the City's cemeteries upon
approval of the City Administrator's office subject to review of the location
and footing design to assure minimum grounds maintenance around said upright
monument. Each grave shall be entitled to one marker and double markers shall
be permitted on two (2) or more graves adjacent and parallel to each other.
(Ord. 490, 4-7-83)
   B.   Markers shall be placed level with the ground surface at the head of
the grave farthest from the foot. Markers shall be of good grade concrete no
less than three inches (3") thick and shall be firmly imbedded in the soil.
Temporary markers supplied by funeral home and approved by City will be
permitted.
   C.   The City does not have for sale, or offer for sale, monuments, markers
or stones and performs no work in the placing of them, but the Superintendent
shall have general supervision over persons performing such work.
   D.   Foundations shall be of concrete made of one part cement, two (2) parts
sand and four (4) parts gravel, not less than six inches (6") deep and with
horizontal dimensions of twenty two inches (22") wide and twelve inches (12")
greater than the length of the monument. Top of concrete foundation shall at no
point be less than two inches (2") below surface of sod.
   E.   Monument firms will be held responsible for damage caused during their
work, to structures, grounds, trees, flowers and shrubbery and for the conduct
of their workers and suspension of labor in the vicinity of funerals. (Ord.
446, 4-2-79)
7-3-10: FUNERALS 1 :
Funerals shall, unless special permission be granted by the City Recorder, take
place between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00)
P.M. at the cemetery, Monday through Friday, except on holidays. (Ord. 260, 5-
7-56)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section 6-4-7 of this Code.
7-3-11: CONDUCT OF PERSONS WITHIN CEMETERIES:
   A.   Motor Vehicles: Automobiles or other vehicles shall not be driven
faster than fifteen (15) miles per hour, shall not turn around on roads or
avenues and shall not be driven upon grass or lawns within the cemeteries.
   B.   Visitors: Visitors will be admitted to the cemetery  during daylight
hours and must enter by the gates. Persons in violation hereof will be deemed a
trespasser.
   C.   Employee Authority: The Superintendent and assistants are instructed to
prevent the entrance of all improper persons and to remove from the grounds all
who violate these rules, commit trespass or depredation, picnic parties,
persons who pick flowers or plants, break or injure any tree or shrub, persons
with firearms or dogs, persons who injure, write upon or deface any wall,
monument or stone or use boisterous and profane language or who use conduct
tending to disturb the quiet and good order of the cemetery, except that
firearms shall be permitted in case of military ceremonies.
   D.   Gratuities Prohibited: No gratuities of any nature whatsoever shall be
accepted for any purpose by any employee in the cemetery in connection with
his/her services. (Ord. 260, 5-7-56; 1993 Code)
CHAPTER 4
WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A.  WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
7-4A-1:   Definitions
7-4A-2:   Administration
7-4A-3:   Required Water Service
7-4A–4:   Service Connections
7-4A–5:   Application for Service
7-4A–6:   Water User Service Lines
7-4A–7:   Service Pipes and Extensions of Water Mains
7-4A–8:   Water Meters
7-4A–9:   Cross-Connection Control Requirement
7-4A-10:   Water Rates and Charges
7-4A-11:   Collection of Water Rates and Charges
7-4A-12:   Discontinuance of Service by Water User
7-4A-13:   Responsibility for Service
7-4A-14:   Responsibility for Water User Equipment
7-4A-15:   Unlawful Acts
7-4A-16:   Inspections
7-4A-17:   Penalties
7-4A-18:   Additional Remedies
7-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them:
 
AGENT:                  A tenant or other person on the premises of another.
                        The physical vertical separation between the free
AIR GAP SEPARATION:     flowing discharge end or a potable water supply pipe
                        line and the open or nonpressure receiving vessel.
APPROVAL or APPROVED:   Approved in writing.
                        Any supply of water used to augment the supply obtained
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: from the public water system which serves the premises
                        in question.
 
                             Water service shall be considered available upon
AVAILABLE WATER SERVICE:     the existence of a distribution main of a public
                             water system to which a service connection can be
                             completed by the water user.
                             Any reversal of the normal flow of water from the
BACKFLOW:                    distribution system that may allow contamination
                             or pollution of the public water supply and render
                             it nonpotable.
                             Any devices or methods approved by the
BACK-FLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Superintendent for use in the prevention of back-
                             flow.
CITY:                        The City of Umatilla, Oregon.
                             Any link or channel between the piping which
CROSS-CONNECTION :           carries drinking water and the piping or fixtures
                             which carry water or other substances.
                             The network of pipes and other facilities which
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:         are used to distribute water from the source,
                             treatment, transmission, or storage facilities to
                             the water user.
                             An assembly of two (2) independently acting check
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: valves with shut-off valves on each side of the
                             check valves and test cocks for checking the water
                             tightness of each check valve.
                             A condition resulting from an unusual calamity
                             such as a flood, storm, earthquake, drought, civil
                             disorder, volcanic eruption, an accidental spill
EMERGENCY:                   of hazardous material, or other occurrence which
                             disrupts water service at a public water system or
                             endangers the quality of water produced by a
                             public water system.
                             Includes a corporation, government, governmental
                             subdivision or agency, business trust, estate,
                             trust, partnership or association, two (2) or more
ORGANIZATION:                persons having a joint or common interest, and any
                             other legal or commercial entity, including any
                             receiver, special master, trustee, assignee, or
                             other similar representative thereof.
                             Includes a mortgagee in possession and means one
OWNER:                       or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is
                             vested:
                            A. All or part of the legal title to the property;
                             or
 
                                   B. All or part of the beneficial ownership
                                  and a right to present use and enjoyment of
                                   the premises.
PERSON:                            Includes an individual or organization,
                                   except the City.
                                   Water from any source that has been
POTABLE WATER:                     investigated by the health agency having
                                   jurisdiction, and has been approved by such
                                   agency for human consumption.
                                   A device for preventing backflow which has
                                   two (2) check valves, a differential relief
                                   valve located between two (2) check valves,
REDUCED PRESSED PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW two (2) shut-off valves, one on the upstream
PREVENTION DEVICE (R.P.DEVICE):    side and the other on the downstream side of
                                   the check valves, and four (4) test cocks
                                   for checking the watertightness of the check
                                   valves and the operation of the relief
                                   valve.
                                   The piping connection that conveys water
SERVICE CONNECTION:                from a distribution main of a City water
                                   distribution system to a water user's
                                   premises.
                                   City Public Works Superintendent, and
SUPERINTENDENT:                    includes authorized personnel and employees
                                   of the City Public Works Department.
                                   Includes an organization or adult person or
                                   adult persons entitled under an oral or
TENANT:                            written rental agreement, including a
                                   leasehold interest, to occupy real property
                                   or a building, including a dwelling unit, to
                                   the exclusion of others.
WATER METER OR METER:              Includes the corporation cock, meter, meter
                                   box and lid.
                                   Includes any person who has made or is
                                   required to make application with the City
                                   for water services or, if no application has
                                   been made, any person whose premises receive
WATER USER:                        City water or are served by the City water
                                   works system. In cases of multiple users who
                                   receive their water through a single meter,
                                   the owner of the premises is the water user
                                   and shall be the person to make application
                                   for water services.
 
                    Includes City water wells, surface water diversion
                    infrastructure, pumping equipment, the distribution systems
WATER WORKS SYSTEM: of potable and non-potable water, fire hydrants, meters and
                    all other appurtenances. (Ord. 517, 10-21-1985; amd. Ord.
                    582, 7-1-1991; Ord. 669, 4-7-1998; Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
 
7-4A-2:   ADMINISTRATION:
A.   Public Works Superintendent: The Superintendent shall have charge of the
maintenance and operation of the water supply, pumping equipment, distribution
system, fire hydrants, meters and all other appurtenances of the water works
system, under the supervision and direction of the City Administrator. The
Superintendent shall oversee all extensions and alterations of the water works
system which are authorized by the City Council. The Superintendent shall also
be responsible for the reading of all water meters and shall report to the City
Finance Officer on all money due the City for all deposit fees and charges made
for water service and connections.
B.   City Finance Officer: The Finance Officer shall be responsible for the
collection of water bills, deposits and fees. All revenues therefrom shall be
accounted for in the manner required by Ordinance 436, section 4, "Protection
and Disposition of Funds", as set forth in subsection C of this Section and
shall be deposited regularly in a separate fund designated Reserve Fund
Account, which fund shall be separate from all other funds and deposits of the
City.
C.   Protection And Disposition Of Funds: The City Finance Director shall be
the custodian of all funds of the City and all funds shall be deposited in a
bank which is a member of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The
Finance Director shall execute a fidelity bond in an amount not less than fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) with a surety company approved by the Farmers
Home Administration and the United States of America shall be named as co-
obligee in such bond and the amount thereof shall not be reduced without the
prior written consent of Farmers Home Administration. The City Finance Director
is hereby directed to establish the following accounts into which the current
funds of the City, bond proceeds, the revenues from the facility and other
income shall be deposited, which accounts shall be continually maintained,
except as otherwise provided, so long as the bond hereby authorized remains
unpaid:
   1.   Construction Account: The proceeds of the bond hereby authorized shall
be deposited in the construction account which shall be established as a
"supervised bank account" as required by the government. Amounts in the
supervised bank account exceeding forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) shall be
secured by the depository bank in advance in accordance with the U.S. Treasury
Department Circular No. 176. Withdrawal from the construction bank account
shall be made only on checks signed by the Finance Director of the City as
authorized by the City Council from time to time, countersigned by the Mayor
and only for the purposes for which said bond was signed as specified in the
estimate of costs. The City's share of any liquidated damages and other moneys
paid by defaulting contractors of their sureties will be deposited in the
construction account to assure completion of the project. When the construction
of the facility has been completed or all construction costs have been paid for
in full, any balance remaining in the construction account shall be used
immediately to pay outstanding installments on the bond in inverse order
without premiums, except that any balance in an amount insufficient to pay a
whole installment will be transferred to the reserve account. The construction
account shall then be closed.
   2.   Revenue Fund Account: As soon as the facility becomes revenue
producing, the gross revenues shall be set aside into a separate account to be
designated the revenue fund account, and moneys so deposited therein shall be
expended and used only in the manner and order as follows:
      a.   Operation And Maintenance Account (Bookkeeping Account): There shall
be set aside and deposited a sufficient portion of the income and revenue in
the revenue account to pay the reasonable and necessary current expenses of
operating and maintaining the facility.
      b.   Debt Service Account (Bookkeeping Account): After the transfer
required in subsection C2a of this Section, there shall be transferred each
year prior to December 1 from the revenue fund account, before any other
expenditures or transfer therefrom and deposited in the debt service account
for payment of the annual installment of the note, a sum equal to the annual
installment becoming due on December 1.
         (1)   If the City for any reason shall fail to make such deposit, then
an amount equal to the deficiency shall be set apart and deposited in the debt
service account out of the gross revenues, which amount shall be in addition to
the regular deposit required.
         (2)   Whenever there shall accumulate in the debt service account
amounts in excess of the requirements during the next twelve (12) months for
paying principal and interest on outstanding installments and in the operation
and maintenance account and the reserve account, hereinafter established,
amounts in excess of the requirements thereof, such excess may be used by the
City to make prepayments on the loan. Reserve Account (Bookkeeping Account):
Out of the balance of income and revenue in the revenue fund account remaining
after the transfers required in subsections C2a and C2b of this Section have
been made, there shall be set aside and deposited in the reserve account the
sum of five hundred thirty dollars ($530.00) each month until there is
accumulated in that fund the sum of sixty three thousand sixty dollars
($63,060.00), after which no further deposits need be made into said account
except to replace withdrawals. The reserve account shall be used and disbursed
only for the purpose of paying the cost of repairing or replacing any damage to
the facility which may be caused by any unforeseen catastrophe, for making
extensions or improvements to the facility and when necessary for the purpose
of making payments of principal and interest on the bonds hereby authorized in
the event the amount of the debt service account is insufficient to meet such
payments. Whenever disbursements are made from said account, said monthly
deposits shall be resumed until there is again accumulated the amount of sixty
three thousand sixty dollars ($63,060.00), at which time deposits may be again
discontinued. (Ord. 436, 11-6-1978; amd. Ord. 517, 10-21-1985; Ord.  841, 1-7-
2020)
7-4A-3: REQUIRED WATER SERVICE:
A.   All residential and non-residential use requiring potable water or non-
potable water shall be connected to the City water works system if such water
service is available, provided, however, if a water user: (1) possesses and
operates a well to withdraw groundwater for domestic use, the water user may
continue to operate such well for such purpose if information is submitted
confirming (a) the well has been in operation prior to July 1, 2020, and (b)
the well and use of water is in compliance with applicable law; (2) possesses
and operates a well to withdraw groundwater for irrigation use, the water user
may continue to operate such well for such purpose if information is submitted
confirming the well (a) has been in operation prior to July 1, 2020, and (b)
the well and use of water is in compliance with applicable law; (3) possesses
and relies on a water supply from an irrigation district for irrigation use,
the water user may continue to source such water from the irrigation district
for such purpose if information is submitted confirming the right to receive
and use the irrigation district water; or (4) possesses and relies on a water
supply source previously authorized prior to April 1, 2019 by City ordinance or
by written agreement with the City.
B.   All residential and non-residential use located on premises previously
connected to the City water works system must be newly connected to the water
works system within sixty (60) days of the City water being made available. In
the event the existing meter or tap does not meet City standards, required
modifications will be performed by the City and the reasonable costs thereof as
determined by administrative policy shall be paid by the water user. These
costs shall be in lieu of the connection charge ordinarily imposed. (Ord. 841,
1-7-2020)
A.   Single-Unit And Multi-Unit Residences: All single-unit residences shall
have one service connection and a water meter. All multi-unit residences
including, but not limited to, apartments and motels, shall have a separate
service connection and water meter for each unit. If requested by the owner and
approved by the City Council, the owner of a multiple-unit residence containing
five (5) or more units may have only one water meter.
B.   Non-Residential: All non-residential water users shall have a water meter
for each user; provided, that if any owner of any building divides or separates
his/her/its other building so as to provide a separate place for a business,
each business place will have a separate water meter. The owner of a structure
in which water is provided through a single water meter shall be liable for all
water supplied to the building. If a use is changed in a non-residential
structure, a water meter shall be required on the new use. If requested by the
owner and approved by the City Council, the owner of a non-residential building
containing two (2) or more separate water users or business places may have
only one water meter.
C.   Requests For Exceptions: Exceptions provided by subsections A and B of
this section, shall only be made by resolution of the City Council stating the
reason therefor. The person requesting the exception shall pay for all expenses
in connection with the City Council's review of the request, including, but not
limited to, City attorney fees, staff time, engineering fees, any materials and
other related costs, whether or not the request is granted. The expenses of
review may be added to the person's water billing and collected in the same
manner as water rates and charges. (Ord. 517, 10-21-1985; amd. Ord. 841, 1-7-
2020)
7-4A-4: SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
A.   Single-Unit And Multi-Unit Residences: All single-unit residences shall
have one service connection and a water meter. All multi-unit residences
including, but not limited to, apartments and motels, shall have a separate
service connection and water meter for each unit. If requested by the owner and
approved by the City Council, the owner of a multiple-unit residence containing
five (5) or more units may have only one water meter.
B.   Non-Residential: All non-residential water users shall have a water meter
for each user; provided, that if any owner of any building divides or separates
his/her/its other building so as to provide a separate place for a business,
each business place will have a separate water meter. The owner of a structure
in which water is provided through a single water meter shall be liable for all
water supplied to the building. If a use is changed in a non-residential
structure, a water meter shall be required on the new use. If requested by the
owner and approved by the City Council, the owner of a non-residential building
containing two (2) or more separate water users or business places may have
only one water meter.
C.   Requests For Exceptions: Exceptions provided by subsections A and B of
this section, shall only be made by resolution of the City Council stating the
reason therefor. The person requesting the exception shall pay for all expenses
in connection with the City Council's review of the request, including, but not
limited to, City attorney fees, staff time, engineering fees, any materials and
other related costs, whether or not the request is granted. The expenses of
review may be added to the person's water billing and collected in the same
manner as water rates and charges. (Ord. 517, 10-21-1985; amd. Ord. 841, 1-7-
2020)
7-4A-5: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
A.   Connection To Water Main: Before connecting to any water main or altering
a service connection, application for permission must be made in writing by the
owner of the premises to be served, or the owner's authorized representative,
to the City. The application shall be in such form as shall be from time to
time prescribed by the City. By submitting an application, the owner agrees to
be bound by the terms of this article and amendments and all reasonable rules
and regulations as shall be promulgated by the City in implementation of this
article.
B.   Opening Water Account: Applications for water service shall be made at
city hall by or on behalf of the person requesting water and water service.
Persons receiving water and water services are deemed bound by the terms of
this article and amendments and all reasonable rules and regulations as shall
be promulgated by the City in implementation of this article.
C.   Implied Consent; Discontinue Service Without Notice: Any water user shall
be deemed to have consented and agreed to the terms and provisions of this
article and to have acknowledged the right of the city to discontinue water
service without notice in the event of failure to make timely payment of all
rates and charges or to otherwise comply with the provisions of this article or
regulations to implement this article.
D.   Eligibility For Water Service: The City may refuse to provide water
service to real property unless the owner, the owner's agent, or the owner's
tenant has made formal application for water service from the City. A tenant
applying for water service may be required by the City to provide proof of his
or her tenancy. The City shall refuse to provide water service to real property
when any tenant applying for water service has a previous unpaid bill for water
service with the City unless the City and the tenant agree to a written plan
for repayment of unpaid water bills. The City may disconnect water service to
real property if the owner, the owner's agent, or the owner's tenant has not
made formal application for water service from the City.
E.   When Owner Is Responsible: When water service is provided to a multi-unit
residential or non-residential use , and such multi-unit use does not have a
separate water meter for each unit, the owner shall be responsible for payment
and the property is subject to a lien.
F.   Annexation: Prior to being connected to City water service each parcel to
receive service shall annex into the City. If a parcel is outside City limits
and not contiguous to city limits, the owner shall sign an unlimited agreement
to annex when the subject property becomes contiguous to City limits.
Properties within the McNary Industrial Park are not required to annex in order
to connect to City water service. (Ord. 517, 1021-1985; amd. Ord. 582, 7-1-
1991; Ord. 669, 4-7-1998; Ord. 765, 7-5-2011; Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4A-6: WATER USER SERVICE LINES:
A.   Installation: The service line from the property line shall be installed
and properly maintained by the water user. All service pipes and all water
pipes in all premises shall be installed in accordance with the plumbing code
of the state of Oregon and the City.
B.   Connection To Water Meter Or Upon Premises: Before any attachment or
connection is made between the water meter and the water user's service line,
permission shall be obtained from the Superintendent, and the work shall be
performed at the expense of the water user. All connections or attachments to
the water meter or upon the premises shall be in accordance with the plumbing
code of the state of Oregon and the City.
C.   Ground Wire Attachments: The water user shall be liable for any damage to
city property caused by electrical ground wire attachment to any plumbing.
D.   Leaking Plumbing: Water may not be furnished where there are defective or
leaking faucets, water closets or other fixtures, or where there are water
closets or urinals without self-closing valves, or tanks without self-acting
float valves, and the water supply may be shut off.  (Ord. 517, 10-21-1985;
amd. Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4A-7: SERVICE PIPES AND EXTENSIONS OF WATER MAINS:
A.   Installation: Service pipes of all sizes between the water main and the
water meter shall be of the type and material specified by the Superintendent.
Service pipes from the water meters to the property line and within the
premises shall be of a grade of material approved by the Superintendent.
Service pipes between the water main and water meter shall be installed and
maintained by the City, except where the meter is located at a distance from
the water main further than the street property line, in which event special
arrangements shall be made as to the cost of the extra length of line.
B.   Extension: Extension to the water mains of the water system may be made by
any one of the following methods, in addition to the procedures provided in
this Article or other ordinances of the City, as specified by an engineer of
the City's choice.
   1.   By the person requesting the water main paying the entire cost. The
water main shall be conveyed or transferred to the City with the necessary
easements, and shall meet the following requirements:
      a.   Specified by the City Engineer, the size, grade, and location of
such main shall provide for anticipated future development of the property in
the adjacent area, and for the connections which such development may generate.
      b.   Where the main passes through private property, a twenty foot (20')
easement and right of way shall be granted to the City for the maintenance,
operation, and repairing of such main and for all water line purposed necessary
or reasonably incident to the uses and purposes thereof, including any
connections to the water system of the City, but not limited thereto.
      c.   A special connection charge (in addition to the service connection
fee) may be charged to those connecting to the water main extension or line who
did not share in the cost of its installation in order to reimburse the person
or persons who paid for its installation. The special connection charge shall
be calculated as follows:
         (1)   The proportionate share of the total cost of the water main
extension or line which reflects the benefits to each property which may be
connected to the line or main, based on the square footage of each benefitted
property;
         (2)   The total actual cost of the water main extension or line,
increased by nine percent annual simple interest, or such other percentage that
the City Council may, from time to time, set by resolution, multiplied by a
percentage of front footage owned by the benefitting property owner of the
total front footage of the water main extension or line; or
         (3)   Such other methodology as may be set forth by written agreement
between the City and the person initially paying the entire cost of the water
main extension or line and which agreement is approved by the City Council.
      d.   Future interest rate changes shall not apply to previously executed
reimbursement agreements entered into between the City and the person initially
paying the entire cost of the water main extension.
   2.   By petitioning the city council to extend the City water main in a
manner to be financed as described hereafter. When considering such extension
to the City water system, the city council shall have before it a report from
the City Engineer of:
      a.   The total cost of installing the main of a design and capacity
sufficient to serve the needs of the anticipated future development of the
property and adjacent area and for the connections which such development may
generate.
      b.   The proportionate share of such total cost which shall reflect the
benefits to each property which may be connected to the line or main, such
proportionate costs to be determined in the same manner as for a local
improvement, as provided by the local improvement ordinance.
C.   Financed From Water Fund: At such time as the City Council determines that
a water main shall be installed by the manner herein described, and when
appropriations therefor have been budgeted, all costs for such water main shall
be financed from the Water Fund. A special connection charge (in addition to
the service connection fee) equal to the proportional benefits, as above
described, shall be paid into the Water Fund, together with an annual interest
charge of not less than twelve percent (12%) per annum or The U.S. National
Bank prime rate plus two percent (2%), whichever is greater, beginning on the
date on which construction of such main was completed, by each property owner
requesting to be connected to the water system. (Ord. 517, 10-21-85; 1993 Code;
amd. Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4A-8: WATER METERS:
A.   Installation, Care And Custody Of Water Meters: Water meters will be
furnished and installed by the City, and the expense of installation will be
included in the service connection fee. The water user will have custody of the
water meter, but the water meter will remain the property of the City. There is
hereby created the relationship of bailor and bailee between the City and the
water user in regard to the care and custody of the water meter.
B.   Repairs: The water user shall be liable for any adjustments, repairs or
replacement of a water meter or other equipment or property owned by the City
which is caused by an act of the water user or tenants, agents, employees,
contractors, licensees, permittees or family members of the water user,
including the breaking or destruction of seals and locks on or near a water
meter. If a water meter is damaged from hot water from the water user's line,
the water user shall be required to pay for the cost of repairs of the water
meter and for the loss of revenue occasioned by the damage, and shall
immediately make the necessary corrections in the water user's water lines to
prevent further damage to the water meter.
C.   Malfunctioning Water Meters: In case of damage to a meter, its stoppage or
imperfect operation, the water user shall give immediate notice to the City. If
any water meter malfunctions or fails to register not due to the fault of the
water user, the water user will be charged the basic rate for the time period
that the meter malfunctioned.
D.   Inspection And Testing: The Superintendent may inspect and test water
meters at any time. If a water user requests inspection and testing of a water
meter, a testing fee shall be paid in advance. If the water meter is found to
be inaccurate according to the standards of the American Waterworks
Association, a water meter will be substituted, the water bill for the
preceding billing period shall be adjusted as set out in subsection C of this
Section and the water meter accuracy test fee refunded.
E.   Accessibility To Water Meters: The water user shall keep the water meter
and appurtenant area free from obstruction or debris in, on or around the same
and accessible at all times, for the purpose of turning-on and turning-off
water, and reading, inspecting or repairing the water meter.
F.   Keeping Water Meters from Freezing: The water user shall take all
necessary precautions to keep the water meter from freezing. If the water user
fails to keep the water meter from freezing, the water user shall be charged
with the cost of repairing any damage which may result from such failure.
G.   Keeping Water Meter Areas Safe: The water user shall keep the water meter
box and appurtenant area in a safe condition and shall be responsible for any
   repair to the water meter and appurtenances or property damage or personal
injury to third persons. In addition, the water user shall hold the City
harmless and indemnify it against any claims by third persons. The City hereby
creates a right of action in third persons injured as a result of a water
user's failure to properly maintain the water meter box and/or appurtenant
area.
H.   Use Of Water Meters: All water furnished by the City to any property with
a water meter must pass through the water meter. (Ord. 517, 10-21-85; amd. Ord.
841, 1-7-2020)
7-4A-9: CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL REQUIREMENT:
A.   Identifying Cross-Connections: The cross-connection control inspector
shall identify and evaluate the premises where potential cross-connections
exist.
B.   Discontinue Service: Where the Superintendent has reasonable cause to
believe that an existing or potential cross-connection is located on the water
user's premises, the Superintendent shall deny or discontinue service to those
premises until an appropriate backflow prevention device is installed or until
the cause of the hazard is eliminated.
C.   Water User to Notify Superintendent: Whenever a water user obtains water
from the water works system and treats the water in any way or adds any
chemical or substance to the water, the water user shall immediately notify the
Superintendent.
D.   Installation Of Backflow Prevention Devices:
   1.   Backflow prevention devices for protecting the water works system shall
be installed on the service connection to premises as required by State law and
regulations.
   2.   All backflow devices shall be installed in accordance with the Oregon
Health Division standards.
E.   Type of Backflow Prevention Device: The type of backflow prevention device
required under subsection D of this Section shall be commensurate with the
degree of hazard which exists.
F.   All backflow prevention devices required under this Section shall be of a
type and model approved by the Superintendent or the Oregon Health Division.
The City shall maintain a list of backflow prevention devices approved for use
in Oregon.
G.   Testing And Inspection Of Backflow Prevention Devices:
   1.   The water user, where one or more reduced pressure device, doublecheck
valve assembly, or pressure vacuum breaker have been installed, shall have the
device tested at least once per year. Backflow prevention devices found not to
be functioning properly shall be promptly repaired by the water user or the
City may deny or discontinue service as provided in subsection B of this
Section. Devices shall be tested immediately after installation and after they
are moved. Reports on the tests shall be prepared by the Superintendent and
copies of the report shall be provided to the water user.
   2.   Backflow prevention devices installed before the effective date of this
Article, which were approved at the time they were installed, but are not on
the current list of approved devices maintained by the Oregon Health Division,
shall be permitted to remain in service provided they are properly maintained,
are commensurate with the degree of hazard, are tested at least annually, and
perform satisfactorily. When devices of this type are moved, or require more
than minimum maintenance, they shall be replaced by devices which are on the
Oregon Health Division list of approved devices. (Ord. 517, 10-21-1985; amd.
1993 Code; Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4A-10:  WATER RATES AND CHARGES:
A.   Set By Resolution; Services Listed: Water rates, charges, deposits and
water services shall be set by resolution of the City Council and be reviewed
at least once annually1.
B.   Adjustment Of Rates: Water rates shall not be decreased during any period
that bonds issued pursuant to Charter amendments enacted by the people of the
City at a special election dated February 24, 1976, and issued December 1,
1978, to Farmers Home Administration are outstanding.
C.   Existing Contracts: Water rates adopted by resolution of the City Council
shall not modify any existing contract the City has with any person for water
rates.
D.   Damages To City Property: Wherever this Article provides for liability for
any damage or repairs to City property by any water user, the amount of damages
or repairs may be added to the water user's bill and collected in the same
manner as water rates and charges.  (Ord. 517, 10-21-1985; amd. 1993 Code; Ord.
841, 1-7-2020)
7-4A-11: COLLECTION OF WATER RATES AND CHARGES: 
A.   Application Fee; Water And Sewer Deposit: Any person for whom an account
is opened shall pay a nonrefundable application processing fee to cover
administrative costs of opening an account. Each application for use of sewer
service, water, or both, shall be accompanied by a refundable deposit which
will be held by the City and applied against any unpaid service charges for
garbage, sewer or water charges due from the applicant. The application fee and
deposits shall be collected from all applicants within three (3) days after
requesting service from the City. The three (3) day period for payment of the
application fee and deposits may be extended at the request of the applicant
because of extenuating circumstances, which will be reviewed by the City
Administrator. When an account is closed, the amount of any sewer and water
deposits plus interest shall be returned to the applicant, less any amounts due
for garbage, sewer or water service. If an applicant has paid the monthly
statements for garbage, sewer and water service in a timely manner for thirty
six (36) consecutive months without delinquency charge, the deposit plus
interest will be credited against the applicant's current bill.
B.   Billing Procedures:
   1.   Water And Sewer Bills Combined: All bills for water shall be prepared
each month at the same time bills for sewage services are prepared and shall be
collected as a combined bill for water and sewage service.
   2.   Billing To The Premises: All water service charges shall be mailed to
the premises where water service is furnished unless the water user requests,
in writing, that the bill be submitted to another address.
   3.   Due Date:
      a.   All water bills for each month shall be due and payable on the
twentieth day of each month.
      b.   If the last day for making payment falls due on a day when City Hall
is closed before the end of or for all of the normal workday or on any legal
holiday, Saturday or Sunday, the payment may be made until the close of
business hours on the next day that City Hall is open for business.
   4.   Place Of Payment: All water bills shall be paid at City Hall.
C.   Appeals: Any person wishing to challenge a water billing may appeal to the
City Administrator before the water service is suspended. Service will not be
suspended during the pendency of an appeal if the water user pays the amount of
any water billing not in dispute and the delinquent fee, if the amount not in
dispute is twenty (20) days past due.
D.   Delinquencies:
   1.   Fee: All bills unpaid after the twentieth day of each month shall be
considered delinquent and a delinquency fee shall be assessed.
   2.   Notice Of Delinquency; Suspension Of Water Service: After the twentieth
day of each month, notification shall be given as provided in subsection B2 of
this Section, that the water bill and delinquency fee must be paid within five
(5) days or water service to the property will be suspended. If the water user
is not the owner of the real property receiving water service, a copy of the
delinquency notice shall also be sent by first class mail to the owner or
owner's agent that is on file with the City when the delinquency notice is sent
to the water user. In the case of residential housing where water service
charges are sent to the landlord instead of the tenant and the five (5) day
delinquency period has expired without payment, notice that water service will
be shut off within one business day shall be attached to the door of each
tenant. If the water service is turned off, the water bill, delinquency fee,
and the expense of reconnecting the service shall be paid in full before water
service is restored.
   3.   Duty To Disconnect Water Service: It shall be the duty of the Finance
Officer to notify the Superintendent of any water user whose bill is
outstanding after the deadline in subsection D2 of this Section, and the
Superintendent shall proceed immediately to disconnect the water service,
unless the City Administrator has postponed the suspension of water services.
   4.   Water Charged To Other Premises Of User: All charges for furnishing
water within the City and also to premises outside the City, shall be
chargeable to the water user of said water at the premises or any former
premises where water service was supplied. Where the water user has a
delinquent bill for one premises, that delinquency shall be charged against the
water user for water obtained at any other premises or source served by the
City.
E.   Low Income Rate: For relief of those residents who are experiencing a
financial hardship, an application for the low income rate may be made to the
City. The City Administrator and Water/Sewer Committee will evaluate requests
and make recommendations to the city council.
F.   Leaky Plumbing: No water charges will be adjusted for any water registered
by meter that may leak or waste through the plumbing or fixtures of the water
user.
G.   Outside City Water Rates: The City may furnish water to places outside the
City limits if it does not affect the City's supply, and the city council may
set the rates therefor by resolution.
H.   Exemption: A turn-off and turn-on fee will not be charged the water user
if one of the purposes for turning off the water was installation of a shut-off
valve between the water meter and the premises. This is a one-time exemption
that runs with the property and shall only be allowed once.
I.   Delay Of Termination Of Water Service: Any person faced with immediate
discontinuance of water service, who is unable to pay by reason of an emergency
situation in which:
   1.   The discontinuance would cause severe hardship to persons other than
the individual unable to pay;
   2.   The emergency is a situation that will be resolved in a period of less
than thirty (30) days from the delinquency billing date; and
   3.   The emergency is one which will be unlikely to recur;
   may request the City Administrator to postpone the cut-off date. The City
Administrator may postpone the discontinuance of services for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) days from the delinquency billing date. Any person for whom
termination of service has been delayed shall be required to pay the applicable
fees in subsection D1 and D2 of this Section.
J.   Deposits:
   1.   Interest: The Director is authorized to invest deposits held by the
City in interest-bearing accounts. The City shall pay interest at the lowest
rate earned on the City's investments during the calendar year, less one
percent (1%) for administrative expenses, to the applicant making the deposit.
The interest will be credited to the customer's account on January 1 succeeding
each deposit and on January 1 thereafter. Interest on sewer and water deposits
shall begin on January 1, 1989, or the date of the deposit, whichever is later.
   2.   Unclaimed Deposits: Deposits received as security for the payment of
water and sewer which remain unclaimed for a period of two (2) years after an
account is closed may be transferred to the Water Fund Account.
K.   Lien For Unpaid Water Bill: When any bill remains unpaid after it becomes
delinquent, the amount due (including interest and penalty) shall be recorded
in the lien docket of the City and shall constitute a lien on the real property
to which water service was provided. At any time after sixty (60) days from the
time the lien is entered in the city's lien docket, in addition to any method
provided by ordinance or charter, the lien may be foreclosed in the manner
provided in Oregon Revised Statutes.
L.   Transfer Of A Claim: A tenant's bill may be transferred to the property
owner, or to a subsequent tenant, if a delinquency notice was provided by first
class mail to the tenant and to the property owner or the owner's agent within
thirty (30) days from the date the bill was due1. (Ord. 515, 10-21-1985; amd.
Ord. 517, 10-21-1985; Ord. 559, 8-8-1989; Ord. 582, 7-1-1991; Ord. 611, 11-2-
1993, eff. 1-1-1994; Ord. 669, 4-7-1998; Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4A-12:   DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE BY WATER USER:
A.   Request For Discontinuance: Any water user desiring to discontinue the
water service may make application therefor at city hall not less than two (2)
days before the date on which the service is desired to be discontinued. Upon
payment of the turn off fee and the sewer and water bill to date, water service
will cease after the effective date of discontinuance for the period during
which the service is to be shut off. Water services shall not be returned to
the premises until the turn on fee is paid.
B.   Liability For Repairs: Any repairs or adjustments made necessary to the
water meter for lack of use by water service being discontinued shall be
charged and collected from the water user and may be added to the water bill
and collected in the same manner as water rates and charges. (Ord. 582, 7-1-
1991; amd. Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4A-13:   RESPONSIBILITY FOR SERVICE:
A.   Nonliability: The city shall not be liable for high or low pressure
connections, chemical, bacteriological or physical conditions, interruptions,
or shortage or insufficiency of supply or any loss or damage occasioned
thereby. The use of water upon the premises of the water user shall be at the
risk of the water user and the responsibility of the city shall cease at the
point of delivery of water. The point of delivery shall be at the water user's
side of the water meter, or in case of privately owned water lines, the point
of delivery shall be at the end of the city's service line.
B.   Water Curtailment:
   1.   Waste Prohibited: It is unlawful to allow waste of city water by
knowingly or negligently causing, authorizing or permitting such water to
escape from its intended beneficial use into any river, creek, natural
watercourse, depression, lake, reservoir, storm sewer, street, highway, road or
ditch. For the purpose of this subsection, "waste" means the use of water in
excess of the reasonable volume necessary to meet the beneficial use; and
"beneficial use" means the reasonable efficient use of water.
   2.   Authority: When the public works superintendent determines that a
critical water supply shortage threatens the ability of the city to deliver
essential water to its customers, the administrator may activate emergency
measures in compliance with the water curtailment plan, adopted by the city on
March 1, 2005, and on file with the city recorder.
   3.   Restrictions Authorized: Upon declaration of a stage three critical
water supply shortage by the public works superintendent:
      a.   No watering or irrigating of lawns, grass or turf shall occur unless
it is:
         (1)   New lawn, grass or turf that has been seeded or sodded after
March 1 of the calendar year in which the restrictions are imposed, and in such
cases it may be watered as necessary until established;
         (2)   Athletic fields frequently used for organized play;
         (3)   Golf course tees and greens; and
         (4)   Park and recreation areas of a particular significance and value
to the community as approved by the city manager.
      b.   No use of city supplied water shall be allowed to clean, fill or
maintain levels in decorative fountains.
      c.   No use of city supplied water shall be allowed to fill swimming
pools or other pools with a capacity in excess of one hundred (100) gallons;
provided, however, that water may be added to swimming pools to replace volume
lost due to evaporation and normal loss due to usage.
      d.   No use of city supplied water shall be allowed to wash sidewalks,
walkways, streets, driveways, parking lots or other hard surfaced areas except
where necessary for public health or safety.
      e.   No use of city supplied water shall be allowed to wash vehicles.
   4.   Withholding Service: In the event that a citation is issued during the
period of activated emergency measures for a violation of subsection B1 or B3
of this section, and the public works superintendent determines that a second
violation has occurred after the date of the citation and during the same
emergency curtailment period, the public works superintendent may:
      a.   Install a flow restrictor on the street side of the water meter; or
      b.   Terminate water service.
C.   Interruptions In Service: Water may at any time be shut off from the mains
for repairs or other necessary purposes. When this is done, the superintendent
will try to give timely notice to water users affected thereby and will, so far
as practicable, attempt to prevent inconvenience and damage arising from the
shutting off of water. But, failure to give notice shall not render the city
responsible or liable for damages or any inconvenience, injury or loss which
may result therefrom. (Ord. 517, 10-21-1985; amd. Ord. 736, 4-5-2005; Ord. 841,
1-7-2020)
7-4A-14:   RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER USER EQUIPMENT:
The water user shall, at his or her own risk and expense, furnish, install and
keep in good and safe condition all equipment that may be required for
receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing water, and the city shall not be
responsible for any loss or damage caused by improper installation of such
equipment, or the negligence, want of proper care or wrongful act of the
customer or any of his tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees or
permittees in installing, maintaining, using, operating or interfering with
such equipment. Further, the city shall not be liable for damage to property
caused by spigots, faucets, valves, hot water heaters or other equipment that
are open when water is turned on or off at the meter or curb stop, either when
the water is turned on originally or when turned on after a temporary
shutdown.  (Ord. 517, 10-21-1985; amd. Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4A-15:   UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A.   Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the
city to do, commit or assist in committing any of the following things or acts:
   1.   To open or close any fire hydrant, valve or other apparatus connected
with the waterworks system of the city or lift or remove the cover of any gate,
meter, valve, shutoff or other apparatus thereof.
   2.   To interfere with, destroy, deface, impair, injure or force open any
gate, or door, or in any way whatsoever destroy, injure or deface any part of
any pump house, reservoir, standpipe, tank, building or buildings, or
appurtenances, fences, trees, shrubs, or fixtures or property appertaining to
the waterworks system.
   3.   To go in, upon, descend or ascend the stairway or steps of any water
storage tank, reservoir, or standpipe of the waterworks system.
   4.   To place any telephone, electric light pole or any obstruction directly
opposite a fire hydrant portal within five feet (5'), otherwise the minimum
distance is three feet (3').
   5.   To resort to any fraudulent device or arrangement for the purpose of
procuring water for himself or others from private connections on premises
contrary to the city regulations or ordinances.
   6.   To interfere with or injure any reservoir, tank, fountain, hydrant,
pipe, cock, valve, or other apparatus pertaining to the waterworks system, or
to turn on or off the water in any street hydrant or other public water fixture
or to hitch or tie any animal thereto.
   7.   To make or permit to be made any connection with the main or service
pipe of the waterworks system, or to turn on or use the water of said system
without first obtaining a permit therefor.
   8.   To cover over or conceal from view any water valve box, service or
meter box.
   9.   To remove any water meter that has been placed by the city, or to in
any manner change, interfere with or tamper with any water meter.
   10.   To turn on the water supply to any building or to any supply pipe
where the supply has been turned off by the city.
   11.   To install, maintain or use any water siphon or injector type pump
operation for drainage purposes which uses the water supply from the city's
distribution system.
B.   Water User Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful for any water user to do,
commit or assist in committing any of the following:
   1.   To allow any obstruction or debris to accumulate on or near any water
meter box.
   2.   To allow any debris to accumulate in any water meter box more than six
inches (6") below the water meter, except during the months of November,
December, January and February.
   3.   To pay any water bill upon which payment, or upon the envelope or
outside cover of which, are any delineations, epithets, terms, or language of
an indecent, lewd, lascivious or obscene character are printed or written or
otherwise impressed or apparent.
   4.   To receive or use water through the water user's service line after
water service has been turned off by the superintendent and before water
service is restored by the superintendent.
   5.   To receive or use water from the city water system while there is a
violation of subsection
7-2B-2 C,
7-2B-5 A or B; section
7-2B-3 ,
7-2B-6  or
7-2B-8  of this title; title 8, chapter 1 or title 10 of this code occurring on
or in connection with the real property, development or building owned, rented
or occupied by the water user.  (Ord. 517, 10-211985; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 678,
10-6-1998; Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4A-16:   INSPECTIONS:
A.   Reasonable Access: The superintendent or authorized agent shall have free
access at all reasonable hours to inspect any premises supplied with water. No
person shall refuse access to any premises for such purposes.
B.   Admission Refused: If admission is refused or delayed, or if inspection is
in any way hindered, in the opinion of the superintendent, water may be turned
off to the premises after giving twenty four (24) hours' oral notice to any
occupant of the premises fourteen (14) years of age or older, or three (3)
days' written notice by mail to the water user. (Ord. 517, 10-21-1985; amd.
Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4A-17: PENALTIES:
Any person violating subsections
7-4A-4 A,
7-4A-5 B,
7-4A-14 A and B of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by the
imposition of a class A civil fine1. (Ord. 517, 10-21-1985; amd. 1993 Code;
amd. Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4A-18: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
A.   Money Judgment: In addition to the penalties provided in section
7-4A-16 of this article, the city may sue in a court of competent jurisdiction
to obtain a judgment for any fee due under this article and enforce collection
of the judgment as allowed by law.
B.   Injunction: The city may seek an injunction to prohibit a person engaged
in any activity regulated by this article without first complying with it.
C.   Attorney Fees And Costs: In any civil action authorized by this section,
if the city prevails, it shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney
fees to be set by the court in addition to its costs and disbursements. These
fees are recoverable at all levels of trial and appeal.
ARTICLE B.  SEWER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
7-4B-1: Definitions
7-4B-2: State Laws Adopted
7-4B-3: Administration
7-4B-4: Service Connections
7-4B-5: Application for Service
7-4B–6: Extensions of Sewer Mains
7-4B--7: Service Installation
7-4B–8: Pretreatment
7-4B–9: Sewer Rates and Charges
7-4B-10: Collection of Sewer Rates and Charges
7-4B-11: Discontinuance of Service by Sewerage User
7-4B-12: Unlawful Acts
7-4B-13: Industrial Cost Recovery
7-4B-14: Inspection, Samples and Tests
7-4B-15: Penalties
7-4B-16: Additional Remedies
7-4B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Article, the following mean:
 
AGENT:                             Includes a tenant or other person on the
                                   premises of another.
                                   The person making application for a permit
                                   for a sewer connection, who shall be the
APPLICANT:                         owner of the premises to be served by the
                                   sewer for which a permit is requested, or
                                   his authorized agent appointed in writing
                                   to do so.
APPROVAL or APPROVED:              Approved in writing.
                                   The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
"BOD" (denoting biochemical oxygen biochemical oxidation of organic matter
demand):                           under standard laboratory procedure in five
                                   (5) days at twenty degrees (200) Celsius,
                                   expressed in milligrams per liter.
 
                           Any structure used for human habitation, employment,
BUILDING:                  place of business, recreation, or any other purpose,
                           containing sanitary facilities.
                           Part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
                           system which receives the discharge from soil, waste
BUILDING DRAIN:            and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the
                           building and conveys it to the building sewers,
                           beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the
                           inner face of the building walls.
BUILDING SEWER:            The extension from the building drain to the public
                           sewer or other place of disposal.
CITY:                      The City of Umatilla, Oregon.
                           Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
GARBAGE:                   preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and
                           from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
                           Includes a corporation, government, governmental
                           subdivision or agency, business trust, estate,
                           trust, partnership or association, two (2) or more
ORGANIZATION:              persons having a joint or common interest, or any
                           other legal or commercial entity, including any
                           receiver, special master, trustee, assignee, or
                           other similar representative thereof.
                           Includes a mortgagee in possession and means one or
OWNER:                     more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is
                           vested:
                          A. All or part of the legal title to the property;
                           or
                          B. All or part of the beneficial ownership and a
                           right to present use and enjoyment of the premises.
pH:                        The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of the
                           hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
p.p.m.:                    Parts per million.
PERSON:                    Includes an individual or organization, except the
                           City.
                           The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
                           dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: degree that all particles will be carried freely
                           under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
                           public sewers, with no particle greater than one-
                           half inch (1 /2") (1.27 cm) in any dimension.
 
                             A combination of water-carried waste from
                             residences, hotels, motels, rooming houses,
SEWAGE:                      business buildings, institutions and industrial
                             establishments together with such ground surface
                             and storm waters which may be present.
SEWER:                       A pipe or conduit carrying sewage.
                             Includes any person who has made application with
                             the City for sewerage service or, if no
                             application has been made, any person whose
SEWER USER OR SEWERAGE USER: premises receive City sewerage service. In cases
                             of multiple sewerage users who receive City water
                             through a single water meter, the owner of the
                             premises is the sewerage user and shall be the
                             person to make application for sewerage service,
SEWERAGE SYSTEM:             All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating
                             and disposing of sewage.
SUPERVISOR:                  Public Works Superintendent, and authorized City
                             staff members.
                             Solids that either float on the surface or are in
SUSPENDED SOLIDS:            suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and
                             which are removable by laboratory filtering.
                             Includes an organization or adult person or adult
                             persons entitled under an oral or written rental
TENANT:                      agreement, including a leasehold interest, to
                             occupy real property or a building including a
                             dwelling unit, to the exclusion of others.
                             Ten thousand (10,000) gallons of water as
UNIT:                        determined by water meter readings. (Ord. 534, 12-
                             1-1986; amd. Ord. 583, 7-1-1991; Ord. 670, 4-7-
                             1998; Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
 
7-4B-2: STATE LAWS ADOPTED:
There is adopted and incorporated by reference Oregon Revised Statutes 447.010
through 447.160, the State Plumbing Code, and the applicable administrative
rules of the State Board of Health promulgated pursuant thereto, unless
otherwise provided for by ordinances of the City. (Ord. 534, 12-1-1986; amd.
Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4B-3: ADMINISTRATION:
A.   Public Works Superintendent: The Superintendent shall have charge of the
maintenance, testing, inspection and operation of the sewer system, under the
supervision and direction of the City Administrator. The Superintendent shall
oversee all extensions and alterations of the sewer system which are authorized
by the City Council. The Superintendent shall also be responsible for the
inspection of all sewer connections and shall report to the City Finance
Officer on all money due the City for all charges made for such connections.
B.   City Finance Officer: The Finance Officer shall be responsible for the
collection of sewer bills,  deposits and fees. All revenues therefrom shall be
accounted for in the manner required by ordinance and shall be deposited
regularly in a separate fund designated Special Sewer Fund, which fund shall be
separate from all other funds and deposits of the City. (Ord. 534, 12-1-1986;
amd. Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4B-4: SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
A.   Permissive Connections: Wherever there is now, or may hereafter be,
constructed in this city a public sewer for the purposes of carrying off sewage
within the city, the owner or owners of the property abutting on any street or
alley in which a sewer is constructed and, in the opinion of the
superintendent, is accessible thereto, may connect the houses or buildings on
the property to the sewer at the expense of the owner(s).
B.   Inspection Fee: An inspection fee will be charged for each connection
which is inspected. These will be paid at the time permits are acquired. (Ord.
534, 12-1-1986; amd. Ord. 583, 7-1-1991; Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4B-5: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
A.   Sewer Connection Permit: if application is approved and the fees paid as
provided, the city shall issue a sewer connection permit specifying the
location where the connection is to be made.
B.   Connection To Sewer: Before connecting to any sewer or altering a service
connection, application for permission must be made in writing by the owner of
the premises to be served, or the owner's authorized representative, to the
city* The application shall be in such form as shall be from time to time
prescribed by the city. By submitting an application, the owner agrees to be
bound by terms of this article and amendments and all reasonable rules and
regulations as shall be promulgated by the city in implementation of this
article.
C.   Opening Sewerage Service Account: Applications for sewerage service shall
be made at city hall by or on behalf of the person requesting sewerage service.
A tenant applying for sewer service may be required by the city to provide
proof of his or her tenancy, The city shall refuse to provide water and sewer
service to real property when any tenant applying for sewer service has a
previous unpaid bill for water or sewer service with the city unless the city
and the tenant agree to a written plan for repayment of unpaid water or sewer
bills. Persons receiving sewerage service are deemed bound by the terms of this
article and amendments and all reasonable rules and regulations as shall be
promulgated by the city in implementation of this article.
D.   Implied Consent; Discontinue Service Without Notice: Any sewerage user
shall be deemed to have consented and agreed to the terms and provisions of
this article and to have acknowledged the right of the city to discontinue
water and sewer service without notice in the event of failure to make timely
payments of all rates and charges and to otherwise comply with the provisions
of this article or regulations to implement this article.
E.   Annexation: Prior to being connected to city sewer service each parcel to
receive service shall annex into the city. If a parcel is outside city limits
and not contiguous to city limit* the owner shall sign an unlimited agreement
to annex when the subject property becomes contiguous to city limits. (Ord.
534, 12-1-1986; amd. Ord. 583, 7-1-1991; Ord. 670, 4-7-1998; Ord. 765, 7-5-
2011;  Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4B-6: EXTENSIONS OF SEWER MAINS:
A.   Extension: Extension to the sewer mains of the sewerage system may be made
by any one of the following methods, in addition to the procedures provided in
this Article or other ordinances of the City, as specified by an engineer of
the City's choice.
   1.   By the person requesting the sewer main extension paying the entire
cost, The sewer main extension shall be conveyed or transferred to the City
with the necessary easements, and shall meet the following requirements:
      a.   Specified by the City Engineer, the size, grade, and location of
such main shall provide for anticipated future development of the property in
the adjacent area, and for the connections which such development may generate.
      b.   Where the main passes through private property, a twenty foot (20')
easement and right of way shall be granted to the City for the maintenance,
operation, and repairing of such main and for all sewer line purposed,
necessary or reasonably incident to the uses and purposes thereof, including
any connections to the sewerage system of the City, but not limited thereto.
      c.   A special connection charge (in addition to the service connection
fee) may be charged to those connecting to the sewer main extension who did not
share in the cost of its installation in order to reimburse the person or
persons who paid for its installation. The special connection charge shall be
calculated as follows:
         (1)   The proportionate share of the total cost of the sewer main
extension which reflects the  benefits to each property which may be connected
to the sewer main, based on the square footage of each benefitted property;
         (2)   The total actual cost of the sewer main extension, increased by
nine percent annual simple interest, or such other percentage that the City
Council may, from time to time, set by resolution, multiplied by a percentage
of front footage owned by the benefitting property owner of the total front
footage of the water main extension or line; or
         (3)   Such other methodology as may be set forth by written agreement
between the City and the person initially paying the entire cost of the sewer
main extension and which agreement is approved by the City Council.
   Future interest rate changes shall not apply to previously executed
reimbursement agreements entered into between the City and the person initially
paying the entire cost of the sewer main extension,
   2.   By petitioning the city council to extend the sewer main in a manner to
be financed as described hereafter. When considering such extension to the City
sewer system, the city council shall have before it a report from the City
Engineer of:
      a.   The total cost of installing the sewer main of a design and capacity
sufficient to serve the needs of the anticipated future development of the
property and adjacent area and for the connections which such development may
generate.
      b.   The proportionate share of such total cost which shall reflect the
benefits to each property which may be connected to the sewer main, such
proportionate costs to be determined in the same manner as for a local
improvement, as provided by the local improvement ordinance. (Ord. 841, 1-7-
2020)
7-4B-7: SERVICE INSTALLATION:
A.   Expense: All cost and expenses incident to the installation, connection,
inspection, maintenance and repair of the building sewer line shall be the
responsibility of the owner, the user or both. The owner or user shall
reimburse the city for any work performed by the city or its contractor on a
building sewer line as a result of an owner's or user's failure to properly
install, connect, inspect, maintain or repair the building sewer line. In the
event of loss or damage to the city's property arising from neglect,
carelessness or misuse by the owner or user of a building sewer line, the cost
of necessary repairs or replacements shall be paid by the owner or user.
B.   Responsibility For The Building Sewer Line: The owner or user, or both, at
their sole risk and expense, shall furnish, install, inspect and keep in good
and safe condition the building sewer line from the point of its connection
with the public sewer line. The owner or user or both shall hold the city
harmless from and indemnify it for any and all liabilities, actions or claims
for injury, loss or damage to persons or property arising from or related to
the building sewer line.
C.   Separate Connections: A separate and independent building sewer shall be
provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of
another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear of the building through an adjoining alley, court, yard
or driveway* the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
D.   Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are found, on examination and tests by the
superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article.
E.   Installation Requirements: The size, slope, alignment, materials of
construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other
applicable rules and regulations of the City or of the State.
F.   Elevation: Wherever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.
G.   Connection To Public Sewer: The connection of the building sewer into the
public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing
Codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the City or of the State.
All such connections shall be made gas-tight and watertight.
H.   Inspection Of Connection: The City shall be given reasonable notice to
allow inspection of a sewer connection before completion, and while the
connections are still uncovered. The manner of connection shall be subject to
the approval of the Superintendent or other City official designated to inspect
the work.
l.   Safety: All excavation for building sewer installations shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner and to a condition 
satisfactory to the City.
J.   Manholes: When required, in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner
shall install, at the owner's expense, a suitable control manhole in the
appropriate location, complete with observation, sampling and measurement
devices. The manhole shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent. (Ord. 534,
12-1-1986; amd. Ord. 577, 8-6-1990; Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4B-8: PRETREATMENT:
A.   Settling: All waste containing soil, dirt and/or sand shall be settled a
minimum of two (2) hours in an acceptable basin before discharge into a sewer.
B.   Required Pretreatment: When required, in the opinion of the
Superintendent, to modify or eliminate wastes that are harmful to the
structures, processes or operation of the sewage treatment works, the user
shall provide such preliminary treatment or processing facilities as may be
determined necessary to render his waste acceptable for admission to public
sewers.
C.   Pretreatment Facilities: Any facilities required to pretreat waste water
to a level acceptable to the City shall be provided, operated, and maintained
at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and
operating procedures shall be submitted to the City for review and shall be
acceptable to the City before construction of the facility. (Ord. 534, 12-1-
1986; amd. Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4B-9: SEWER RATES AND CHARGES:
A.   Set By Resolution; Services Listed: Sewer rates, charges, deposits, fees
and sewer services shall be set by resolution of the City Council and be
reviewed at least once annually.1
B.   Adjustment Of Rates: Sewer rates shall not be decreased during any period
that sewer bonds issued are outstanding.
C.   Existing Contracts: Sewer rates adopted by resolution of the City Council
shall not modify any existing written long term contract the City has with any
person(s) for sewer rates.
D.   Damages To City Property: Wherever this Article provides for liability for
any damage or repairs to City property by any sewer user, the amount of damages
or repairs may be added to the sewer user's bill and collected in the same
manner as sewer rates and charges. (Ord. 534, 12-1-1986; amd. Ord. 841, 1-7-
2020)
7-4B-10: COLLECTION OF SEWER RATES AND CHARGES:
A.   Application Fee; Water And Sewer Deposit: Any person for whom an account
is opened shall pay a nonrefundable application processing fee to cover
administrative costs of opening an account. Each application for use of sewer
service, water or both, shall be accompanied by a refundable deposit which will
be held by the City and applied against any unpaid service charges for garbage,
sewer or water charges due from the applicant. The application fee and deposits
shall be collected from all applicants within three (3) days after requesting
service from the City. The three (3) day period for payment of the application
fee and deposits may be extended by a request of the applicant because of
extenuating circumstances, which will be reviewed by the City Administrator.
When an account is closed, the amount of any sewer and water deposits plus
interest shall be returned to the applicant, less any amounts due for sewer or
water service. If an applicant has paid the monthly statements for garbage,
sewer and water service in a timely manner for thirty six (36) consecutive
months without delinquency charge, the deposit plus interest will be credited
against the applicant's current bill.
B.   Billing Procedures:
   1.   Water And Sewer Bills Combined: All bills for water shall be prepared
each month at the same time bills for sewage services are prepared and shall be
collected as a combined bill for water and sewage service.
   2.   Billing To The Premises: All sewerage service charges shall be mailed
to the premises where sewerage service is furnished unless the sewerage user
requests, in writing, that the bill be submitted to another address.
   3.   Due Date:
      a.   All sewer bills for each month shall be due and payable on the
twentieth day of each month.
      b.   If the last day for making payment fails on a day when City Hall is
closed before the end of, or for all of, the normal workday or on any legal
holiday, Saturday or Sunday, the payment may be made until the close of
business hours on the next day that City Hall is open for business.
   4.   Place Of Payment: All water and sewer bills shall be paid at City Hall.
C.   Appeals: Any person wishing to challenge a sewer billing may appeal to the
City Administrator before the water service is suspended. Service will not be
suspended during the pendency of an appeal if the sewer user pays the amount of
any sewer billing not in dispute and the delinquency fee, if the amount not in
dispute is twenty (20) days past due.
D.   Delinquencies:
   1.   Fee: All bills unpaid after the twentieth day of each month shall be
considered delinquent and a delinquency fee shall be assessed.
   2.   Notice Of Delinquency; Suspension Of Water Service: After the twentieth
day of each month notification shall be given as provided in subsection B2 of
this Section, that the sewer bill and delinquency fee must be paid within five
(5) days or water service to the property will be suspended. If the sewer user
is not the owner of the real property receiving sewer service, a copy of the
delinquency notice shall also be sent by first class mail to the owner or
owner's agent that is on file with the City when the delinquency notice is sent
to the sewer user. If the water service is turned off, the sewer bill,
delinquency fee, and the expense of reconnecting the service, shall be paid in
full before the water service is restored.
   3.   Duty To Disconnect Water Services: It shall be the duty of the Finance
Officer to notify the Superintendent of any sewer user whose bill is
outstanding after the deadline in subsection D2 of this Section, and the
Superintendent shall proceed immediately to disconnect the water service,
unless the City Administrator has postponed the suspension of water services.
   4.   Sewer Services Charged To Other Premises Of User: All charges for
furnishing sewer services within the City and also to premises outside the
City, shall be chargeable to the sewer user of said sewer services at the
premises or any former premises where sewer service was supplied. Where the
sewer user has a delinquent bill for one premises, that delinquency shall be
charged against the sewer user for sewer services obtained at any other
premises or source served by the City.
   5.   Recovering Delinquent Charges Where Sewerage user Does Not Receive City
Water: Under Oregon Revised Statutes 454.225, if a sewer charge is delinquent
and the user is not receiving water services from the City, the Finance
Director may certify and present the charges to the Umatilla County Tax
Assessor after July 15 and on or before the following July 15 and be by the
assessor assessed against the premises serviced on the next assessment and tax
roll prepared after July 15. Once the service charges are certified and
presented to the assessor, the payment for the service charges will be made to
the tax collector pursuant to Oregon Revised Statutes 311.370.
E.   Low Income Rate: For relief of those residents who are experiencing a
financial hardship, an application for the low income rate may be made to the
City, The City Administrator and Water/Sewer Committee will evaluate requests
and make recommendations to the City Council.
F.   Outside City Sewer Rates: The City may furnish sewer service to places
outside the City limits and the City Council may set the rates therefor by
resolution.
G.   Delay Of Termination Of Sewer Service: Any person faced with immediate
discontinuance of water service, who is unable to pay by reason of an emergency
situation in which:
   1.   The discontinuance would cause severe hardship to persons other than
the individual unable to pay;
   2.   The emergency is a situation that will be resolved in a period of less
than thirty (30) days from the delinquency billing date; and
   3.   The emergency is one which will be unlikely to recur;
      may request the City Administrator to postpone the cut-off date. The City
Administrator may postpone the discontinuance of services for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) days from the delinquency billing date. Any person for whom
termination of service has been delayed shall be required to pay the applicable
fees in subsection DI and D2 of this Section.
H.   Indecent Matters: The City may reject payment for any sewer bill upon
which or upon the  envelope or outside cover of which are any delineations,
epithets, terms or language of an indecent, lewd, lascivious or obscene
character are printed or written to otherwise impressed or apparent.
l.   Deposits:
   1.   Interest: The Director is authorized to invest deposits held by the
City in interest-bearing accounts. The City shall pay interest at the lowest
rate earned on the City's investments during the calendar year, less one
percent (1%) for administrative expenses, to the applicant making the deposit.
The interest will be credited to the customers account on January 1 succeeding
each deposit and on January 1 thereafter. Interest on sewer and water deposits
shall begin on January 1, 1989, or the date of the deposit, whichever is later.
   2.   Unclaimed Deposits: Deposits received as security for the payment of
water and sewer which remain unclaimed for a period of one year after an
account is closed shall be transferred to the Special Sewer Fund account unless
subject to the Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act, Oregon Revised
Statutes 98.302 et seq. (Or Laws 1957, c. 670).
J.   Transfer Of A Claim: A tenant's bill may be transferred to the property
owner or to a subsequent tenant if a delinquency notice was provided by first
class mail to the tenant and to the property owner or the owner's agent within
thirty (30) days from the date the bill was due.
K.   Lien For Unpaid Sewer Bill: When any bill remains unpaid after it becomes
delinquent, the amount due (including interest and penalty) shall be recorded
in the lien docket of the City and shall constitute a lien on the real property
to which sewer service was provided. At any time after sixty (60) days from the
time the lien is entered in the City's lien docket, in addition to any method
provided by ordinance or charter, the lien may be foreclosed in the manner
provided in Oregon Revised Statutes.  (Ord. 560; amd. Ord. 534 12-1-1986; Ord.
583, 7-1-1991; Ord. 611, 11-2-1993, eff. 1-1-1994; Ord. 645, 7-2-1996; Ord.
670, 4-7-1998; Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4B-11: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE BY SEWERAGE USER:
Any sewerage user desiring to discontinue sewerage service and who is also
receiving water service may make application therefor at City Hall not less
than two (2) days before the date on which the service is desired to be
discontinued. Upon payment of the water turn off fee and the sewer and water
bill to date, sewerage service will cease after the effective date of
discontinuance for the period during which the service is shut off. Sewerage
services shall not be returned to the premises until the turn-on fee for water
service is paid. (Ord. 583, 7-1-1991; amd. Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4B-12: INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY:
A.   Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
any of the following waters or waste into any public sewer:
   1.   Petroleum, coal tar, vegetable or mineral oils, and products and their
derivatives and wastes.
   2.   Any water and waste which may contain more than one hundred (100)
milligrams per liter of fat, oil or grease.
   3.   Antimony, arsenic, barium, beryllium, bismuth, boron, cadmium, chromium
(hexa), chromium (tri), cobalt, copper, iron, lead, manganese, mercury,
molybdenum, nickel, rhenium, selenium, silver, strontium, tellurium, uranyl,
tin and zinc.
   4.   Explosive or inflammable liquids and gases.
   5.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
   6.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five-tenths (5.5)
or higher than nine (9.0) or having other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works, or
any explosive, acid or alkalies or corrosive liquids, gases or substances of
sufficient strength to damage sewer, manholes, pumping stations or treatment
plant units.
   7.   Paints or waste products from paint manufacturers.
   8.   Substances which will form deposits or obstructions in sewers or which,
when mixed with sewage, will precipitate material and thus form deposits in
sewers.
   9.   Ashes, cinders, sand, earth, mud, straw, shavings, feathers, glass,
rags, tar, plastics, hair, coal, rubbish or metals of any kind, whole blood,
entrails, paper dishes and cups and milk containers.
   10.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature above one hundred forty
degrees Fahrenheit (140ºF).
   12.   Fruits and vegetables.
   13.   Fruit and vegetable pits and seeds such as those from peaches,
apricots, cherries, prunes, pumpkins and squash.
   14.   Paunch, stable and barn manure.
   15.   Walnuts and filberts.
   16.   Offal from slaughterhouses.
   17.   Dead animals.
   18.   Sulphite or sulphate liquor and "white" water from pulp and paper
mills.
   19.   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in receiving
waters of the sewage treatment plant.
   20.   Any waters or waste containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials
at the sewage treatment plant.
   21.   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
B.   Temporary Or Permanent Drainage: Neither temporary nor permanent drainage
of storm water or other runoffs into the sanitary sewer system shall be
permitted. Drainage from roofs, storm sewer or storm drains shall not be
permitted into the sanitary sewer system and no such connection shall be
permitted.
C.   Harmful Contributions: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged, any substances, materials, waters or wastes, if it appears likely
to the authorized local and/or State and/or Federal agencies, that such waste
can harm either sewer, sewage treatment process, or equipment have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public
property, or constitute a nuisance, or will violate standards established by
the authorized local{'}'} State and/or Federal agencies.
D.   Protection From Damage: No person shall break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part
of the Municipal sewer system, (Ord. 534, 12-1-1986; amd. 1993 code; Ord. 841,
1-7-2020)
7-4B-13: INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY:
At such time as "industrial waste" as defined under section 35.905-8 of the
Construction Grant Regulations 40 CFR part 35, are discharged to the facilities
constructed under EPA Grant No. C410400, the City shall develop and adopt an
industrial cost recovery system acceptable to the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency. This cost recovery system shall comply with the requirement of PL92-500
and all regulations and guidelines pertaining thereto. In the interim, the City
shall submit an annual certification affirming the nonexistence of industrial
discharges to this facility and shall maintain such records and documents as
necessary to substantiate the certification. (Res. 3-77, 719-1976; amd. Ord.
841, 1-7-2020)
7-4B-14: INSPECTION; SAMPLES AND TESTS:
A.   Reasonable Access: Duly authorized employees of the City, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall have the authority to inspect or cause to
be inspected, all buildings and premises except the interior of dwellings, as
often as may be necessary, for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
Article.
B.   Admission Refused: If admission is refused or delayed, or if inspection is
in any way in the opinion of the Superintendent; water may be turned off to the
premises after giving twenty four (24) hours oral notice to any occupant of the
premises fourteen (14) years of age or older, or three (3) days' written notice
by mail to the water user.
C.   Examination: All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics
of the waters and waste to which reference is made in this Article shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standards and Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public
Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or
upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effective constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb or property. (The
particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all
outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analysis
are obtained from a 24-hour composite of all outfalls, whereas pHs are
determined from periodic grab samples.) (Ord. 534, 12-1-1986; amd. Ord. 841, 1-
7-2020)
7-4B-15: PENALTIES:
Any person violating subsection 7-4B-4AT or 7-4B-6C, G, H, or l, or subsection
7-4B-7B or any of Section 7-4B-10 of this Article shall, upon conviction be
punished by the imposition of a Class A civil fine1. In the case of a
continuing violation, every day's continuance of the violation is a separate
violation. (Ord. 534, 12-1-1986; amd. 1993 code; amd. Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
7-4B-16: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
A.   Money Judgment: In addition to the penalties provided in Section 7-48-14
of this Article, the City may sue in a court of competent jurisdiction to
obtain a judgment for any fee due under this Article and enforce collection of
the judgment as allowed by law.
B.   Injunction: The City may seek an injunction to prohibit a person engaged
in any activity regulated by this Article which does not comply with this
Article.
C.   Attorney Fees And Costs: In a civil action authorized by this Section, if
the City prevails, it shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney fees
to be set by the court in addition to its costs and disbursements. These fees
are recoverable at all levels of trial and appeal. (Ord. 534, 12-1-1986; amd.
Ord. 841, 1-7-2020)
CHAPTER 5
REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICTS
SECTION:
7-5-1: Definitions
7-5-2: Application For Reimbursement District
7-5-3: City Manager's Report
7-5-4: Cost Recovery From A Reimbursement District
7-5-5: Formation Of A Reimbursement District
7-5-6: Adoption Of Reimbursement Resolution
7-5-7: Notice Of Adoption Of Assessment Ordinance
7-5-8: Recording The Ordinance
7-5-9: Contesting The Reimbursement District
7-5-10: Obligation To Pay
7-5-11: Administration
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   PERSON: A natural person, the person's heirs, executors, administrators, or
assigns; a firm, partnership, corporation, association or legal entity, its or
other successors or assigns; and any agent, employee or any representative
thereof.
   REIMBURSEMENT CHARGE: The fee required to be paid by a property owner within
a reimbursement district as determined by the city council to be the amount
which is appropriate to reimburse another person for financing or causing the
construction of street or utility improvements.
   REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICT: The area which is determined by the council to
derive a benefit from the construction of public street, water, sewer or
stormwater improvements financed in whole or in part by a person without the
formation of a local improvement district. (Ord. 764, 5-3-2011)
7-5-2: APPLICATION FOR REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICT:
   A.   Any person who chooses or is required as a condition of a development
or building permit approval to construct a public street, water, sanitary
sewer, or stormwater improvement which will or could provide service to
property other than property owned by that person may apply to the city to form
a reimbursement district. The street, water, sanitary sewer, or stormwater
improvements must include improvements located off site or in a size greater
than those which would otherwise ordinarily be required in connection with an
application for development or building permit approval. The city may also
initiate formation of a reimbursement district for city financed water,
sanitary sewer and stormwater improvements.
   B.   The application shall include the following:
      1.   A description of the location, type, and size of the public
improvement.
      2.   A narrative explaining why the applicant considers that all or part
of the cost of the improvement is eligible for reimbursement.
      3.   A map showing the properties to be included in the proposed
district, including the properties owned by the applicant; and the front
footage and square footage of each of the properties, or similar data necessary
for calculating the apportionment of the cost.
      4.   A proposed methodology for apportioned cost among the benefited
properties.
      5.   The estimated cost of the improvements as evidenced by bids,
projections of the cost of labor and materials, or other evidence satisfactory
to the city.
      6.   The estimated date of completion of the improvements.
   C.   The application for the formation of a reimbursement district must be
made after city approval of the construction plans for the improvements
proposed to be covered by the reimbursement district.
   D.   The application for the formation of a reimbursement district shall be
accompanied by a processing fee established by council resolution. (Ord. 764,
5-3-2011)
7-5-3: CITY MANAGER'S REPORT:
   A.   The city manager shall review the application for the establishment of
a reimbursement district and determine whether a district should be
established. The city manager may request the submittal of other relevant
information from the applicant in order to assist in the evaluation. The city
manager shall prepare a written report for the council that:
      1.   Describes the extent to which the improvements will relieve other
persons of the future need or requirement to construct all or a portion of the
same improvement;
      2.   Recommends whether the reimbursement district should be formed;
      3.   Establishes the area to be included in the reimbursement district;
      4.   Sets the estimated cost of the street, water, sewer, or stormwater
improvement within the area of the proposed reimbursement district and the
portion of the cost for which the applicant should be reimbursed;
      5.   Establishes a methodology for apportioning the costs among the
parcels within the reimbursement district;
      6.   Establishes the annual percentage rate applied to the proposed
reimbursement charge, which represents the annual return on investment of the
reimbursable costs;
      7.   Establishes the amount to be charged by the city for the
administration of the reimbursement district;
      8.   Establishes the period of time that the right to reimbursement
exists, beginning on the date of the adoption of the formation resolution.
(Ord. 764, 5-3-2011)
7-5-4: COST RECOVERY FROM A REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICT:
   A.   The cost to be reimbursed to the applicant shall be limited to the cost
of the engineering, design and construction surveying, construction,
acquisition and condemnation costs of acquiring the additional easements and
right of way, the cost of permits, engineering and legal expenses and the
processing fee.
   B.   A reimbursement charge shall be computed by the applicant and approved
by the city for all properties which have the opportunity to utilize the
improvements, including the property of the applicant, for formation of a
reimbursement district. The applicant for formation of the reimbursement
district shall not be reimbursed for the portion of the reimbursement charge
computed for the property of the applicant. City owned property shall not be
subject to a reimbursement charge, unless prior to city acquisition of such a
parcel, the reimbursement district has previously been established over the
property. (Ord. 764, 5-3-2011)
7-5-5: FORMATION OF A REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICT:
   A.   Notice Of Public Hearing: The city shall provide mailed notice of the
public hearing and the applicant's request to form a reimbursement district to
all owners of property, as shown on the most recent county assessor's
assessment roll, within the proposed district. Notice of the hearing shall be
mailed at least twenty (20) days before the date of the hearing. The notice
shall:
      1.   State that a reimbursement district has been proposed that includes
the property of the person receiving the notice and the name of the applicant;
      2.   Briefly describe the reimbursement district, the street, water,
sewer, or stormwater improvement to be reimbursed;
      3.   The estimated amount of the reimbursement charge, and the
circumstances under which the charge must be paid;
      4.   State the time, date and place of the hearing;
      5.   State the council will accept both written and oral testimony;
      6.   Nature of the council action that may be taken.
   B.   Public Hearing And Council Action:
      1.   The council shall hold a public hearing on the application for
formation of a reimbursement district at which time any person may comment on
the proposal.
      2.   After the public hearing is held, the council shall approve, deny or
modify the recommendations contained in the city manager's report.
      3.   The council decision shall be based on the following:
         a.   Whether the properties against which a reimbursement charge is
sought are or will be specifically benefited by the improvement.
         b.   Whether the cost for which a reimbursement charge is sought are
based on appropriate information.
         c.   Whether the method for apportioning the cost to benefited
properties is reasonably calculated to reflect the benefit each lot or parcel
of land receives from the improvement.
         d.   Whether the annual percentage rate multiplier to be applied to
the cost of construction reasonably reflect prevailing market rates.
      4.   The council's decision shall be in the form of a resolution. If a
reimbursement district is established, the resolution shall include the area
within the district, the estimated costs assigned to each parcel, the annual
percentage rate multiplier to be applied, the city's administration fee, and
the period of time that the right to reimbursement exists beginning on the date
of adoption of the formation resolution.
      5.   Because formation of the reimbursement district does not result in
an assessment against property or lien against property, the process is not
subject to mandatory termination because of remonstrances. The council has the
sole discretion after the public hearing to decide whether a resolution forming
the reimbursement district shall be adopted.
      6.   A copy of the formation resolution adopted by the city council shall
be mailed to the owners of all property subject to the reimbursement charge
established therein and to any other persons who have requested a copy. (Ord.
764, 5-3-2011)
7-5-6: ADOPTION OF REIMBURSEMENT RESOLUTION:
   A.   After the project has been completed and accepted by the city, the
applicant shall submit to the city the final cost and the proposed assignment
of costs to each benefitting property based on the allocation method approved
in the establishment of the reimbursement district. The applicant shall submit
a copy of all bills for recoverable cost and evidence of their payment. The
eligible cost, benefitting properties, and method of assignment must be
approved by the city manager. The applicant has the burden of establishing the
costs of the improvements.
   B.   The city manager shall submit the final costs and reimbursement
resolution to the council for approval. Actual costs shall not be deemed
reasonable if the city manager determines that such costs significantly exceed
the market rates for similar projects. If such is found to be the case, the
city manager may recommend a reduction in the reimbursable costs of the
prevailing market rate for similar projects.
   C.   The city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed assessment
ordinance. The city shall provide mailed notice of the proposed assessment
ordinance to the applicant and all property owners within the reimbursement
district. Notice shall be mailed at least twenty (20) days before the date of
the council action on the assessment ordinance. The notice shall set forth the
time, date and place of the council action. The notice shall state the amount
of the reimbursement charge proposed for each property.
   D.   After the public hearing, the council shall approve or modify the
eligible costs of the improvements and the reimbursement charge for each
property. The council decision shall be in the form of an assessment lien by
ordinance.
   E.   The date of the formation of the reimbursement district shall be the
date that the council adopts the formation resolution. (Ord. 764, 5-3-2011)
7-5-7: NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF ASSESSMENT ORDINANCE:
The city shall notify all property owners within the district and the applicant
of the adoption of an assessment ordinance. The notice shall include a copy of
the assessment ordinance and an explanation of when the property owner is
obligated to pay the reimbursement charge and the amount of the charge. (Ord.
764, 5-3-2011)
7-5-8: RECORDING THE ORDINANCE:
The city shall record the assessment ordinance in the office of the county
recorder so as to provide notice to the potential purchasers of property within
the district. The recording shall create an assessment lien. (Ord. 764, 5-3-
2011)
7-5-9: CONTESTING THE REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICT:
No legal action intended to contest the formation of the district or the
reimbursement charge, including the amount of the charge designated for each
parcel, shall be filed after thirty (30) days following adoption of the
assessment ordinance. (Ord. 764, 5-3-2011)
7-5-10: OBLIGATION TO PAY:
An owner of property within a reimbursement district shall pay to the city the
reimbursement charge established by the assessment ordinance when any of the
following events occur within ten (10) years from the date that the
reimbursement district was formed:
   A.   The property owner receives final approval to subdivide or partition
property; or
   B.   The property owner wishes to connect to the sewer line, water line, or
make use of the street improvement or storm drainage improvement.
The reimbursement charge is due and payable as a precondition of receiving the
first city permit applicable to the development activity undertaken, or, in the
case of a connection to a line, as a precondition of receiving authorization
for such a connection. The building official shall not issue a building permit
until the reimbursement charge has been paid in full. (Ord. 764, 5-3-2011)
7-5-11: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   An owner of property within a reimbursement district may avoid the
payment of the annual percentage rate multiplier by paying a reimbursement
charge in full within sixty (60) days of the date that the assessment ordinance
is adopted by the city council.
   B.   The right of reimbursement is assignable and transferable after written
notice is delivered to the city, advising the city to whom future payments are
to be made.
   C.   The applicant, or any successor of which the city is notified, has the
obligation of providing the city with a current mailing address for the term of
the reimbursement district. If the applicant cannot be found with due diligence
on behalf of the city, then the applicant or successor will be deemed to have
waived his or her right to any reimbursement charge.
   D.   The city shall establish separate accounts for each reimbursement
district. Upon receipt of a reimbursement charge, the city shall cause a record
to be made of that property's payment and remit the charge to the applicant or
their assignee, less the amount of the administration fee established by the
city.
   E.   The reimbursement charge is not intended to replace or limit, and is in
addition to any other existing fees or charges collected by the city. (Ord.
764, 5-3-2011)
CHAPTER 6
PUBLIC PARKS
SECTION:
7-6-1: Park Operating Policy
7-6-2: Park Rules And Regulations
7-6-3: Penalties For Violation Of Park Rules And Regulations
7-6-1: PARK OPERATING POLICY:
   A.   Park Hours: Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, city parks
shall be open to the public every day of the year during designated hours
posted at the entrances to each park. The city of Umatilla parks and recreation
board may establish opening and closing hours for each individual park with the
hours to be conspicuously posted for public information. Rules for use for the
Umatilla Marina and RV park fee customers are separate from these provisions
and are part of individual use contracts.
   B.   Park Reservations:
      1.   A park, or portion thereof, may be reserved for organized or group
activities. Reservations shall be made through the city manager, or his or her
designee, on an approved application form. The city manager, or his or her
designee, may approve the application if:
         a.   The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park; and
         b.   The proposed activity or use will not unreasonably interfere with
other uses or activities occurring in the park including, but not necessarily
limited to, construction, repairs, or other activities intended to promote the
public health, safety, welfare, or recreation; and
         c.   The proposed activity or use is reasonably anticipated not to
incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct; and
         d.   The proposed activity will not impose extraordinary activity or
expense upon city services, especially as may affect parks or public works
personnel or police operations, unless such prior arrangements have been made
and approved in conjunction with the use or activity by the city manager, or
his or her designee; and
         e.   The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the day and time requested in the application.
      2.   The city manager, or his or her designee, may impose such conditions
upon the proposed activity as are reasonably necessary to ensure the above
requirements are met.
      3.   The city manager, or his or her designee, shall have the authority
to regulate the activities in park areas when necessary to prevent congestion
and to procure the maximum use and safety for the convenience of all. Visitors
shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end.
   C.   Rules And Regulations Posted: Park rules and regulations shall be
posted at the entrances of each city park for public information, with
additional reference made to the enabling legislation.
   D.   Special Use Activities Limited To Umatilla Marina Park: The city
manager, or his or her designee, may permit a civic, fraternal, charitable, or
nonprofit organization to sell and serve alcoholic beverages during prior
approved community events at the Umatilla Marina Park, adjacent to, but not
including, the Umatilla Marina and the Umatilla RV Park, provided all other
requirements herein are met, and the organization submits the following prior
to the event:
      1.   Proof of liquor liability naming the city as a coinsured with
liability limits not less than the city's exposure under the Oregon tort claims
act; and
      2.   Proof that the organization has obtained a temporary special permit
from the Oregon liquor control commission (OLCC) to sell and serve liquor at
the location. (Ord. 809, 10-20-2015)
7-6-2: PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Prohibited Activities In City Parks Or Trails: The following activities
are prohibited in city parks or on city trails, and persons engaging in such
activities may be asked to leave the park or trail by a police officer, or
other persons with authority so designated by the city manager, and may be
subject to penalties described under section 7-6-3 of this chapter. Serious or
repeat offenders will be cited, and may be excluded from all city parks, as
ruled by a judge after a hearing.
      1.   Use of loud, obscene or abusive language.
      2.   Violence, or the threat of violence, whether actual or simulated.
      3.   Use of any loud speaker, radio, CD or tape player or other
amplification device which can be heard at a distance of more than fifty feet
(50'), except with a permit issued by the city manager, or his or her designee.
      4.   Disorderly conduct.
      5.   Removing, cutting, defacing or damaging any buildings, structures,
signs, park equipment, flowers, trees, shrubs or natural features, without
prior approval from the city manager, or his or her designee.
      6.   Littering, dumping or disposing of household garbage, or any other
trash or refuse not generated through use of the park. Glass bottles or any
other type of glass containers are prohibited in city parks.
      7.   Starting or maintaining any fire, except in a grill, fireplace or
stove provided therefor which is attended at all times and is extinguished upon
leaving the park. Dumping of used charcoal anywhere on park grounds or in trash
cans is prohibited.
      8.   Riding a bicycle except on designated bike paths, or in such a
manner as threatens other park users or interferes with their peaceful
enjoyment of the park.
      9.   Consumption of any alcoholic beverage, except as allowed under
subsection 7-6-1D of this chapter.
      10.   Smoking, which includes e-cigarettes, or any other use of tobacco
products.
      11.   Exceeding the speed limit posted inside a city park.
      12.   Allowing a dog to run at large. All dogs shall be kept in control
and on a leash at all times. An owner or possessor of a dog shall immediately
remove all feces deposited by the dog and dispose of the waste in a trash
receptacle.
      13.   Failure to leave the park upon direction of a police officer or
community service officer.
      14.   Any other conduct which interferes with the reasonable use of the
park by the general public.
   B.   Possession Or Discharge Of Firearms:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or to have in his or
her possession any firearm in any park, excluding fee customers of the Umatilla
Marina or Umatilla RV Park, or to discharge or shoot any firearm or gun from or
into any park.
      2.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to peace officers or
to the members of any state or national military organization while on duty.
   C.   Sales And Solicitations:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or display for sale any
merchandise, article or thing or to solicit any collection, donation or charge
in any park, unless he or she first obtains a permit therefor from the city
manager, or his or her designee.
      2.   The granting or refusal of the permit is within the discretion of
the city manager, or his or her designee, except that he or she shall issue no
permit unless the applicant therefor complies with any other applicable
ordinance pertaining to the sale of merchandise or any solicitation or
collection in the city.
   D.   Use Of Motor Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or
take any automobile or other motor vehicle into or upon any park, except upon
the driveways and roadways as may be provided designated for that purpose and
then only when the automobile or other vehicle is operated or driven pursuant
to such rules and regulations as the city manager, or his or her designee, may
promulgate.
   E.   Overnight Use: It shall be unlawful for any person to set up tents or
any other temporary shelter, or to use house trailers, campers or automobiles
for the purpose of overnight camping in any city park, nor shall any person
remain in any city park after closing hours, except for recreational vehicles
or vessel moorage customers authorized to stay in the Umatilla Marina and RV
park. (Ord. 809, 10-20-2015)
7-6-3: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Any person who violates any of the foregoing rules and regulations
shall be, upon conviction thereof, subject to punishment by a fine of not more
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per Oregon Revised Statutes 198.600,
or by imprisonment for not more than five (5) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, and may be excluded from any or all city parks for a period of
time as determined to be appropriate by the ruling judge.
   B.   Every full day during which a use or activity continues to be conducted
in violation of the park rules and regulations established herein shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 809, 10-20-2015)
CHAPTER 7
TREE MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
7-7-1: Title
7-7-2: Purpose And Intent
7-7-3: Definitions
7-7-4: Establishment Of City Tree Board
7-7-5: Tree Board Duties And Responsibilities
7-7-6: Park And Street Tree Species Guide
7-7-7: Permission To Plant Trees
7-7-8: Tree Spacing Standards
7-7-9: Public Tree Care
7-7-10: Tree Topping
7-7-11: Pruning; Safety And Visibility
7-7-12: Hazard Trees
7-7-13: Removal Of Tree Stumps
7-7-14: Interference With Tree Board
7-7-15: Compliance With State Laws
7-7-16: Abuse Or Mutilation Of Trees
7-7-17: Notice Of Violation And Remedial Action
7-7-18: Penalty
7-7-19: Appeals
7-7-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CITY OF UMATILLA, OREGON URBAN TREE
MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE, or TREE ORDINANCE for short. (Ord. 789, 4-1-2014)
7-7-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purposes of this chapter are to establish a plan and program for the
planting, maintenance, protection, control, and removal of trees in public
places; to provide safe, healthy and attractive landscaping; to minimize
conflicts with utilities, traffic flow, visibility and parking; to provide for
public safety and access on and across public rights of way; and to establish a
tree board to implement, review and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
The intent of this chapter is to help the city of Umatilla become a more
desirable place to live, work and play for all citizens through the careful
planting and management of trees throughout the community in order to enjoy all
the benefits trees provide to a community. (Ord. 789, 4-1-2014)
7-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   HAZARD TREE: A tree located in either the public right of way or on private
property in which the tree, or a portion thereof, has the potential to fail and
injure persons or property; or by reason of root control is injurious to
sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public
improvements, or is infected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.
   MAINTENANCE: The routine trimming and pruning of street trees (not resulting
in severe loss of the tree canopy which is characteristic of tree topping), or
removing of seedlings and saplings of native or naturalized "escaped" trees
and/or shrubs performed by the property owner.
   PARK TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
parks or areas to which the public has free access, such as the cemetery and
city hall.
   STREET TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways
within the city.
   TOPPING: A severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches
(3") in diameter within the crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal
canopy and disfigure the tree.
   TREE CLASS: The classification of the mature height of the tree. (Ord. 789,
4-1-2014)
7-7-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY TREE BOARD:
   A.   There is hereby created and established a city tree board for the city
of Umatilla which shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by
the city council.
      1.   One member of the tree board shall also be a member of the parks and
recreation committee.
      2.   One member of the tree board may live within the urban growth area.
      3.   One member of the tree board may be a nonresident business owner in
Umatilla.
      4.   One member of the city council may serve on the board as an ex
officio member with all the same rights, duties and privileges as other
appointed members. A city council member who serves on the tree board in an ex
officio capacity shall count as one of the five (5) members of the board.
      5.   No person shall serve on the tree board if that person currently
sits on more than two (2) other city boards or committees. A current sitting
city council member serving in an ex officio capacity is exempt from this rule.
      6.   The term of the five (5) persons to be appointed by the council
shall be three (3) years except the term of two (2) of the members appointed to
the first board shall be for only one year, and the term of two (2) members of
the first board shall be for two (2) years. In the event that a vacancy shall
occur during the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed
for the unexpired portion of the term. There is no limit on the number of terms
a member may serve.
      7.   The board shall choose its own officers and may adopt bylaws
consistent with the city charter, ordinances and resolutions, and subject to
city council approval, in order to provide rules and procedures for its
members, meetings and official activities. The board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of
business.
      8.   The city public works director shall act as advisory staff to the
board with authority to direct the administrative functions necessary for the
board to carry out its duties and responsibilities.
      9.   Regular meetings shall be held at a frequency necessary to carry out
the tree board's duties. A meeting may be called at the request of the
chairman, or three (3) active board members, or at the request of the city
public works director.
      10.   A member of the board may resign at any time by submitting a letter
of resignation to the city council. The board may recommend to the city council
that any member be replaced for nonperformance of duty if he or she is absent
from three (3) consecutive regular meetings without prior excuse, or is absent
from four (4) or more regular meetings within a calendar year.
      11.   Members of the board shall serve without compensation.
      12.   The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts
and decisions of the tree board, and may remove a member for official
misconduct, misrepresentation, or abuse of authority by the member for his or
her personal, financial, or political gain. (Ord. 803, 7-13-2015)
7-7-5: TREE BOARD DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   The board shall have the primary responsibility to study, review,
evaluate, develop, and to periodically update, a written plan for the care,
preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of all
street and park trees. Exempt from that review are hazard trees that have been
determined by the public works director to pose an imminent or immediate threat
to persons or property.
   B.   In addition to the board's primary responsibility espoused under
subsection A of this section, the board is tasked with developing an urban
forestry program that facilitates greenway development along streets, rivers,
pathways, parks and other public areas, and that promotes a public awareness
outreach to educate and assist citizens regarding requirements and best
practices for tree planting, care, maintenance and removal on private property.
   C.   The board, when requested by the city council, shall consider,
investigate, make findings, report and make recommendation upon any special
matter or question coming within the scope of its work.
   D.   The board shall work cooperatively with the parks and recreation
committee, planning commission, or other city board or department where
appropriate to ensure consistency of goals, plans, rules and regulations and to
avoid unnecessary duplication of permitting or other administrative actions.
   E.   The tree board, with assistance from the city public works director,
shall establish review procedures, standards and criteria to be used in taking
action on tree permit requests, including requests for variances therefrom. At
a minimum, these shall include the following requirements that:
      1.   A permit must be obtained from the city public works director before
planting, pruning or otherwise affecting a street tree. No fee shall be charged
for this permit.
      2.   The selection, location and planting of street trees must comply
with the requirements of this chapter.
      3.   Any street tree planted after the adoption of this chapter and not
in compliance therewith will be removed at the expense of the person who
planted it. (Ord. 789, 4-1-2014)
7-7-6: PARK AND STREET TREE SPECIES GUIDE:
A list of acceptable tree species shall be adopted by the tree board,
hereinafter referred to as "tree guide", and shall constitute the official park
and street tree species approved for planting within all public areas of the
city. No species other than those included in this list may be planted as
street trees without written approval of the city's tree board. Street trees
must conform to size and spacing guidelines established in this chapter, unless
a variance is authorized by the tree board. The street tree species listed in
the tree guide is not an all inclusive list. Other species which conform to the
size and spacing criteria may be considered; however, invasive and generally
undesirable tree species such as Russian olive shall not be authorized. The
landowner shall be responsible to ensure that any species planted is maintained
in such a way as to meet the purposes of this chapter; i.e., not impair access;
damage utilities, sidewalks, or pavement; or create a public safety hazard.
(Ord. 789, 4-1-2014)
7-7-7: PERMISSION TO PLANT TREES:
   A.   No tree, shrub, bush or other woody vegetation over two feet (2') tall
at maturity shall hereafter be planted in or removed from any public parking
strip or other public place in the city without first securing a permit
therefor from the city public works director or his or her designee.
   B.   A permit shall be issued if the requested planting conforms to the
guidelines set forth in this chapter and the tree guide; however, the city's
tree board may make more specific recommendations for species to be planted in
certain areas of the city. Any person wishing to plant a tree, shrub, bush or
other woody vegetation in a public parking strip or other public place which
does not conform to the requirements of this chapter or the tree guide may
request a variance from the regulations from the city's tree board. Upon
receiving a request for a variance, the city public works director shall call
for a board meeting to consider the variance request.
   C.   The public works director is charged with the enforcement of this
chapter. If a tree or other woody vegetation should be unlawfully removed from
a public parking strip or other public place, the public works director may
order the tree or woody vegetation replaced by a suitable tree or plant.
Failure to comply with the order within a reasonable time shall be deemed a
separate violation of this chapter. Note: Permission to plant along a state
highway within the city limits must be obtained from the state. (Ord. 789, 4-1-
2014)
7-7-8: TREE SPACING STANDARDS:
   A.   The spacing of street trees within public rights of way shall be in
accordance with the tree class and the distances specified on the following
table:
      TABLE 1
      TREE SPACING STANDARDS
 
 Class I Class II Class III Class IV
Mature height of tree                Up to 25' 25' - 35' 35' - 50' 50' and over
Spacing between trees                25'       25'       35'       40'
Distance from curb to sidewalk 1     3'        4'        6'        8'
Distance from overhead utility       10'       15'       25'       40'
wires2
Distance from underground utilities3 7'
Distance from street corners         30'
Distance from fire hydrants          10'
 
   Notes:
      1.    Exceptions for less distance may be approved by the city tree
board, but exceptions of less than 2 feet shall not be made.
      2.    Except property service lines.
      3.    The city tree board shall have the authority to grant exceptions to
this prohibition on a case by case basis for class I trees only.
   B.   The spacing between shrubs and hedges within the parking strip must be
a minimum of eight feet (8') (crown to crown) to allow pedestrian access from
parked cars across the parking strip to the sidewalk.
   C.   Exceptions may be made for special planting subject to approval by the
city's tree board. (Ord. 789, 4-1-2014)
7-7-9: PUBLIC TREE CARE:
   A.   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the right of way lines of all streets, alleys,
avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure public
safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public
grounds. The city's tree board may remove or cause order to be removed, any
tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition which by reason of its
nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or
other public improvements, or is infected with any injurious fungus, insect or
other pest.
   B.   This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent
property owners provided that the selection and location of the trees is in
accordance with section 7-7-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 789, 4-1-2014)
7-7-10: TREE TOPPING:
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city
department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property
except under special circumstances as determined by the city's tree board.
Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or trees under utility wires
are exempt from this provision at the determination of the city public works
director. Certain trees under other obstructions or where other pruning
practices are impractical may be exempted from this provision at the
determination of the tree board. (Ord. 789, 4-1-2014)
7-7-11: PRUNING; SAFETY AND VISIBILITY:
   A.   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right of way within
the city shall prune the branches of said trees so that the light from any
street lamp and the view of any street intersection or traffic control device
or sign is not obstructed; said owner must maintain a clear space of at least
eight feet (8') above the surface of the sidewalk and twelve feet (12') above
the surface of the street. The owner shall remove all dead, diseased or
hazardous trees, or broken or decayed limbs, which constitute a menace to the
safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub
on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along
the street from a streetlight, or when it interferes with visibility of any
traffic control device or sign. Failure of the property owner to comply with
the order of the city's tree board after thirty (30) days' notice shall be
deemed in violation of this section and the city may then remove or trim the
tree or shrub at an assessed cost against the property.
      1.   The owner of any premises within the city shall be liable to any
person who is injured or otherwise suffers damage by reason of the owner's
failure to remove or trim the tree or shrub as set forth in this subsection A.
      2.   Furthermore, the owner shall be liable to the city of Umatilla for
any judgment or expense incurred or paid by the city by reason of the owner's
failure to satisfy any obligation imposed by this section.
   B.   No recourse shall be had against the city for damage or loss to persons
or property suffered or sustained by reason of a failure to trim trees or
shrubs as required by any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 789, 4-1-2014)
7-7-12: HAZARD TREES:
   A.   The city shall remove or order to be removed any tree within a public
right of way that constitutes a risk to public safety or property.
   B.   The city shall remove or order to be removed any tree on private
property that constitutes a risk to public safety or property within the public
right of way. This may include, but not be limited to, dead, damaged, or
diseased trees.
   C.   The city shall have the right to cause the remedial treatment, if
appropriate, of diseased trees on public right of way or private property
within the city when the trees harbor insects or disease which constitutes a
potential threat to other trees within the city.
   D.   The city's tree board will notify the owner of the trees in writing and
will order the removal or remedial treatment. Failure of the property owner to
comply with the order of the city's tree board after thirty (30) days' notice
shall be deemed a violation of this section and the city may then remove, trim
or cause remedial treatment of the trees or shrubs at an assessed cost against
the property. (Ord. 789, 4-1-2014)
7-7-13: REMOVAL OF TREE STUMPS:
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed by the owner to the
surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the
surface. (Ord. 789, 4-1-2014)
7-7-14: INTERFERENCE WITH TREE BOARD:
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
city's tree board or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street
trees or trees on private grounds authorized in this chapter. (Ord. 789, 4-1-
2014)
7-7-15: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAWS:
Any contractor, or person who works for compensation, performing work on a
tree, other than planting, which is fifteen feet (15') above ground level and
has limbs greater than three inches (3") in diameter, must be licensed with the
Oregon construction contracting board (CCB) per Oregon administrative rule
(OAR) 812-002-0300. (Ord. 789, 4-1-2014)
7-7-16: ABUSE OR MUTILATION OF TREES:
It shall be a violation of this chapter to abuse, destroy or mutilate any tree,
shrub, bush or other woody vegetation in a public parking strip or any other
public place. (Ord. 789, 4-1-2014)
7-7-17: NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND REMEDIAL ACTION:
Notice of a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be in the form of a
certified, return receipt letter from the city. Such letter shall identify the
property upon which the violation is located, and shall include a description
of the violation and an explanation of the action necessary to gain compliance
with this chapter. This letter shall be mailed to the last known owner of
record of the subject parcel according to the tax account rolls of the Umatilla
County assessor.
The owner shall be given fourteen (14) days from the date of receipt to contact
the city concerning remedy of the infraction. If there is no such contact,
violation will commence on the fifteenth day of the receipt of notification. If
contact is made within the fourteen (14) day period after receipt of
notification, the city public works director may establish a date for remedy of
the infraction. If the infraction is not remedied by the date established,
violation will commence on the following day. (Ord. 789, 4-1-2014)
7-7-18: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 789, 4-1-2014)
7-7-19: APPEALS:
Any decision under this chapter made by the city public works director may be
appealed to the tree board. Any decision of the tree board may be appealed to
the city council. Appeals must be in writing and filed within fourteen (14)
days of the decision being appealed. A decision of the city council shall be
final. (Ord. 789, 4-1-2014)
TITLE 8
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
8-1-1: Administration
8-1-2: Purpose
8-1-3: Building Codes
8-1-4: Stop Work Orders
8-1-5: Licensing Required
8-1-6: Building Permits
8-1-7: Certificate Of Occupancy
8-1-8: Board Of Appeals
8-1-9: Penalty
8-1-10: Notice Of Noncompliance And Violation
8-1-1: ADMINISTRATION:
There is hereby established a code enforcement agency which shall be under the
administrative and operational control of the building official. The building
official is authorized to enforce all the provisions of the codes. The building
official shall have the power to render written and oral interpretations of the
codes and to adopt and enforce administrative procedures in order to clarify
the application of their provisions. Such interpretations, rules, and
regulations shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of the codes.
(Ord. 647, 1-7-1997)
8-1-2: PURPOSE:
The building codes adopted by reference under this chapter shall govern the
construction, reconstruction, alteration and repair of buildings and other
structures and the installation of mechanical devices and equipment therein.
(Ord. 581, 7-1-1991)
8-1-3: BUILDING CODES:
   A.   Nonresidential Building Code:   OAR 918-460-0010 rules establishing
minimum safety standards for the design and construction of buildings.
   B.   Residential Building Code: The most current edition of OAR 918-480-0005
minimum safety standards for the design and construction of one and two family
dwellings.
   C.   Plumbing Code: The most current edition of OAR 918-750-0110 plumbing
specialty code.
   D.   Manufactured Dwelling Standard: The most current edition of OAR 918-
500-0020 code adoption of manufactured dwelling standards.
   E.   Mechanical Code: The most current edition of OAR 918-440-0010 rules
establishing minimum safety standards for the design and construction of
mechanical systems in buildings.
   F.   Electrical Code: The most current edition of OAR 918-305-0100 code
adoption of electrical specialty code.
   G.   Dangerous Buildings Code: A document, a copy of which is on file with
the city, entitled 1997 uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings,
is adopted as the dangerous buildings code of the city.
   H.   Fire Code: A certain copy of which is on file with the city, entitled
state of Oregon, 1998 edition, Oregon uniform fire code, is adopted as the fire
code of the city. (Ord. 714, 4-2-2002)
8-1-4: STOP WORK ORDERS:
Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of the codes in
section 8-1-3 of this chapter (or other pertinent laws or ordinances
implemented through their enforcement), the building official may order the
work stopped by notice, in writing, served on any person engaged in the doing
or causing of such work to be done. Any person so notified shall stop work on
the project or that portion of the project affected by the stop work order
until specifically authorized by the building official to proceed thereafter.
(Ord. 647, 1-7-1997)
8-1-5: LICENSING REQUIRED:
No person shall advertise or enter into a contract to perform any services
requiring a license from or registration with the construction contractors
board, the plumbing board or the electrical board without first being duly
licensed or registered with such board. All contractors performing work within
the city shall be licensed by the state of Oregon construction contractors
board during the time of all phases of work and until completion of any or all
contract work. No contractor shall employ any person to perform work covered by
the construction contractors board unless that contractor is registered as
nonexempt from workers' compensation coverage with the construction contractors
board. (Ord. 647, 1-7-1997)
8-1-6: BUILDING PERMITS:
No building permit shall be issued for the construction, reconstruction,
alteration, or change of use of a structure or lot that does not conform to the
requirements of title 10 of this code and the building codes adopted by this
chapter. (Ord. 678, 10-6-1998)
8-1-7: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
No person shall occupy or use any building or structure or portion thereof
until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. No building
or structure shall have its existing occupancy classification until the
building official has issued a certificate of occupancy for the new use. A
certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until all relevant requirements of
this code are met, including, but not limited to, this chapter, title 10 and
subsection 7-2B-2C of this code. However, the city administrator may direct the
building official to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy and may
temporarily allow use of water and sewer before the installation and completion
of these requirements provided the owner and developer, if any, have posted a
performance bond with the city in an amount satisfactory to the city
administrator to ensure the completion of these requirements within a specified
time satisfactory to the city administrator. (Ord. 678, 10-6-1998)
8-1-8: BOARD OF APPEALS:
There shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals consisting of five (5)
members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters
pertaining to building construction and who are not employees of the
jurisdiction. The building official shall be an ex officio member of and shall
act as secretary to said board but shall have no vote on any matter before the
board. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the mayor and shall hold
office at his or her pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for
conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings to the
appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official. The board of appeals
shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative
provisions, nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of the
adopted codes. (Ord. 678, 10-6-1998)
8-1-9: PENALTY:
   A.   Fine: It is a class B civil fine for any person to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, demolish, use, occupy or
maintain any building or structure in the city without a valid building permit,
a valid certificate of occupancy, or in violation of any building code adopted
by this chapter. In the case of a continuing violation, every day's continuance
of the violation is a separate violation.
   B.   Suspension Of Water Service: The municipal judge may suspend water
service to any real property or building owned, leased, occupied, or developed
by a person punished under subsection A of this section until the penalty is
paid or until the violation is corrected or both. If the court orders water
service suspended until the violation is corrected, the suspension of water
service will continue notwithstanding a change of ownership, renters,
occupiers, or developers of the real property or building unless a temporary
certificate of occupancy permit is issued by the city administrator under
section 8-1-7 of this chapter or a valid building permit is obtained or both.
(Ord. 678, 10-6-1998)
8-1-10: NOTICE OF NONCOMPLIANCE AND VIOLATION:
   A.   If a person is convicted of a violation of subsection 7-2B-2C, 7-2B-5A
or B, or section 7-2B-3, 7-2B-6, or 7-2B-8 of this code; this chapter or title
10 of this code by the municipal judge or other court of competent
jurisdiction, the city recorder shall enter a notice of noncompliance in the
city lien docket upon any property where the violation occurred.
   B.   The notice of noncompliance shall specify the owner of the property as
reflected in the Umatilla County recording office, the property description by
tax map and lot or by subdivision, block and lot, the date of filing, a brief
description of the violation, reference to the court case number and citation
to this chapter and section.
   C.   Whenever the violation for which the notice of noncompliance was filed
is corrected, the city recorder shall mark the noncompliance as corrected,
specifying the date of correction.
   D.   Whenever a notice of noncompliance is outstanding and a request for
city liens is received by the city, the person requesting the search shall be
notified of the outstanding noncompliance. (Ord. 678, 10-6-1998)
CHAPTER 2
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
ARTICLE A.  SIGN CODE
SECTION:
8-2A-1: Purpose and Scope
8-2A-2: Definitions
8-2A-3: Sign Permit and Fee
8-2A-4: Permit Exceptions
8-2A-5: Procedure
8-2A-6: Measurement
8-2A-7: Exempt and Temporary Signs
8-2A-8: Prohibited Signs
8-2A-9: Signs in Residential Zones
8-2A-10: Signs in Community Services Overlay Zones
8-2A-11: Signs in Commercial Zones
8-2A-12: Signs in Industrial Zones
8-2A-13: Regulations by Sign Type
8-2A-14: Maintenance, Construction and Safeguards
8-2A-15: Nonconforming Signs
8-2A-16: Administration and Enforcement
8-2A-17: Variances and Appeals
8-2A-18: Special Provisions
8-2A-19: Illustrations
8-2A-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   The purpose of this Article is to provide reasonable and necessary
regulations for the erection and maintenance of signs in order to:
      1.   Promote free and meaningful exchange of ideas and information.
      2.   Protect the health, safety, property and welfare of the public.
      3.   Improve the neat, clean, orderly and attractive appearance of the
City.
      4.   Improve the effectiveness of signs in identifying and advertising
businesses and facilities.
      5.   Eliminate signs that demand, rather than invite, public attention.
      6.   Provide for the reasonable, orderly and effective display of outdoor
advertising.
      7.   Preserve, protect and enhance the economic, scenic, historic and
aesthetic values and objectives of the City and its citizens.
      8.   Provide effective signing to meet the anticipated differing needs of
various areas in the City.
   B.   The provisions of this Article apply to all lands within the Urban
Growth Boundary of the City. (Ord. 604, 11-16-93, eff. retroactive to 7-20-93)
8-2A-2: DEFINITIONS:
Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number
includes the plural and the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory, and
the word "building" includes "structure" other than "sign structure". Types of
signs are described under the term "sign" unless the context otherwise
requires:
   ANIMATION: Any form of movement by electric, mechanical or kinetic means,
including but not limited to rotation, revolving or wind activation of all or a
portion of a sign incorporating flashing or intermittent light for sign
illumination or for changing the message on a message sign.
   APPROVED PLASTIC: A plastic approved by Underwriters Laboratory for use in
construction of electric signs.
   AREA: The total area of a sign, including all decorative or structural trim,
facing, announcement, demonstration, display, illustration or any other
attention-getting device, exclusive of essential structural supports.
   AWNING: A roof-like structure that extends from a building face, generally
frame constructed with a cloth or metal cover. An awning contains a sign when a
message is incorporated by design or attached to the awning surface.
   BUILDING FRONT: The primary front of a building as viewed from the public
street to which it is oriented. The area of a building front is calculated as
the height multiplied by the width of the primary front.
   BUSINESS: All of the activities carried on by the same legal entity on the
same premises and shall include, but not be limited to charitable, fraternal,
benevolent, educational and social organizations.
   CANOPY: A permanent-roofed structure which may be freestanding or partially
attached to a building for the purpose of providing shelter to pedestrians or
patrons in automobiles but shall not mean a completely closed structure.
   CITY: The City of Umatilla, Oregon.
   CUTOUT: A display in the form of letters, figures, characters,
representations or others in cutout or irregular form attached to or super-
imposed upon an advertising sign.
   DISPLAY SURFACE: The area made available by the sign structure for the
purpose of displaying a message thereon.
   ELECTRONIC READER BOARD: A sign designed to display electronic messages that
move, flash or scroll, the content of which may be changed.
   ERECT: To construct, paint, place, affix or otherwise bring into being.
   HIGHWAY: All State highways, including Interstate, Federal Aid Primary,
Federal Aid Secondary and other State highways 1 .
   INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL: A material that will not ignite at or below a
temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees (1,200°) Fahrenheit during an
exposure of five (5) minutes and which will not continue to burn or glow at
that temperature when tested in accordance with the UBC.
   LOW PROFILE BUILDING: A building with a roof less than twelve feet (12')
above the sidewalk.
   MAINTAIN: To allow to exist or continue.
   MARQUEE: A permanent-roofed structure attached to or supported by a building
but does not mean a "canopy" as defined herein.
   NONSTRUCTURAL TRIM: A molding, batten, caps, nailing strip or stringer,
lattice, cutout, letter or walkway attached to a sign structure.
   PERSON: An individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint venture
or other legal entity.
   PROJECTION: The distance which a projecting sign extends from a building
face or the distance by which any other type of sign extends over public
property.
   ROOF LINE: The line which marks the highest point of the vertical front of a
building in the case of a false front or the line where the roof is joined to
the vertical front wall of the building in other cases.
   SIGN: Any sign, display, message, light (other than lighting designed
primarily for the illumination of premises), emblem, device, figure, mannequin,
painting, drawing, placard, poster or other thing that is designed, used or
intended for an advertising purpose and includes, where applicable, the sign
structure, display surface and all components of the sign. "Sign" includes, but
is not limited to:
  Advertising Sign: A sign which advertises goods, products, business or
services which are not sold, manufactured or distributed on or from the
premises or facilities on which the sign is located.
  Building Directory: A sign giving the name and room number or location of the
occupants of a building.
  Directional Sign: An on-premises sign designed to be read by a person already
on the premises and used only to identify and locate an office, entrance,
exits, motor vehicle route, telephone or similar place, service or route.
  Electric Sign: A sign containing electrical wiring.
  Flush Sign: A sign erected on the face of a building, marquee, canopy or roof
overhang in a place parallel to such face and not extending more than twelve
inches (12") therefrom. A "flush sign" also includes a sign erected against
supporting or ornamental columns supporting an overhanging roof in a place
generally parallel to the nearest building face. An "attached flush sign" is a
flush sign which does not extend beyond the corners of a building and is
located under the eaves.
  Freestanding Sign: An on-premises sign supported by one or more uprights or
braces in the ground and detached from any building or structure.
  Graffiti: Any inscriptions, words, figures, or designs that are marked,
etched, scratched, drawn, painted, pasted or otherwise affixed to the surface
of property without the permission of the owner.
  Message Sign: A sign providing information by means of sequential
illumination of lights contained in or upon the sign.
  Motor Vehicle Directional Sign: A sign identifying motor vehicle entrances or
exits to or from the premises on which the sign is located.
  Nonconforming Sign: A sign which does not conform to the provisions of this
Article.
  On-Premises Sign: A sign which advertises only the business or the goods,
products or facilities located on the premises on which the sign is located or
the sale, rent or lease of the premises.
  Principal Sign: The primary permanent on-premises sign designed primarily to
identify or advertise a business or advertise a business or facility to
motorists or pedestrians approaching the business or facility. A "principal
sign" is limited to a combination, freestanding, flush or projecting sign.
  Projecting Sign: A sign other than a flush sign which projects beyond the
building face to which it is attached.
  Roof Sign: A sign erected upon the roof of a building, roof structure or a
flat canopy or marquee roof.
  Second Principal Sign: A freestanding sign on the premises where the building
is set back from the front property line, as hereinafter specified.
  Secondary Marquee Sign: A marquee sign located only on an alley and under a
canopy or flush to the building.
  Secondary Wall Sign: An incidental, permanent on-premises flush sign.
  Temporary Sign: A sign, banner, balloon, pennant, valance or advertising
display constructed principally of cloth, paper, cardboard, plywood, wood,
wallboard, plastic, sheet metal or similar lightweight materials with or
without a frame and which is not permanently affixed to any sign structure,
sign tower, pole or building. Except for a balloon, banner, pennant or valance
constructed of cloth, flexible lightweight plastic, paper or cardboard,
temporary signs shall be limited to signs displayed five feet (5') or less
above ground level.
  Under Marquee Sign: A sign erected under and supported by a marquee or
canopy.
   SHOPPING CENTER: A building or group of buildings planned and developed as a
center on land with two (2) or more retail business occupancies existing or
planned. A "shopping center" shall not include a business which does not
participate in maintenance or promotional activities of the center, which
fronts on an arterial or collector street and which has a marked segregated
parking or use area separate from the shopping center parking or access areas.
Two (2) or more businesses not otherwise qualified may voluntarily join to form
a "shopping center" by executing a form provided by the building or zoning
official including written consent of the owner or owners of the premises and
for removal of nonconforming signs if the "shopping center" is discontinued.
   STREET FRONTAGE: A lot line fronting a street or highway. The width along
such lot line must be at least fifty feet (50') to qualify as a "street
frontage", unless the premises has only one such frontage. Access to a street
or highway is not required to establish a "street frontage" on a lot line
fronting on a limited-access highway.
   UNIFORM BUILDING CODE: The Uniform Building Code published by the
International Conference of Building Officials as adopted by the City, a copy
of which is on file for inspection in the office of the City Clerk 2  and which
is referred to as "UBC" in this Article.
   ZONE: A zone established pursuant to the City Zoning Ordinance 3 . (Ord.
604, 11-16-1993, eff. retroactive to 7-20-1993; amd. Ord. 636, 12-5-1995)
 
Notes
1 1. ORS 366.010.
2 1. See subsection 8-1-3A of this Code.
3 2. See Title 10 of this Code.
8-2A-3: SIGN PERMIT AND FEE:
   A.   Permit Required: No sign shall hereafter be erected, re- erected,
constructed, altered or maintained until a sign permit has been issued, unless
no permit is required under Section
8-2A-4. Where a group of signs is to be erected on the same building at the
same time, each sign requires a separate permit. The application procedure is
set forth in Section
8-2A-5.
   B.   Fee: Before a sign permit is issued, a permit fee therefor shall be
paid to the City as follows:
      1.   The City Council may, at any time, adopt a resolution to adjust the
permit fees. (Ord. 604, 11-16-1993, eff. retroactive to 7-20-1993)
8-2A-4: PERMIT EXCEPTIONS:
A sign permit shall not be required for routine maintenance, such as repainting
and repair of existing signs. Exceptions are also made for exempt signs listed
in Section
8-2A-7. However, a permit is required for a change of business name or any
structural alteration to an existing sign. (Ord. 604, 11-16-1993, eff.
retroactive to 7-20-1993)
8-2A-5: PROCEDURE:
Any person or firm contemplating the erection, installation or repair of any
new or existing sign shall first consult with the City Administrator. The
process for requesting a sign permit is as follows:
   A.   Installer shall consult with the City Administrator and where
appropriate will be provided with a sign permit application.
   B.   The completed application shall be submitted with the appropriate fee
and drawings to indicate the dimension, location and height of all existing and
proposed signs for the subject business.
   C.   Electric signs shall require notations to indicate capacity, power
consumption and shall bear U.L. approval labels. A permit for an electric sign
will not be issued until an Oregon State Building Codes electrical permit is
presented to the Building Inspector.
   D.   The Building Inspector may require additional information, such as
photographs, needed to determine whether the proposal meets the requirements of
this Article.
   E.   Proof that the installer holds a current sign company license shall be
presented if required.
   F.   The Building Inspector will determine when the application is complete.
The permit will be approved or denied within fifteen (15) days from the
submittal date, unless referred to a City commission as herein provided.
Variances and appeals will be processed as set forth in Section
8-2A-17.
   G.   When approved, a permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector with
the name of the sign erector thereon. The sign erector shall post the permit on
site or retain the permit for inspection during construction. (Ord. 604, 11-16-
93, eff. retroactive to 7-20-93)
8-2A-6: MEASUREMENT:
All signs shall be measured to include the entire sign area as follows. The
area of a sign composed of individual block letters and/or individual
decorative devices, displays, illustration, etc., or other attention-getting
device, shall be the area included between two (2) sets of horizontal and
vertical lines:
   A.   The horizontal line shall be continuous to the top and bottom edges of
the farthest projecting elements; and
   B.   The vertical line shall be continuous to the furthermost projecting
lateral elements.
   C.   Single signs with display faces on two (2) sides shall be measured on
one face only. (Ord. 604, 11-16-93, eff. retroactive to 7-20-93)
8-2A-7: EXEMPT AND TEMPORARY SIGNS:
Unless determined by the City Administrator to be a hazard to motorists,
pedestrians or property, the following signs are exempt from the permit
process, but shall comply with the safe erection and maintenance standards of
Section 8-2A-14, and with all specified standards of this Section.
   A.   Official or Traffic Signs: Official sign, traffic sign or traffic
signal, including but not limited to a sign identifying a public building or
use or erected by a public officer performing an official duty under law, court
or administrative officer.
   B.   Directional Signs: Directional sign erected by public authority.
   C.   Warning Signs: Warning sign erected to warn the public of a danger on,
or limiting access to public and private property, limited to a maximum width
dimension of two feet (2'), sign area of four (4) square feet, and maximum
height of six feet (6').
   D.   Building Identification: Permanent building identification limited to
twenty four (24) square feet in a sign area and prohibited in residential
zones.
   E.   Numbers: House or building numbers limited to six inches (6") in height
for dwellings of four (4) or less families and one foot (1') in height for
other buildings.
   F.   Name Sign: Name sign denoting the name of the owner or occupant,
limited to two (2) square feet in sign area.
   G.   Temporary Political Signs: Temporary political campaign signs shall be
erected only on private property, and limited to a sign area of sixteen (16)
square feet and a maximum horizontal dimension of eight feet (8'); placed ten
feet (10') inside property lines when located within ten feet (10') of
intersecting street or alley property lines; maintained in a neat, clean and
attractive condition. Signs may be erected during the campaign for a period of
sixty (60) days prior to the election in which candidates or issues are to be
voted upon. Such temporary signs shall be removed not later than the fifth day
following the election.
   H.   Temporary Nonprofit Signs: Temporary nonprofit signs identifying or
advertising a nonprofit civic, charitable or benevolent event complying with
the same requirements as temporary signs to be used for promotional purposes.
   I.   Flags: Flags of the United States, State of Oregon, United States flag
or State of Oregon Military Service, foreign countries, United Nations or
civic, fraternal, veterans or charitable organizations.
   J.   Seasonal Decor: Christmas or seasonal decorations as customarily used.
   K.   Street Banners: Street banners approved by the City Administrator
advertising a public entertainment or event and conditioned upon safe erection
and maintenance and such conditions as the City Administrator may attach,
including but not limited to insurance and bonding.
   L.   Indoor Signs: Signs located inside a building unless such sign violates
the watt capacity of subsection 8-2A-13P or is located in a residential zone.
   M.   Benches: Benches with advertising thereon if approved by the Planning
Commission.
   N.   Nonilluminated directional and motor vehicle directional signs defined
by Section 8-2A-2 and painted on paving or otherwise limited to a maximum
height of four feet (4') and a sign area of eight (8) square feet.
   O.   Temporary For Sale Signs: A temporary "for sale" sign not exceeding six
(6) square feet in area with a maximum height of four feet (4'), may be erected
upon private property; provided, that it advertises the sale, lease, or rental
of the property upon which it is erected. One additional "for sale" or "open
house" sign limited to the same size.
   P.   Temporary Subdivision Signs: A temporary subdivision sign may be
erected upon a tract of land designated as a subdivision advertising sale of
the tract or lots in the tract. Such sign shall not exceed forty two (42)
square feet in area. The sign shall be reduced in size by six (6) square feet
for each lot less than seven (7) lots in the subdivision.
   Q.   Promotional Signs: Temporary signs to be used for promotional purposes.
Temporary signs may be used for promotional purposes, but only on private
property and subject to the following:
      1.   Temporary signs for promotional purposes may be erected for a period
not to exceed two (2) weeks before the event advertised.
      2.   No more than one "sandwich board" or "A-frame" shall be allowed for
each premises.
      3.   A balloon, banner, pennant or valance constructed of cloth, flexible
lightweight plastic, paper or cardboard, may be used as a temporary sign for
promotional purposes only. The sign will be permitted for a period of seven (7)
consecutive days in any month and then removed for a minimum of twenty two (22)
days or the remainder of the month.
   R.   Permanent Political, Ideological Signs: Permanent political,
ideological, religious signs which convey a message but which do not advertise
a product or service for sale, provided such signs shall be subject to all
ordinances and regulations concerning size, placement, materials and the type
and soundness of supporting structure.
   S.   Murals: Murals which are mounted or painted upon an existing building
or structure and which do not advertise a product or service for sale.
   T.   Historic Landmark Signs: Historic landmark signs that are erected by
the City or the owner of a historic building or placed in accordance with an
official historic designation.
   U.   Community Interest Signs: Community interests may be identified by the
City on a temporary or permanent basis. Such signs may promote, but are not
limited to the promotion of: community events, public parks and points of
interest that serve a substantial public purpose.
   V.   Garage Sale Signs: These signs are allowed, one to a premises, with a
maximum of three (3) square feet in area.
   W.   Building Directory Signs: Building directory signs are permitted in
shopping centers and multi-tenant buildings. (Ord. 604, 11-16-93, eff.
retroactive to 7-20-93)
8-2A-8: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
No sign shall be erected or maintained which:
   A.   Bears or contains statements, words or pictures of an obscene, indecent
or immoral character, such as will offend the public morals or decency.
   B.   Extends or is erected (such as a roof sign), above the roof line of the
building to which it is attached, except as provided in subsection
8-2A-13H.
   C.   The Building Inspector determines to be in violation of ORS 483.138,
which applies to signs creating confusion with or interfering with the
effectiveness of traffic signs or signals.
   D.   Is placed on, affixed to, or painted on a motor vehicle, vehicle or
trailer and placed on public or private property for the primary purpose of
providing a sign not otherwise permitted by this article (exception: garage
sale signs).
   E.   Is a private sign placed on, painted on or affixed to any utility pole,
tree or rock.
   F.   Is located in an area of the city zoned residential, except for those
signs designated in sections
8-2A-7,
8-2A-9 and
8-2A-10 of this article. (Ord. 604, 11-16-1993, eff. retroactive to 7-20-1993)
   G.   By use of lights or illumination, creates an unduly distracting or
hazardous condition to a motorist or pedestrian. (Ord. 631, 5-16-1995)
   H.   Is graffiti.
   I.   Is otherwise in violation of any provision of this article. (Ord. 636,
12-5-1996)
8-2A-9: SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
These areas are not zoned for commercial use, but are permitted the following
signs:
   A.   One 2-square foot nonanimated, nonilluminated flush sign for homes with
approved home occupation permits.
   B.   Community service signs permitted by section 8-2A-10 of this article.
   C.   Multi-family housing complexes with at least four (4) dwellings are
allowed a flush or a freestanding sign no more than eight feet (8') above
grade, as follows:
 
Number Of Dwelling Units Sign Area
4 to 8                   12 square feet
9 to 15                  24 square feet
16 to 24                 32 square feet
25 or more               48 square feet
 
(Ord. 604, 11-16-1993, eff. retroactive to 7-20-1993)
8-2A-10: SIGNS IN COMMUNITY SERVICES OVERLAY ZONES:
These areas are zoned for community facility uses as an overlay to the primary
(residential, commercial, etc.) underlying zone. Signs for the purpose of
identification of a public or private facility which serves a substantial
public purpose, including, but not limited to, churches, schools, hospitals,
medical offices, clinics, radio/television stations and utility substations are
permitted as follows:
   A.   One flush or freestanding sign not to exceed forty eight (48) square
feet in area. The top of a freestanding sign shall not exceed eight feet (8')
above grade. (Ord. 604, 11-16-1993, eff. retroactive to 7-20-1993)
8-2A-11: SIGNS IN COMMERCIAL ZONES:
These areas are zoned for a variety of retail and service business uses, and
are allowed the following signs:
   A.   One principal sign, either flush, projecting or freestanding. If
projecting or freestanding, limited to one square foot for each linear front
foot of the major street frontage of the property with a maximum of one hundred
(100) square feet, and subject to the requirements of subsection 8-2A-13C of
this article.
   B.   A second principal (freestanding) sign when allowed under subsection
8-2A-13B of this article. (Ord. 604, 11-16-1993, eff. retroactive to 7-20-1993)
   C.   Commercial wall signs within the district shall be limited to an area
of thirty two (32) square feet. Freestanding or projecting commercial signs
shall be limited to an area of twenty four (24) square feet.
   D.   Freestanding commercial signs shall be limited in height to a maximum
of twenty feet (20'), as measured from the top of the sign to the finished
ground level. Commercial wall and canopy signs shall not project above the roof
eaves. (Ord. 710, 5-7-2002)
8-2A-12: SIGNS IN INDUSTRIAL ZONES:
These areas are zoned for a variety of industrial, manufacturing and limited
commercial and residential uses. The following signs are allowed:
   A.   The same signs as allowed in the commercial zones, section
8-2A-11 of this article. (Ord. 604, 11-16-1993, eff. retroactive to 7-20-1993)
8-2A-13: REGULATIONS BY SIGN TYPE:
   A.   Principal Sign: A principal sign is limited to a combination,
freestanding, flush or projecting sign.
   B.   Secondary Sign: A secondary principal sign is a freestanding sign on
the premises where the building is set back from the front property line.
   C.   Freestanding and Projecting Signs: Such signs shall be located in
conformity to the Zoning Ordinance and Building Code of the City 1 .
      1.   A freestanding sign shall not exceed a maximum height as approved by
the Building Inspector for structural requirements.
      2.   Signs may project twelve inches (12") over an alley with a minimum
clearance of fourteen feet (14') above grade and may project an additional
twelve inches (12") for each twenty four inches (24") of additional clearance
above grade, to a maximum projection of thirty six inches (36").
      3.   Except in alleys or other areas of vehicular traffic, a minimum of
eight feet (8') clearance shall be maintained from the bottom of a projecting
or freestanding sign, and the level of the sidewalk or grade immediately below
at the building line with a maximum projection of twelve inches (12"). For each
additional projection of six inches (6") the sign shall have twelve inches
(12") of vertical clearance above the eight foot (8') minimum requirement (see
diagram at Section 8-2A-19). In no case shall the maximum projection exceed
five feet (5') nor shall any sign extend closer to the street or alley than two
feet (2') from the outer curb face or two feet (2') from the traveled surface
where no curb is present.
      4.   Unless approved by the Building Inspector for a minimum number of
braces on a building face not able to support a projecting sign, no projecting
signs shall be supported by a frame commonly known as an "A-frame" or other
visible frame located on a building roof.
      5.   To insure traffic safety, signs shall be located in accordance with
the "Clear Visions Area" provisions of the City's Zoning Ordinance.
   D.   Flush Signs: Flush signs shall comply with the following standards and
specification:
      1.   Maximum Area:
         a.   Residential Zones: Two (2) square feet in area. Multi- family
complexes are allowed larger signs in accordance with subsection 8-2A-9C.
         b.   Shopping Centers: Twenty five percent (25%) of building front
maximum.
         c.   Commercial and Industrial Zones: Fifty percent (50%) of building
front maximum.
         d.   Community Services Overlay Zone: Forty eight (48) square foot
maximum.
      2.   Placement and Projection:
         a.   The total sign area of all exterior walls shall not exceed the
maximum allowed under subsection D1 of this Section.
         b.   Flush signs may be erected on the face of a building, marquee,
canopy or roof overhang in a place parallel to such face and not extending more
than twelve inches (12") therefrom, except that:
            (1)   A flush sign may also be erected against supporting or
ornamental columns located under an overhanging roof in a place generally
parallel to the nearest building face.
            (2)   A flush sign may be attached to the surface of an awning
without further projection therefrom.
   E.   Message Signs: Message signs are permitted only in the Commercial and
Industrial District.
   F.   Roof Signs: Roof signs are permitted in the Commercial and Industrial
Zones only on low profile buildings and the top of roof signs shall not extend
more than twelve feet (12') from sidewalk grade.
   G.   Secondary Marquee Signs: Secondary marquee signs are permitted only in
shopping centers, Commercial and Industrial Zones and shall not be over eight
(8) square feet in area, shall be located under a canopy or flush in an alley
with a minimum of seven and one-half feet (71/2') clearance.
   H.   Home Occupation Signs: Home occupation signs are permitted in the
residential districts not to exceed two (2) square feet in area and flush
mounted.
   I.   Garage Sale Signs: These signs are allowed, one to a premises, with a
maximum of three (3) square feet in area.
   J.   Service Station Island Signs: Signs that designate type of fuel,
promotional sign for fuel only and fuel price are allowed at the rate of four
(4) square feet maximum per pump island. In addition, one sign designating fuel
prices may be attached to a pole with the top of the sign not to exceed twelve
feet (12') above ground level, with a maximum area of thirty two (32) square
feet.
   K.   On Premises Signs: All on premises signs must utilize at least fifty
percent (50%) of the sign area for advertising the main business on the
premises. Signs that contain more than fifty percent (50%) off premises
advertising shall be regulated under subsection O of this section.
   L.   Secondary Street Frontage Signs: Secondary frontage signs shall be of a
flush type only. Size limits for secondary frontage flush signs are those given
in subsection D of this section. (Ord. 604, 11-16-1993, eff. retroactive to 7-
20-1993)
   M.   Electric Signs: Electric signs shall bear the Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc., seal of approval. All electrical signs shall be installed
in accordance with the electrical specialty and the one and two family dwelling
electrical code 2  as it regards distances from electrical lines. Electrical
equipment used in connection with display signs shall be installed in
accordance with the city ordinances regulating electrical installations. (Ord.
632, 6-20-1995)
   N.   Illuminated Signs: No sign shall be erected or maintained which, by use
of lights or illumination, creates an unduly distracting or hazardous condition
to a motorist or pedestrian. (Ord. 604, 11-16-1993, eff. retroactive to 7-20-
1993)
   O.   Off Premises Advertising Signs (Billboards): Advertising signs shall be
located only along U.S. Highway 730 and U.S. Interstate Highway 82 and in
commercial and industrial zones, as designated by the city zoning ordinance.
      1.   Maximum Height: The maximum height above grade shall be twenty four
feet (24'); but shall be increased to forty feet (40') in the highway district.
      2.   Outdoor Advertising Signs: Outdoor advertising signs shall have
metal primary structural members.
      3.   Size: The maximum number of advertising signs shall not exceed two
(2) per five (5) miles along U.S. Highway 730 and the limits prescribed by
federal and state laws along U.S. Interstate Highway 82. Sign area shall not
exceed six hundred seventy two (672) square feet, with maximum dimensions of
fourteen feet (14') vertical and forty eight feet (48') horizontal. (Ord. 735,
12-7-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 10 and Chapter 1 of this Title, respectively, of this Code.
2 1. See subsection 8-1-3F of this title.
8-2A-14: MAINTENANCE, CONSTRUCTION AND SAFEGUARDS:
   A.   Maintenance And Appearance: All signs and the site on which they are
located shall be maintained in a neat, clean and attractive condition.
      1.   Signs shall be kept from excessive rust, corrosion, peeling paint or
other surface deterioration. The display surfaces, trims, frames and supports
of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or otherwise neatly maintained, as
applicable.
      2.   On premises ground signs shall be directly supported by poles or
supports in the ground. No external cross braces, guy wires, "T-frames", "A-
frames", "trusses" or similar bracing systems shall be used in constructing a
ground sign or freestanding sign.
   B.   Design And Construction: Except as specified in this article, design,
loading, construction and material shall be those specified in the building
code, as amended by the state and adopted by the city.
   C.   Clearance And Safeguard: To ensure public safety, the installation and
maintenance of all signs shall be subject to the following provisions: (Ord.
604, 11-16-1993, eff. retroactive to 7-20-1993)
      1.   The installation or erection of any sign requiring the operation of
any crane or other equipment must be conducted in a manner so as to maintain a
minimum clearance from any and all high voltage electric power or other type
electrical lines, as dictated by the electrical specialty and the one and two
family dwelling electrical code. (Ord. 632, 6-20-1995)
      2.   All freestanding sign installers must utilize the "call before you
dig" utilities locate service (1-800-332-2344) offered by the Oregon utilities
coordinating council to ensure clearance from underground utilities.
      3.   All signs together with all of their supports, braces, guys and
anchors shall be kept in good repair and be maintained in a safe condition.
(Ord. 604, 11-16-1993, eff. retroactive to 7-20-1993)
8-2A-15: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Generally: Signs and advertising structures which do not conform to the
provisions of this article but which lawfully existed and were maintained,
shall remain lawful except as provided in this section:
      1.   A nonconforming sign which has been determined by the building
inspector or city administrator to be improperly maintained or unsafe shall be
removed within thirty (30) days after notice as provided in subsection B of
this section.
      2.   A nonconforming sign which is a temporary sign shall conform to the
provisions of section
8-2A-7 of this article within thirty (30) days after notice.
      3.   Nonconforming signs which violate the provisions of section 8-2A-8,
"Prohibited Signs", of this article shall be removed within thirty (30) days
after notice.
      4.   Nonconforming signs which are structurally altered, relocated or
replaced shall immediately comply with all provisions of this article.
      5.   Nonconforming signs which have been abandoned or those advertising a
business that is no longer conducted in or upon the premises and has been so
conducted for a period of sixty (60) days shall comply with this article.
Property owners shall display "for rent" or clearly indicate business is
closed.
      6.   Nonconforming signs which were lawfully erected and maintained in
areas outside of the corporate limits of the city and within the Umatilla urban
growth boundary shall be subject to the provisions of this article, from its
date of adoption by Umatilla County, forward.
   B.   Removal:
      1.   Abandoned Signs: Where an advertised business is no longer conducted
in or upon the premises on which a sign is located, such sign shall be
considered as an abandoned sign subject to removal by the person who owns the
sign or the owner of the building, structure or premises on which the sign is
located. The following are not subject to this abandoned sign provision:
         a.   An advertising sign where a person has merely leased or
contracted advertising space thereon.
         b.   A sign to which the successor to a person's business location or
business agrees to maintain as provided in this article by the filing of a
letter of intent with the city administrator within thirty (30) days after
notification of a violation of this provision.
      2.   Compliance Procedure And Removal:
         a.   Notice:
            (1)   Except for signs which the building inspector has determined
to be unsafe signs which by reason of their condition present an immediate and
serious danger to public safety, the building inspector or city administrator
shall give written notice of a nonconforming sign. The notice shall be given to
the owner of the building, structure or premises on which the sign is located.
Notices shall be sent by certified mail or be delivered personally to the
building owner at his last known address, or address of record. The notice
shall specify the violations of this article and the time allowed for
compliance. Except for unsafe signs, compliance shall be required within thirty
(30) days from mailing or personal delivery of the notice, unless time is
extended for good cause shown.
            (2)   In the case of an unsafe sign, the Building Inspector shall
make a reasonable attempt to notify the sign owner of the building, structure
or premises on which the sign is located. The type of notice and the time spent
attempting notice shall be determined by the Building Inspector based upon the
nature of the hazard and the immediacy of the threatened harm to person or
property. Upon failure of notice after reasonable effort to give the same, or
the refusal of the notified persons to comply with this Article within the time
specified by the Building Inspector, the Building Inspector may remove or cause
others to remove the sign or make the minimum necessary repairs to remove the
danger or hazard.
         b.   Recovery of Costs: Where the City repairs or removes a sign which
has been determined to be unsafe because it presents an immediate and serious
danger to the public, the City may recover all costs incurred from the owner of
the sign, or the owner of the building upon which the sign is erected, or both.
When the sign owner also owns the real property upon which the sign is located,
the costs incurred may be assessed against the property. The amount assessed
shall be set forth by the City Council by this Article, and the lien created
thereby shall be collected and foreclosed in the same manner as assessments for
local improvements.
   C.   Signs for Nonconforming Uses: A use which has been determined to be
nonconforming pursuant to the City Zoning Ordinance, but which would ordinarily
require a sign, if such use were located in an appropriate zoning district,
shall be permitted a sign, subject to the requirements of the zone which best
fits the nonconforming use, as determined by the City Administrator. (Ord. 604,
11-16-93, eff. retroactive to 7-20-93)
8-2A-16: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Inspection: The Building Inspector under the supervision and control of
the City Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to enforce this
Article. Upon the presentation of proper credentials, he may enter at
reasonable times into or upon any building or premises in the City to inspect
signs or carry out the duties and responsibilities imposed on him by this
Article. The City Administrator may inspect or reinspect any sign to determine
if it complies with this Article.
   B.   Release from Liability: Neither the Building Inspector, City
Administrator nor the City nor any of its authorized representatives shall be
liable for any damages, costs or expenses for any failure to enforce the
provision of this Article.
   C.   Violation: No person shall erect, maintain, or use nor shall any person
in control of any premises, permit the erection, maintenance or use of any sign
which does not conform to and comply with the provisions of this Article.
Nothing contained in this Article is intended to permit the erection or
maintenance of any sign in violation of any other ordinances or State or
Federal law. Violations of this Article shall be subject to the penalties
hereinafter provided.
   D.   Penalties: Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
Article, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than
two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each calendar day that a sign is in violation of
this Article shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 604, 11-16-93, eff.
retroactive to 7-20-93)
8-2A-17: VARIANCES AND APPEALS:
   A.   Act on Requests: The Planning Commission of the City shall act on all
requests for variances and appeals of sign permit determination by the City
Administrator.
   B.   Hearings: The Planning Commission shall conduct hearings for appeal and
variance matters in the same manner and shall apply the same standards as are
used for variance hearings conducted pursuant to Section
10-14-10 of this Code.
   C.   No Action Pending Appeal: Except in the case of unsafe signs, no action
shall be taken by the Building Inspector under this Article pending an appeal
or variance request to the Planning Commission and during any further appeal to
the City Council.
   D.   Appeals: Any person aggrieved by a determination of the City
Administrator may appeal to the Planning Commission. Upon appeal, the
Commission may vary the requirements of this Article as permitted herein or it
may:
      1.   Decide questions arising out of interpretation of the Article.
   E.   Exercise of Authority: In exercising its appeal or variance authority,
the Commission may attach such conditions to either as it determines to be
necessary to achieve the purposes stated in Section
8-2A-1 of this Article. (Ord. 604, 11-16-93, eff. retroactive to 7-20-93)
8-2A-18: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Districts of Special Control: The Planning Commission shall have the
authority to establish districts which must be at least one City block in
length that would allow for variances of sizes, types, heights, etc., when:
      1.   The area is shown to have, or it is desired to promote, a unique and
beneficial display of desirable architectural, historic or historic area; or
      2.   A group of commercial activities in an intensive commercial area
joins together in a cooperative arrangement to sign their occupancies so as to
create an unusual or unique display; but only after a plan showing all of the
new sign arrangement and a petition of all property owners is presented to the
City Planning Commission. After approval by the Commission is received, the
plan will be forwarded to the City Council which shall either: by ordinance
designate the district as one of special control, return it to the Planning
Commission for correction or further study, or reject the plan.
      3.   Once approved, the plan shall govern sign design, location, number
and size within the special district. However, all other provisions of this
Article, including but not limited to: permitting, safety, inspection and
enforcement, shall have full force and effect. (Ord. 604, 11-16-93, eff.
retroactive to 7-20-93)
8-2A-19: ILLUSTRATIONS:
[Image]
 
  (Ord. 604, 11-16-93, eff. retroactive to 7-20-93)
ARTICLE B.  BILLBOARDS
(Rep. by Ord. 621, 7-13-1994)
CHAPTER 3
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
(Rep. by Ord. 683, 2-16-1999)
CHAPTER 4
MOVING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Permits Required
8-4-2: Application; Fees
8-4-3: Prerequisites for Permit
8-4-4: Procedures for Moving Buildings
8-4-5: Property Damage
8-4-6: Permit Cancellation
8-4-7: Penalties
8-4-1: PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Moving Building Permit: No person shall move any building or a part of
any building within the City without first obtaining a moving permit therefor;
provided, however, that this Section will not apply when moving a building
within the confines of a lot or contiguous lots when not necessary to move the
same over public property, public streets or alleys, or property belonging to
another person.
   B.   Building Permit: In addition to the permit to move the building, the
applicant, contractor or owner will be required to obtain a building permit for
any construction required to relocate the building within the City limits, and
to bring the construction of said building up to the building code requirements
for a new building in the same location within sixty (60) days from the time
that the permit was issued. (Ord. 485, 6-21-82)
8-4-2: APPLICATION; FEES:
Any person desiring a permit required by Section
8-4-1 of this Chapter, will file a written application with the appropriate
City official, which application shall set forth the size and dimensions of
such building, the location of the building, the location to which it will be
moved and shall designate the streets, avenues or alleys through, over and
along which such building shall be moved and such other information as the
appropriate City official may require. An inspection fee 1  may be set by
resolution and shall be paid at the time of application for each permit. All
permits shall be issued only upon the personal application of the permittee.
(Ord. 485, 6-21-82; amd. 518, 10-21-85; 1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section 1-12-4 of this Code; see section 9 of Ordinance 518.
8-4-3: PREREQUISITES FOR PERMIT:
   A.   State License Required: The applicant for a building moving permit will
show proof of being licensed by the State of Oregon to do the work requested.
   B.   Inspection Required: The appropriate City official will inspect the
building to be moved, and if it is found that the building is of substantial
construction and in such condition that it may be moved without collapsing or
falling apart and further finds that the building is designed and adaptable for
the purpose, use or occupancy to which it is proposed to put the same at the
new location, and that it conforms to the requirements of the Building and
Zoning codes at the new location, then the appropriate City official will
approve the permit application. The appropriate City official will further
determine that the applicant has safe and sufficient equipment and facilities
for moving the building. In addition the appropriate City official will require
compliance with all provisions of this Chapter which are prerequisite to the
granting of a moving permit.
   C.   Deed Restriction: The appropriate City official will ask the permittee
of proof that said building or structure to be moved is allowed in any deed
restriction on the land upon which the building or structure is to be placed.
(Ord. 485, 6-21-82)
8-4-4: PROCEDURES FOR MOVING BUILDINGS:
   A.   Notice to Utilities: The applicant will, at the time of applying for
each moving permit, submit to the appropriate City official a letter or other
written notification from the public utilities, cable T.V. companies and/or
others stating that they have been informed and have approved the proposed
route.
   B.   Route Proposed: The appropriate City official will personally examine
the route proposed and the application for the permit shall be made at least
forty eight (48) hours before the proposed moving date, holidays, Saturdays and
Sundays excluded.
   C.   Traffic Control: While moving a building sufficient passageway for
vehicles upon one or both side of such building will be maintained upon any
street, avenue or alley or provide a detour which is adequate to handle the
existing traffic and that said detour will be approved by the Police
Department. Movements will not be permitted during peak traffic hours, during
hours of darkness, storm or unsafe driving conditions. (Ord. 485, 6-21-82)
8-4-5: PROPERTY DAMAGE:
The issuing of a moving permit shall not be construed to authorize the holder
thereof to move or remove any utility poles or wires, or trees, traffic
signals, or signs, or other public or private property without first obtaining
permission from the owner thereof. If in moving a building damage is inflicted
upon any public or private property, repairs, replacement or restitution shall
be promptly made to the satisfaction of the owner. (Ord. 485, 6-21-82)
8-4-6: PERMIT CANCELLATION:
Any permit granted hereunder may be cancelled at any time by the granting
authority upon proof satisfactory to it that the permittee has violated any of
the terms of the permit, or that the permit was obtained through
misrepresentation in the application therefor, or when in the judgment of the
granting authority the public interest requires cancellation. (Ord. 485, 6-21-
82)
8-4-7: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any permittee who shall suffer any building or structure to remain in
or on any of the streets, alleys, thoroughfares, highways or sidewalks, or upon
any of the public grounds of the City for longer than will be specified in the
permit, commits a Class D civil violation and like penalty for every twenty
four (24) hours the same will be continued, and such building will be deemed a
nuisance and may be aborted as provided by ordinance.
   B.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter, shall, upon
conviction, be punished by the imposition of a Class B civil fine 1 . Each day
that the offense continues or that a person operates without a permit will
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 485, 6-21-82; 1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
CHAPTER 5
DUST CONTROL
SECTION:
8-5-1: Definition
8-5-2: Intent
8-5-3: Application of Provisions
8-5-4: Control Measures
8-5-5: Inclusion in Other Provisions
8-5-6: Penalties
8-5-1: DEFINITION:
"Blowing" as used in this Chapter means erosion by wind which in turn subjects
other properties to dust from the blowing material on said building project.
(Ord. 346, 7-7-75)
8-5-2: INTENT:
   A.   The intent of this Chapter is to prevent a builder from allowing dust
to originate from the building site both during and after construction until
sale thereafter to a buyer which shall thereafter be responsible for the dust
or the builder as owner-manager shall thereafter be responsible for the dust.
It means that a contractor cannot hereafter erect a structure and upon
completion merely let the property sit and erode away as dust to the detriment
of the surrounding properties.
   B.   The contractor or the builder or developer for which the contractor
completes the construction shall be liable to prevent the "blowing" as herein
set forth. (Ord. 346, 7-7-75)
8-5-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This Chapter applies to all builders where the project involves disturbing the
earth, or hauling in fill material which can blow, whether the builder is an
individual, a tract developer, a contractor builder or a builder of a
speculative structure or structures. (Ord. 346, 7-7-75)
8-5-4: CONTROL MEASURES:
   A.   Control Methods: Every person shall take and maintain positive steps to
immediately control from blowing any fill material or any soil which the
project disturbs. Said steps shall be either by a water sprinkling system,
sprinkler truck, gravel blanket, sod, straw or other agent which will
positively prevent the blowing of the disturbed soil and/or fill material which
is placed by said builder where the fill material may also be subject to
"blowing".
   B.   Maintenance: The positive control measures used by the builder must be
effective and must be maintained until the property has been sold to the first
buyer or the builder puts in his/her own manager and thereafter will be subject
to the nuisance ordinance relating to uncontrolled dust originating upon a
person's property. (Ord. 346, 7-7-75)
8-5-5: INCLUSION IN OTHER PROVISIONS:
   A.   Building Permit: Every building permit issued by the City henceforth
shall be subject to the requirement of this Chapter.
   B.   Performance Bond: The requirement of this Chapter shall be included in
the coverage of the contractor's or builder-developer's performance bond which
in turn shall be subject to damage claims for failure to abide by this Chapter.
(Ord. 346, 7-7-75)
8-5-6: PENALTIES:
   A.   Close Down: Violation of this Chapter shall be grounds for the
immediate closing down of the offending construction project by the Building
Inspector. (Ord. 346, 7-7-75)
   B.   Penalty: Violation of this Chapter is punishable by the imposition of a
Class A civil fine 1 . (Ord. 514, 2-25-85; 1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
TITLE 9
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Reserved (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
TITLE 10
ZONING
CHAPTER 1
ZONING PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Purpose
10-1-3: Scope Of Regulations
10-1-4: Exemptions
10-1-5: Standards
10-1-6: Definitions
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the CITY OF UMATILLA ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 688,
6-15-1999)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this title are to promote public health, safety, convenience
and general welfare and to carry out the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 688, 6-15-
1999)
10-1-3: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
No structure or premises shall hereafter be used or occupied and no structure
or part thereof shall be erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or
altered contrary to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-1-4: EXEMPTIONS:
Agriculture, grazing, horticulture and the growing of timber are not subject to
the restrictions of this title. "Timber growing" is interpreted to be the
growing of trees for commercial purpose. Tracts of land of less than five (5)
acres shall be presumed to be nonagricultural, nongrazing, nonhorticultural and
not for the growing of timber unless proved to be otherwise. (Ord. 688, 6-15-
1999)
10-1-5: STANDARDS:
The standards established by this title are determined to be minimum
requirements in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare.
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-1-6: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the masculine includes the feminine and neuter and the
singular includes the plural; the word "occupied" includes designed or intended
to be used; and the word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directive.
The following words and phrases, unless the context otherwise requires, shall
mean:
   ACCESS: The way or means by which pedestrians and vehicles enter and leave
property.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING: An interior, attached, or detached residential structure
that is used in connection with, or that is accessory to, a single-family
dwelling.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE: A structure or use incidental and subordinate to
the primary use of the property and that is located on the same lot with the
main use, e.g., a home occupation is an accessory use.
   ACCESSWAY OR ACCESS CORRIDOR: A defined right-of-way or easement provided
for pedestrians, vehicles, or both, for safe, usable and convenient access to
or between properties or uses. "Access corridor" means a separate travelway for
pedestrians and bicyclists to minimize travel distances within and between
subdivisions, planned unit developments, residential areas and commercial
centers, major employment areas, transit stops, or within and between nearby
neighborhood activity centers such as schools, parks and convenience shopping.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS OR USE: A business or use that provides
sexually oriented entertainment, services or products which make up a
substantial or significant portion of the establishment's activities or
merchandise. Adult entertainment businesses or uses exclude minors by virtue of
age under the laws of the State of Oregon, whether or not such minors are
accompanied by a consenting parent, guardian or spouse. Types of uses include,
but are not limited to: adult motion picture theaters, video arcades, massage
parlors, nude modeling studios, lotion studios, adult bookstores, adult
paraphernalia shops, nude photography studios, or eating and drinking
establishments that have sexually oriented entertainment such as nude dancers,
strippers, or other similar entertainers.
   AGRICULTURE: The tilling of the soil and the raising of crops.
   ALLEY: A narrow public street through a block primarily for service access
to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on another street.
   ALTERATION: Any manmade change to the use of a structure or the use of land.
   ANTENNA: A system of electrical conductors for radiating or receiving radio
waves, commonly consisting of a metal rod, wire panel or dish mounted on a
supporting tower, pole, mast, or similar structure.
   APARTMENT: A dwelling unit within a multi-family dwelling structure.
   AUTOMOBILE: Any self-propelled vehicle (including motorcycles) capable of
operating on any highway, street, road, alley or land.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A business that provides services for vehicles
limited to the selling of petroleum products, tires, batteries and accessories,
servicing of automobiles, including minor automotive repair, but excluding auto
body and fender work, major engine repair or rebuilding, outside display of
goods, except for petroleum products, and outside repairs of any kind.
   BICYCLE: A vehicle designed to operate on the ground on wheels, propelled
solely by human power, upon which any person or persons may ride, and with
every wheel more than fourteen inches (14") in diameter or two (2) tandem
wheels either of which is more than fourteen inches (14") in diameter or having
three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, any of which is more than fourteen
inches (14") in diameter.
   BICYCLE FACILITIES: A general term denoting improvements and provisions made
to accommodate or encourage bicycling, including parking facilities, all
bikeways, and shared roadways not specifically designated for bicycle use.
   BIKEWAY: Any road, path or way which in some manner is specifically
designated as being open to bicycle travel, regardless of whether such facility
is designated for the exclusive use of bicycles or is shared with other
transportation modes.
   BOARDING, LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE: A building where lodging with or without
meals is provided for compensation for not less than five (5) and no more than
ten (10) guests.
   BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT: An adjustment of a property line by relocation of
a common boundary where an additional unit of land is not created and where the
existing land reduced in size by the adjustment complies with any applicable
zoning ordinance.
   BUILDING: A structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
   BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the grade to the
highest point of the roof beams of flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard
roofs, or to the center height between eaves and ridges for gable, hip or
gambrel roofs.
   BUILDING LINE: A line established by this title to govern the placement of a
building with respect to the front lot line through the setback requirements of
a minimum front yard. A building line is ordinarily parallel to the front lot
line and at a distance in accordance with the setback requirements.
   BUILDING SPECIFICATIONS: Requirements for minimum standards. (As established
in the uniform building code.)
   CITY: The city of Umatilla, Oregon.
   COMMERCIAL USE: The activity of purchasing, selling or conducting other
transactions involving the handling or disposition, other than included in the
term light and heavy "industry" as defined in the appropriate section, of any
article, substance or commodity for the livelihood or profit, including shops
for the sale of personal services, professional services, and places where
commodities, services or merchandise are sold or agreements are made to furnish
them. Limited on site assembly of products offered for sale is permissible, as
for a bakery or dressmaker.
   COMMUNITY SERVICES USE: A use that may be appropriate or necessary in any
district due to its public convenience, necessity, unusual character, technical
need, or effect on the neighborhood. Such uses may include a public or private
park, utility facility, building used for religious worship, as listed in
chapter 6 of this title.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The comprehensive plan for the city of Umatilla,
comprising plans, maps, and reports, or any combination thereof, relating to
the future economic and physical growth and development pattern or
redevelopment of the city.
   COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Umatilla, Oregon.
   DEDICATION: The designation of land by its owner for any general or public
use.
   DENSITY, NET: The number of dwelling units per unit of land, expressed as
the number of square feet of land per dwelling unit. The net density is
computed by dividing the net square footage by the number of dwelling units.
Net square footage is determined by subtracting any area of land dedicated for
public purposes from the total site area.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, construction, installation or alteration of
buildings or other structures; condominium conversion; land division;
establishment or termination of a right of access; storage on real property;
tree cutting; clearing; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation,
or drilling operations.
   DRIVE-THROUGH USE: A commercial use that involves provision of a product or
service through a window or similar opening in a building, in a manner that
does not require the customer to leave his/her automobile.
   DUPLEX: A residential structure containing two (2) dwelling units and share
a common wall, floor or ceiling, built on a single lot or parcel.
   DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms designed for occupancy by one family and
not having more than one cooking facility. For the purposes of this title, a
travel trailer is not a dwelling unit.
   EASEMENT: A grant of the right to use a specific portion of a property for
specific purposes.
   EFFICIENCY DWELLING UNIT: The unit shall have a living room not less than
two hundred (200) square feet nor more than five hundred (500) square feet of
floor area and shall be provided with a separate closet, kitchen sink, cooking
appliance and refrigeration facilities each having clear working space of not
less than thirty inches (30") in front. The unit shall be provided with a
separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
   EMPLOYEE(S): All persons, including proprietors, who work on premises during
the largest shift at peak season.
   FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, legal adoption or
legal guardianship living together in a dwelling unit plus not more than four
(4) additional persons; or an individual or a group of not more than five (5)
persons unrelated by blood, marriage, adoption or legal guardianship living in
a dwelling unit.
   FAMILY DAYCARE PROVIDER: A daycare provider which accommodates fewer than
thirteen (13) children in the provider's home; this is considered a residential
use.
   FENCE: An accessory structure designed and intended to serve as a barrier or
as a means of enclosing a yard or other area, or other structure; or to serve
as a boundary feature separating two (2) or more properties. A "sight obscuring
fence" is a fence constructed of wood or masonry or similar solid material or a
chainlink fence with slats that is at least six feet (6') high and that
completely obscures the view from one side of the fence to the other.
   FLOODPLAIN: The floodplain of the Umatilla area is defined as those areas
that would be inundated by the maximum flood that occurs once every one hundred
(100) years as identified by the U.S. army corps of engineers or the federal
emergency management agency.
   FLOOR AREA: The area included in surrounding walls of a building or portion
thereof, or the area contained under a roof for structures without walls.
   FRONTAGE: The portion of a property which abuts a public street.
   FUNCTIONAL AREA OF INTERSECTION: The area beyond the physical intersection
of two (2) roadways that is necessary to safely traverse the intersection
considering the perception, decision making and maneuvering distance required,
plus any vehicle storage length needed. The functional area includes the length
of road upstream from an oncoming intersection needed by motorists to perceive
the intersection and begin maneuvers to negotiate it. The upstream area
consists of distance for travel during perception-reaction time, travel for
maneuvering and deceleration, and queue storage. The functional area also
includes the length of road downstream from the intersection needed to reduce
conflicts between through traffic and vehicles entering and exiting a property.
The functional areas of intersections vary depending on any number of factors
such as vehicle speed, number and types of travel lanes, traffic control
devices used, existing driveways, vision clearance, and other factors affecting
perception-reaction distance, maneuverability and queue storage required.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or portion of a main building used
for the parking or temporary storage of vehicles owned or used by occupants of
the main building. A carport is considered a garage.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building, other than a private garage, used for the care
and repair of motor vehicles or where such vehicles are parked or stored for
compensation, hire or sale.
   GRADE: A point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving,
or sidewalk within the area between a building and the property line, or, when
the property line is more than five feet (5') from the building, between the
building and a line five feet (5') from the building. For determining building
height, grade is measured at the lowest point of elevation. Also, the percent
of elevation change of a street.
   GRAZING: The use of land for pasturing domestic, herbivorous animals such as
horses, cattle, sheep and goats.
   HEAVY INDUSTRY: The manufacturing, processing, compounding, packaging or
assembling of products, the process of which requires or creates emissions or
discharges other than normal sanitary sewage wastes or the storage of materials
which require permits be issued by the Oregon state department of environmental
quality.
   HOME OCCUPATION: A lawful business activity commonly carried on within a
dwelling by members of the family occupying the dwelling. A home occupation is
an accessory use as defined herein and is subject to subsection
10-11-1A of this title.
   HORTICULTURE: A form of agriculture.
   HOSPITAL: An establishment that provides sleeping and eating facilities to
persons receiving medical, obstetrical or surgical care and nursing service on
a continuous basis.
   HOTEL: A building in which lodging is provided for guests for compensation
and in which no provision is made for cooking in the room.
   JUNKYARD: An area of more than two hundred (200) square feet not enclosed by
a building and used for the dismantling, storage or handling in any manner of
junked vehicles or other machinery or for the purpose of storage of dismantled
material, junk and scrap, if such activity is not incidental to the primary use
on the same lot.
   KENNEL: Any premises or building in which four (4) or more dogs or cats at
least four (4) months of age are kept for board, propagation or sale.
   LANDSCAPING: Plant materials, including trees, shrubs, and ground cover. A
landscaped area shall primarily be composed of plant materials, but may include
a pedestrian walkway or patio or similar space if designed as an integral part
of the landscaped area.
   LIGHT INDUSTRY: The manufacturing, processing, compounding, packaging or
assembling of products, the process of which does not require or create
emissions or discharges other than normal sanitary sewage wastes or the storage
of materials which require permits be issued by the Oregon state department of
environmental quality.
   LIVESTOCK: Domestic animals of types customarily raised or kept on farms for
profit or other purposes.
   LOCAL UTILITY DISTRIBUTION FACILITY: Distribution lines and facilities for
water, sewer, power, telephone, cable television or internet that are located
entirely within existing rights of way and/or utility easements, either
underground or using existing poles, towers or other existing structures, and
are primarily intended to serve local residences or businesses within the
city's urban growth boundary.
   LOT: A unit of land that is created by a subdivision or partition of land,
which meets the minimum lot requirements as established by this title.
   LOT AREA: The total horizontal area within lot lines of a lot.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting streets other than an
alley; provided, that the streets do not intersect at an angle greater than one
hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
   LOT DEPTH: The horizontal distance from the midpoint of the front lot line
to the midpoint of the rear lot line.
   LOT, INTERIOR: A lot with frontage on only one street.
   LOT LINE: The property line bounding a lot.
   LOT LINE, FRONT: The lot line separating a lot from a street other than an
alley. In the case of a corner lot, the shortest lot line along a street other
than an alley.
   LOT LINE, REAR: A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front
lot line; in the case of an irregular, triangular, or nonrectangular lot, a
line ten feet (10') in length within the lot parallel to and at a maximum
distance from the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line, including
a side abutting a street.
   LOT OF RECORD: A legally created lot or parcel of land at the time of
adoption of this title.
   LOT WIDTH: The distance between the midpoints of the two (2) principal
opposite side lot lines, measured at approximately a right angle to the lot
depth and parallel to the front lot line.
   MAJOR UTILITY FACILITY: Any utility facility or structure, as distinguished
from local distribution utility facilities, owned or operated by a public,
semipublic, private or cooperative electric, fuel, communication, sewage or
water company for the generation, transmission, distribution, or processing of
its products or for the disposal of cooling water, waste or byproducts and
including power transmission lines, major trunk pipelines, power substations,
dams, water towers, railroad tracks, sewage lagoons, sanitary landfills, and
similar facilities.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure constructed for movement on the public
highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, is intended for
human occupancy, is being used for residential purposes and was constructed in
accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards
regulations in effect at the time of construction.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Any place where manufactured homes are located on
the same lot, tract, or parcel of land under the same ownership, the primary
purpose of which is to rent space or keep space for rent to any person for a
charge or fee paid for the rental or use of facilities. "Manufactured dwelling
park" does not include a lot or lots located within a subdivision being rented
or leased for occupancy by no more than one manufactured dwelling per lot.
   MARIJUANA PROCESSOR: A "person" who "processes" marijuana items in this
state, as those terms are defined under ballot measure 91, sections 5(24) and
(26)(a) and (b).
   MARIJUANA RETAILER: A "person", as that term is defined under ballot measure
91, who sells marijuana items to a consumer in this state.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY: A facility registered by the Oregon health
authority under Oregon Revised Statutes 475.300 to 475.346 that dispenses
marijuana pursuant to Oregon Revised Statutes 475.314.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR: The vending of food and/or beverages from a vehicle that
is equipped to both cook and sell food, and that is capable of being moved from
place to place.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR POD: A location where more than one (1) Mobile Food
Vendor is located on the same lot, tract, or parcel of land under the same
ownership.
   MOBILE HOME: A structure constructed for movement on the public highways
that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities and is intended for human
occupancy, is being used for residential purposes and was constructed between
January 1, 1962, and June 15, 1976, and met the construction requirements of
the Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction.
   MODULAR HOME: A sectional or factory built house built to meet the housing
standards as set by the state of Oregon, designed to be affixed to real
property on a permanent foundation.
   MOTEL: An individual building or group of buildings attached or detached
containing guestrooms together with conveniently located parking space on the
same lot which is designed, used, or intended to be primarily used, for
transient accommodations. The term includes auto courts, motor lodges, tourist
courts and efficiency units.
   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: A residential structure containing three (3) or more
dwelling units.
   MULTI-TENANT COMMERCIAL/OFFICE BUILDING: A building designed and intended to
accommodate two (2) or more commercial retail or service uses or professional
offices permitted in the zone, or any combination thereof, through leasing of
floor space.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR USE: A lawful existing structure or use at the
time this title, or any amendment thereto, becomes effective which does not
conform to the requirements of the district in which it is located.
   NURSING HOME: A facility other than a residential dwelling unit which
provides care and nurturing for the elderly.
   OWNER: An owner of record of real property or the authorized registered
agent of an owner, as shown in the records of the county assessor.
   PARKING LOT: Four (4) or more parking spaces designed to serve a single
building or use, or four (4) or more parking spaces required under chapter 9 of
this title, together with associated maneuvering and access space.
   PARKING SPACE: A rectangular space designed with sufficient area for the
parking of a standard American automobile.
   PARKING SPACES FOR HANDICAPPED: A rectangular space designed to comply with
specifications of the Americans with disabilities act (ADA).
   PEDESTRIAN: A person who is traveling without the use of a vehicle; i.e.,
walking or using a wheelchair.
   PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES: Improvements which provide for pedestrian traffic
including sidewalks, walkways, crosswalks and other improvements, such as
lighting and benches which make it safe or convenient to walk.
   PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, association or social or fraternal
organization, corporation, trust, estate, receiver, syndicate, branch of
government or any group or combination acting as a unit.
   PLANNING COMMISSION: The city of Umatilla planning commission.
   PRIMARY USE: The primary use to which a premises is devoted and the primary
purpose for which the premises exists.
   RECREATION VEHICLE: A vacation trailer, travel trailer, or other vehicular
or portable unit which is either self- propelled or towed or carried by a motor
vehicle; which is intended for human occupancy; and is designed primarily for
vacation or recreation purposes, or temporary residential use. A recreation
vehicle is further defined as a mobile unit of forty five feet (45') in length
or less and eight feet (8') in width when equipped for travel purposes.
   RECREATION VEHICLE PARK: A lot that is operated on a fee or other basis as a
place for the parking of occupied recreation vehicles. A recreation vehicle
park may include a residential structure for a resident manager and/or
caretaker.
   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY:
   A.   Child Caring Facility: A facility that provides for six (6) or more
children (unmarried persons under 18 years of age), for day treatment for
disturbed children; adoption placement services; residential care, including,
but not limited to, foster care of residential treatment for children; or other
similar services for children.
   B.   Residential Care Facility: A facility that provides for six (6) or more
physically disabled or socially dependent individuals, residential care in one
or more buildings on contiguous properties as provided by Oregon Revised
Statutes 443.400(5).
   C.   Residential Training Facility: A facility that provides for six (6) or
more mentally retarded or other developmentally disabled individuals,
residential care and training in one or more buildings on contiguous properties
as provided by Oregon Revised Statutes 443.400(7).
   D.   Residential Treatment Facility: A facility that provides for six (6) or
more mentally, emotionally, or behaviorally disturbed individuals or alcohol or
drug dependent persons, residential care and treatment in one or more buildings
on contiguous properties as provided by Oregon Revised Statutes 443.400(9).
   RESIDENTIAL HOME:
   A.   Adult Foster Home: A family home or facility in which residential care
is provided for five (5) or fewer adults who are not related to the provider by
blood or marriage as provided by Oregon Revised Statutes 443.705(1).
   B.   Registered Residential Facility: A facility that provides residential
care for five (5) or fewer disabled (physical or mental impairment which for
the individual constitutes or results in functional limitation to 1 or more
life activities) or elderly (62 years of age or older) individuals as provided
by Oregon Revised Statutes 443.480 to 443.500.
   C.   Residential Training Home: A facility that provides, for five (5) or
fewer mentally retarded or other developmentally disabled individuals,
residential care and training in one or more buildings on contiguous
properties, when so certified and funded by the mental health and development
disability services division as provided by Oregon Revised Statutes 443.400(8).
   D.   Residential Treatment Home: A facility that provides, for five (5) or
fewer mentally, emotionally or behaviorally disturbed individuals or alcohol or
drug dependent persons, residential care and treatment in one or more buildings
on contiguous properties as provided by Oregon Revised Statutes 443.400(10).
   RESIDENTIAL TRAILER: A structure constructed for movement on the public
highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, is intended for
human occupancy, is being used for residential purposes and was constructed
before January 1, 1962.
   SCREENING: A sight obscuring fence or landscaping that consists of dense
perennial evergreen planting with sufficient foliage to obscure vision and
which will reach an average height of at least six feet (6') within thirty (30)
months after planting.
   SETBACK: The distance between the closest part of a structure or use and a
property line.
   SETBACKS FOR CORNER LOTS: For determining required yard setback purposes
only, the narrowest street frontage will be considered to be the front. The lot
line most nearly parallel to the front lot line will be considered the rear;
the remaining lot lines will be considered side lot lines.
   SIDEWALK: A pedestrian walkway, with or without a curb, constructed of a
durable, hard surface, usually concrete.
   SIGN: A presentation or representation, other than a house number, which by
words, letters, figures, designs, pictures or colors publicly displayed gives
notice relative to a person, a business, an article or merchandise, a service,
an assemblage, a solicitation or a request for aid or other type of
advertising. The term includes the surface upon which the presentation or
representation is displayed. Each display surface of a sign shall be considered
to be a sign.
   SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING: A detached dwelling unit occupied by one family and
located on its own lot.
   SITE: An area of real property in common ownership, notwithstanding that a
particular development permit application may be for development of a portion
of the site only. Conveyance of less than fee title to different persons, such
as by ground lease, shall not operate to prevent the requirement of site review
for the entire site.
   SITE REVIEW: The process of reviewing all community service developments,
manufactured dwelling parks, attached dwelling structures (single-family and
multi-family), commercial developments, and industrial developments for
compliance with the standards and criteria of this code.
   STREET: A public or private way that is created to provide access to one or
more lots, parcels, areas or tracts of land, excluding a private way that is
created to provide ingress or egress to such land in conjunction with the use
of such land for forestry, mining or agricultural purposes.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: A change to the supporting members of a structure
including the supporting parts of foundations, bearing walls or partitions,
columns, beams, girders or the roof.
   STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed. An edifice or building of any
kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner and which requires location on the ground or
which is attached to something having a location on the ground.
   TOWNHOUSE: A dwelling unit constructed in a row of two (2) or more attached
units, where each dwelling unit is located on an individual lot or parcel and
shares at least one common wall or architectural feature with an adjacent unit;
also called attached single-family dwelling or townhome.
   TRUCK STOP: Any business whose primary use is the servicing of trucks over
one and one-half (11/2) ton capacity with petroleum products, repair and
related services, including motel units, restaurant service, trucker
accessories, batteries and tires.
   UNIFORM BUILDING CODE (UBC): The current version of the state of Oregon
specialty codes as adopted by the city of Umatilla.
   USE: An activity or purpose for which land or a structure is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   VEHICLE REPAIR: The general repair, alteration, rebuilding, maintenance, or
reconditioning of vehicles, including motor, body, frame, upholstery, interior
and/or paint work.
   VISION CLEARANCE AREA: A triangular area on a lot at the intersection of two
(2) streets or a street and railroad, two (2) sides of which are lot lines
measured from the corner intersection of the lot lines to a distance specified
in these regulations. The third side of the triangle is a line across the
corner of the lot joining the ends of the other two (2) sides. Where the lot
lines at intersections have rounded corners, the lot lines will be extended in
a straight line to a point of intersection. Plantings, walls, structures, or
temporary or permanent obstructions exceeding three feet (3') in height
measured from the grade of the street centerline are prohibited in this area.
   WALKWAY: A facility provided specifically for the benefit and use of
pedestrians.
   YARD: An open space on a lot that is unobstructed from the ground upward
except as otherwise provided in this title.
   YARD, FRONT: A yard between side lot lines, measured horizontally at right
angles to the front lot line, from the front lot line to the nearest point of
the building.
   YARD, REAR: A yard extending between side lot lines and measured
horizontally and at right angles to the rear lot line from the rear lot line to
the nearest point of the main building.
   YARD, SIDE: A yard between the front and rear yards measured horizontally
and at right angles to the side lot line from the side lot line to the nearest
point of the building.
   YARD, STREET SIDE: A yard adjacent to a street between the front yard and
rear lot line measured horizontally and at right angles from the side lot line
to the nearest point of a building or other structure. (Ord. 723, 6-17-2003;
amd. Ord. 799, 11-3-2015; Ord. 830, 8-7-2018; Ord. 836, 6-4-2019; Ord. 840, 9-
3-2019)
CHAPTER 2
PLAN DESIGNATIONS AND MAP
SECTION:
10-2-1: Compliance Required
10-2-2: Land Use Classifications
10-2-3: Official Plan Map
10-2-4: Boundaries Of Districts
10-2-5: Designation Of Annexed Areas
10-2-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A lot may be used and a structure or part of a structure constructed,
reconstructed, altered, occupied or used only as permitted by this title. (Ord.
688, 6-15-1999)
10-2-2: LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the following districts are hereby established
in the city. The terms "zone" and "zoning map" and "district" or "plan map
designation" or "plan map" are used interchangeably. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
      PLAN DISTRICT DESIGNATIONS
      (Within The City Limits)
 
Plan Designation Abbreviation
Single-family residential     R-1
Medium density residential    R-2
Multi-family residential      R-3
Downtown residential          DR
Downtown commercial           DC
Downtown transitional         DT
Neighborhood commercial       NC
General commercial            GC
Highway commercial            HC
Light industrial              M-1
Heavy industrial              M-2
Community services            CS
Floodplain                    FP
 
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999; amd. Ord. 710, 5-7-2002; Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-2-3: OFFICIAL PLAN MAP:
   A.   Location Of Districts: The boundaries for the districts listed in this
title are indicated on a map entitled "city of Umatilla plan map". The
boundaries may be modified in accordance with the zoning map amendments that
shall be adopted by reference.
   B.   Plan Map: The map or map amendment shall be dated with the effective
date of the ordinance that adopts the map or map amendment. A certified print
of the adopted map or map amendment shall be maintained without change in the
office of the city recorder as long as this title remains in effect. (Ord. 688,
6-15-1999)
10-2-4: BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS:
If a district boundary as shown on the map divides a lot between two (2)
districts, the entire lot shall be deemed to be in the district in which the
greater area of the lot lies; provided, that this adjustment involves a
distance not to exceed twenty feet (20') from the mapped district boundary.
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-2-5: DESIGNATION OF ANNEXED AREAS:
An area annexed to the city shall be assigned a plan designation that most
closely corresponds with its comprehensive plan designation unless an amendment
is undertaken under the requirements of this title. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
   TABLE 10-2-1
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MAP AND CORRESPONDING
   LAND USE DISTRICT DESIGNATION
 
Comprehensive Plan Map Designation Plan Map Designation
                                   Single-family residential (R-1), medium
   Residential                  density residential (R-2), multi-family
                                   residential (R-3), downtown residential (DR)
                                   Downtown commercial (DC), downtown
   Commercial                   transitional (DT), neighborhood commercial
                                   (NC), general commercial (GC), highway
                                   commercial (HC)
   Industrial                   Light industrial (M-1), heavy industrial (M-
                                   2)
 
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999; amd. Ord. 710, 5-7-2002; Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
CHAPTER 3
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A.  SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1)
SECTION:
10-3A-1: Purpose
10-3A-2: Uses Permitted
10-3A-3: Conditional Uses Permitted
10-3A-4: Development Standards
10-3A-1: PURPOSE:
The R-1 District is intended for low density, urban single- family residential
uses. The R-1 District corresponds to the R-1 designation of the Comprehensive
Plan. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999; amd. Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
10-3A-2: USES PERMITTED:
The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in the R-1 District:
A.   Single-family dwelling subject to the provision of section
10-11-9  of this title;
B.   One manufactured home on an individual lot subject to the provisions of
section
10-11-8  of this title;
C.   Residential home;
D.   Family day care provider;
E.   Home occupation subject to the provision of section
10-11-1  of this title; and
F.   Accessory uses, including an accessory dwelling subject to the provisions
of section
10-11-11  of this title. (Ord. 830, 8-7-2018; amd. Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
10-3A-3: CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
The following primary uses and their accessory uses may be permitted when
authorized in accordance with the requirements of chapter 12 of this title:
Community services uses as provided by chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 688, 6-
15-1999; amd. Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
10-3A-4: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
 
Minimum lot area        7,000 square feet
Minimum lot width       50 feet
Minimum lot depth       90 feet
Minimum yard setbacks:
   Front and rear yar10 feet
   Side yard         5 feet
   Side street yard  10 feet
   Garage            18 feet from any street except an alley
Maximum building height 40 feet
 
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999; amd. Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
ARTICLE B.  MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-2)
SECTION:
10-3B-1: Purpose
10-3B-2: Uses Permitted
10-3B-3: Conditional Uses Permitted
10-3B-4: Development Standards
10-3B-5: Limitations On Use
10-3B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-2 District is to allow single-family dwellings on smaller
lots, duplexes, townhouses and multi-family dwellings at moderate density. Site
review is required for most uses. The R-2 District corresponds to the R-
2 designation of the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999; amd. Ord. 840,
9-3-2019)
10-3B-2: USES PERMITTED:
The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in the R-2 District:
A.   Single-family dwelling subject to the provision of section
10-11-9  of this title;
B.   Townhouse subject to the provision of section
10-11-12  of this title;
C.   Duplex;
D.   Multi-family dwellings;
E.   One manufactured home on an individual lot subject to the provisions of
section
10-11-8  of this title;
F.   Residential home;
G.   Residential facilities;
H.   Family day care provider;
I.   Home occupations subject to the provision of section
10-11-1 ; and
J.   Accessory uses, including an accessory dwelling subject to the provisions
of section
10-11-11  of this title. (Ord. 830, 8-7-2018; amd. Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
10-3B-3: CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted subject to the
provisions of chapter 12 of this title:
A.   Boarding house.
B.   Community services uses as provided by chapter 6 of this title.
C.   Manufactured home parks.
D.   Office or clinic for a doctor, dentist or other practitioner of the
healing arts, attorney, architect, engineer, surveyor or accountant. (Ord. 688,
6-15-1999; amd. Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
10-3B-4: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A.   Density: One dwelling unit per three thousand (3,000) square feet.
B.   Landscaping: Except for lots intended for single-family dwellings, a
minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of lot area shall be devoted to landscaping,
exclusive of landscaping required for parking areas. The minimum dimension of
any landscaped area shall be five feet (5').
C.   Open Space: At least two hundred (200) square feet of outdoor open area
easily accessible from the interior of the dwelling shall be provided for each
ground floor dwelling unit. Part of the required area may include a private
screened patio.
   DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
 
                  Single-family dwelling: 5,000 square feet
Minimum lot area  Townhouse: 3,000 square feet
                  Duplex: 6,000 square feet
                  Multi-Family: 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit
Minimum lot width 45 feet and 25 feet for townhouse lots
 
Minimum yard setbacks:   
   Front and rear yar10 feet
   Side yard         5 feet or 0 feet for townhouse lots where abutting a
                        common wall
   Side street yard  10 feet
   Garage            18 feet from any street except an alley
Maximum building height 40 feet
 
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999; amd. Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
10-3B-5: LIMITATIONS ON USE:
Uses other than single-family dwellings, accessory uses to single-family
dwellings, duplexes and home occupations are subject to site plan review. (Ord.
688, 6-15-1999; amd. Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
ARTICLE C.  MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-3)
SECTION:
10-3C-1: Purpose
10-3C-2: Uses Permitted
10-3C-3: Conditional Uses Permitted
10-3C-4: Development Standards
10-3C-5: Limitations On Use
10-3C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-3 District is to provide for multi-family dwellings.
Typical housing types include apartments, townhouses, condominiums, and cluster
developments. Site review is required for most uses. The R-3 District
corresponds to the R-3 designation of the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 688, 6-15-
1999; amd. Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
10-3C-2: USES PERMITTED:
The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in the R-3 District:
A.   Townhouse subject to the provision of section
10-11-12  of this title;
B.   Duplex;
C.   Multi-family dwellings;
D.   Residential home;
E.   Residential facilities;
F.   Family day care provider. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999; amd. Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
10-3C-3: CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted subject to the
provisions of Chapter 12 of this Title:
A.   Boarding house.
B.   Community Services uses as provided by Chapter 6 of this Title.
C.   Office or clinic for a doctor, dentist or other practitioner of the
healing arts, attorney, architect, engineer, surveyor or accountant. (Ord. 688,
6-15-1999; amd. Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
10-3C-4: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A.   Density: One dwelling unit per two thousand (2,000) square feet for the
first three (3) dwelling units, plus one thousand five hundred (1,500) square
feet for each additinal dwelling unit.
B.   Landscaping: Except for lots intended for single-family dwellings, a
minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of lot area shall be devoted to landscaping,
exclusive of landscaping required for parking areas. The minimum dimension of
any landscaped area shall be five feet (5').
C.   Open Space: At least two hundred (200) square feet of outdoor open area
easily accessible from the interior of the dwelling shall be provided for each
ground floor dwelling unit. Part of the required area may include a private
screened patio.
 
                         Townhouse: 2,000 square feet
Minimum lot area         Duplex: 4,000 square feet
                         Multi-Family: 6,000 square feet, plus 1,500 square
                         feet for each additional dwelling unit
Minimum lot width        50 feet and 20 feet for townhouse lots
Minimum lot depth        90 feet
Minimum yard setbacks:
     Front and rear y12 feet
     Side yard       5 feet or 0 feet for townhouse lots where abutting a
                         common wall
 
   Side street yard  12 feet
     Garage         18 feet from any street except an alley
Maximum building height 45 feet
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999; amd. Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
10-3C-5: LIMITATIONS ON USE:
Uses other than duplexes are subject to site review. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999; amd.
Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
ARTICLE D.  DOWNTOWN RESIDENTIAL (DR)
SECTION:
10-3D-1: Purpose
10-3D-2: Uses Permitted
10-3D-3: Conditional Uses Permitted
10-3D-4: Development Standards
10-3D-5: Limitations On Use
10-3D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the downtown residential district is to accommodate higher
density residential developments and office uses in the downtown area. Typical
housing types include attached housing, apartments, townhouses, and
condominiums. (Ord. 710, 5-7-2002; amd. Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
10-3D-2: USES PERMITTED:
The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in the DR district:
A.   Townhouse subject to the provision of section
10-11-12  of this title;
B.   Multi-family dwellings;
C.   Residential home;
D.   Residential facilities;
E.   Family day care provider;
F.   Expansion of existing commercial businesses with frontage along 6th Street
shall be permitted within the DR district provided that the entire expansion
site is located within a distance of two hundred feet (200') of the 6th Street
curb. Such expansion includes parking and service areas that directly support
such businesses.
G.   Professional, financial, business, medical, dental and professional
service offices are permitted only if the entire site is located within a
distance of three hundred fifty feet (350') of the 6th Street curb.
H.   Single-family dwellings existing at the time of the adoption of this
article. The owner of an occupied single-family dwelling may upgrade that
dwelling provided said dwelling is used for the same purpose. (Ord. 722, 6-3-
2003; amd. Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
10-3D-3: CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
Community service uses as provided by Chapter 6 of this Title. (Ord. 710, 5-7-
2002; amd. Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
10-3D-4: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A.   Density: For residential uses, the maximum allowable density shall be one
dwelling unit per two thousand (2,000) square feet for the first three (3)
dwelling units, plus one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for each
additional dwelling unit.
B.   Landscaping: A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of lot area shall be
devoted to landscaping, exclusive of landscaping required for parking areas.
The minimum dimension of any landscaped area shall be five feet (5').
Landscaping shall be located between a structure and the fronting street, or as
best provides a pleasant environment for pedestrians. Landscaping may include
street furniture and pedestrian amenities, including public plazas and similar
features.
C.   Open Space: At least two hundred (200) square feet of outdoor open area
easily assessable from the interior of the dwelling shall be provided for each
ground floor dwelling unit. Part of the required area may include a private
screened patio.
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
 
                  Townhouse: 2,000 square feet
Minimum lot area  Duplex: 4,000 square feet
                  Multi-family: 6,000 square feet, plus 1,500 square feet for
                  each additional dwelling unit
Minimum lot width 50 feet and 20 feet for townhouse lots
Minimum lot depth 80 feet
 
Minimum yard setbacks:
     Front and rear ya12 feet
     Side yard        5 feet or 0 feet for townhouse lots where abutting a
                          common wall
     Side street yard 12 feet
     Garage           18 feet from any street except an alley
Maximum building height   45 feet
 
D.   Building Orientation: Buildings shall have their primary entrances
oriented toward the street. On corner lots, building entrances shall face the
primary street or may face the corner.
E.   Building Materials: No special standards for building materials apply.
F.   Parking: Parking lots are not allowed in the front yard setback or in a
side yard setback closer to the street than the adjacent building facade.
Parking lots shall not be located between the building and the public street.
G.   Garages And Carports: Garages and carports shall be located so that the
garage door or carport opening is set back further from a street than the
facade of the building. Garage doors shall be recessed a minimum of two feet
(2') from the building facade for any garage that fronts on a public street
other than an alley.
H.   Pedestrian Walkways: All multi-family dwellings and townhouses shall
provide pedestrian walkways between buildings and the public right of way. When
not connected to a public sidewalk, walkways between adjacent buildings shall
be provided. All pedestrian walkways shall not be less than five feet (5') in
width and constructed of concrete or other material easily distinguishable from
vehicular pavements. (Ord. 710, 5-7-2002; amd. Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
10-3D-5: LIMITATIONS ON USE:
A.   All uses, including expansion or change of any existing use or structure
except for modification of a single-family dwelling, are subject to site
review.
B.   If office and residential uses occupy a single structure or parcel of
land, the total minimum number of required off street parking spaces shall be
either the required number of spaces for the office use or the required number
of spaces for the residential use, whichever is greater. (Ord. 710, 5-7-2002;
amd. Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
CHAPTER 4
COMMERCIAL ZONES
ARTICLE A.  DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL (DC)
SECTION:
10-4A-1: Purpose And Intent
10-4A-2: Interpretation Of Uses
10-4A-3: Uses Permitted Outright
10-4A-4: Uses Permitted Subject To Standards
10-4A-5: Conditional Uses Permitted
10-4A-6: Temporary Uses Permitted
10-4A-7: Property Development Standards
10-4A-8: Site Plan Design Review Requirements And Procedures
10-4A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the downtown commercial (DC) zone is to provide a concentrated
central business district centered on 6th Street (State Highway 730) to
encourage development of a pedestrian oriented town center that combines both
commercial and public activities and is intended to become a community
gathering place. Uses include a mix of civic, retail, service, office and
residential uses intended and designed to be pedestrian friendly with buildings
close to and oriented toward fronting streets and sidewalks to promote a
pleasant window shopping experience. Parking may be provided on a districtwide
basis and may include public street parking, rather than having each individual
building or use provide parking. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4A-2: INTERPRETATION OF USES:
   A.   Types Of Uses: Within the DC zone, uses are classified as "permitted",
"permitted with standards", and "conditional". Further, uses are functionally
classified by the description of the particular activity (such as "single-
family residence") or by the general category with reference to the "North
American industry classification system" (NAICS). Permitted and conditional
uses shall be of a size and scale to meet the purpose and intent of the DC
zone.
   B.   North American Industry Classification System (NAICS): Uses
functionally classified with reference to the NAICS are described with the
NAICS index number. Some activities, otherwise included under the NAICS
category, may be specifically excluded by this article. The excluded activity
will be placed in the general NAICS category, but identified by the preceding
words - "but (or and) excluding". For example, "food store (54), but excluding
freezer and locker meat provisioners".
   C.   Interpretation Of Uses: Where a use is not described with reference to
the NAICS or otherwise defined in section 10-1-6 of this title, the words of
this zoning ordinance describing such use are to be given their ordinarily
accepted meaning, except where the context in which they are used otherwise
clearly requires.
   D.   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specifically identified as permitted,
permitted with standards, temporary, or conditionally permitted within the
zone, or otherwise allowed through interpretation, shall be considered
prohibited uses. A use specifically permitted in one zone, but not another,
shall not be interpreted as being permitted in another zone under a different
classification. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4A-3: USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT:
The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in the DC zone
subject to the property development standards of the DC zone, and the site plan
design review requirements and procedures under sections
10-4A-7 and
10-4A-8 of this article:
   A.   Automotive parts and accessories stores (44131).
   B.   Electronic and appliance stores (443).
   C.   Specialty food stores (4452).
   D.   Pharmacies and drugstores (44611).
   E.   Cosmetics, beauty supplies, and perfume stores (44612).
   F.   Optical goods (44613).
   G.   Food (health) supplement and other health and personal care stores
(44619).
   H.   Clothing stores (4481).
   I.   Shoe stores (4482).
   J.   Jewelry, luggage, and leather goods stores (4483).
   K.   Sporting goods, hobby, and musical instruments stores (4511).
   L.   Bookstores and news dealers (4512).
   M.   Miscellaneous store retailers (453) limited to the following:
      1.   Florists (4531).
      2.   Office supplies, stationery, and gift stores (4532).
      3.   Pet and pet supplies stores (45391).
      4.   Art dealers (45392).
      5.   Tobacco stores (453991).
   N.   Information industries - except internet (51).
   O.   Finance and insurance (52).
   P.   Offices of real estate agents and brokers (5312) and activities related
to real estate (5313).
   Q.   Consumer goods rental (5322).
   R.   Professional, scientific, and technical services (541) limited to the
following:
      1.   Legal services (5411).
      2.   Accounting, tax preparation, bookkeeping and payroll services
(5412).
      3.   Architecture, engineering, and related services (5413) not including
testing lab (54138).
      4.   Specialized design services (5414).
      5.   Computer systems design and related services (5415).
      6.   Management, scientific, and technical consulting services (5416).
      7.   Advertising, public relations, and related services (5418).
      8.   Marketing research and public opinion polling (54191).
      9.   Photographic services (54192).
      10.   Translation and interpretation services (54193).
      11.   Management of companies and enterprises (551).
   S.   Administrative and support services (561) limited to the following:
      1.   Office administrative services (5611).
      2.   Employment services (5613).
      3.   Business support services (5614).
      4.   Travel arrangement and reservation services (5615).
      5.   Investigation and security services (5616).
   T.   Educational services (611) limited to the following:
      1.   Business schools and computer and management training (6114).
      2.   Fine arts schools (61161).
      3.   Sports and recreation instruction (61162).
      4.   Language schools (61163).
      5.   Educational support services (6117).
   U.   Offices of physicians, dentists and other health practitioners (6211,
6212 and 6213).
   V.   Social assistance services (624) limited to the following:
      1.   Individual and family services (6241).
      2.   Vocational rehabilitation services (6243).
   W.   Performing arts companies (7111).
   X.   Public recreational park, facility or trail, provided:
      1.   The site is inventoried in the comprehensive plan for park, trail or
other recreational purposes.
      2.   Development of the park, facility or trail will be in accordance
with an adopted master development plan for the park, facility or trail.
   Y.   Restaurants and other eating places 1  (7225).
   Z.   Electronic and precision equipment repair and maintenance (8112).
   AA.   Personal care services (8121 - examples include barbershops and beauty
salons).
   BB.   Dry cleaning and laundry services (8123) except industrial launderers
(812332).
   CC.   Other personal services (8129) limited to the following:
      1.   Pet care (except veterinary) services (81291).
      2.   Photofinishing (81292).
   DD.   Grant making, civic, professional, and similar organizations (813) but
excluding religious organizations (8131). (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
 
Notes
  1. Includes food services where meals are the primary service or attraction
  provided and which may include beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages that
1 are incidental to meals. May include a portion of the premises that is age
  restricted due to serving alcoholic beverages that is not separated from view
  of the remainder of the premises.
10-4A-4: USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO STANDARDS:
The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in the DC zone
subject to the standards listed thereunder, the property development standards
of the DC zone, and the site plan design review requirements and procedures
under sections
10-4A-7 and
10-4A-8 of this article, unless otherwise specified for the use.
   A.   Residential use, subject to the following:
      1.   The use will be situated on the second story or above within a
building in which the ground floor is occupied by or readily available solely
for commercial use.
      2.   Off street parking requirements meeting city standards are provided
for the use separate from those required for ground floor commercial uses.
      3.   The residential use will comply with applicable building, fire and
other safety codes as mandated by local, state or federal laws.
   B.   Drive-through for any use, subject to the following:
      1.   A drive-through window or use shall be oriented to the side or rear
of a building and shall be designed to minimize conflicts with pedestrians and
vehicles.
      2.   A drive-through window that uses access from Sixth Street (Highway
730) is allowed only if use of the access for the drive- through window is
limited to either ingress or egress.
   C.   Creation of a new city, county or state road, or realignment of an
existing city, county or state road or any portion thereof and which does not
involve a land partition, subject to the following:
      1.   The road or realignment complies with applicable street standards,
as specified in the comprehensive plan or other implementing ordinances and the
city's public works standards, for the existing or intended street
classification.
      2.   Review for compliance with the requirements under subsection C1 of
this section, shall be subject to the procedures and requirements for a type
III decision.
      3.   The use is subject to inspections, as determined by the city public
works director, to certify that all improvements have been constructed to city
standards.
   D.   Specialty trade contractors (238), subject to the following standards:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square
feet.
      2.   At least twenty percent (20%) of the building area will be used for
office use and product display.
      3.   There will be no outside storage of materials.
   E.   Furniture and home furnishings (442), subject to the following
standards:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of seven thousand five hundred
(7,500) square feet.
      2.   Loading and unloading of furniture and home furnishings must occur
on site, or along a local side street or within an alley.
   F.   Building material and supplies dealers (4441) but excluding 44411 -
home centers, subject to the following standards:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of seven thousand five hundred
(7,500) square feet.
      2.   There will be no outside storage or display of goods or materials.
   G.   Beer, wine and liquor stores (4453), subject to the following:
      1.   The use will not be located within five hundred feet (500') of a
school or two hundred feet (200') of a designated city park.
   H.   General rental centers (5323), subject to the following standards:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square
feet.
      2.   There is no outside storage or display of goods or materials.
   I.   Veterinary services (54194), subject to the following standards:
      1.   The use is limited to small animals on premises.
      2.   There shall be no outside boarding of animals.
   J.   Alcoholic beverage drinking places 1  (7224 - examples include pub,
tavern, sports bar and nightclub), subject to the following:
      1.   The use will not be located within five hundred feet (500') of a
school, public library or designated city park.
   K.   Personal and household goods repair and maintenance (8114), subject to
the following standards:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square
feet.
      2.   At least ten percent (10%) of the building area is used for office
use and customer service.
      3.   There is no outside storage of materials.
   L.   Local utility distribution facilities (see section
10-1-6, "Definitions", of this title), subject to the following:
      1.   A permit for the proposed distribution line or facility has been
obtained from the public works director in accordance with the requirements of
title 7 of this code, prior to construction. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
 
Notes
  1. Includes any use where the serving of alcoholic beverages is the primary
1 service or attraction and access to all or any portion of the premises is age
  restricted by law due to serving alcoholic beverages. The use may include the
  serving of meals incidentally to the primary use.
10-4A-5: CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
The following conditional uses may be permitted in the DC zone subject to the
property development standards of the DC zone, the decision criteria and any
additional applicable standards in chapter 12 of this title specific to the
use, and the site plan design review requirements and procedures under sections
10-4A-7 and
10-4A-8 of this article.
The applicant bears the burden of proof for demonstrating, based on factual
information and arguments, how the proposed use complies with all standards and
decision criteria upon which the planning commission must base its decision.
   A.   Convenience stores (44512).
   B.   General merchandise stores (45299).
   C.   Taxi and limousine service (4853).
   D.   Postal service (4911).
   E.   Couriers and express delivery services (4921).
   F.   Local messengers and local delivery (4922).
   G.   Architectural, engineering and related services (5413) including
testing lab (54138).
   H.   Scientific research and development services (5417).
   I.   Services to buildings and dwellings (5617).
   J.   Technical and trade schools (6115).
   K.   Ambulatory healthcare services (621) limited to the following:
      1.   Outpatient care centers (6214).
      2.   Medical and diagnostic laboratories (6215).
      3.   Home healthcare services (6216).
      4.   Ambulance services (62191).
      5.   Other ambulatory healthcare services (62199).
   L.   Community food, housing, emergency and other relief services (6242).
   M.   Child daycare services (6244).
   N.   Museums, historical sites, and similar institutions (7121).
   O.   Arcades (7131).
   P.   Other amusement and recreation industries (7139) but excluding 71391,
71393; permitted examples include fitness and recreation sports centers and
bowling centers.
   Q.   Public recreational park, facility or trail not identified in the
comprehensive plan.
   R.   Traveler accommodations (72111) but excluding motels (72111) and RV
parks and recreational camps (7212).
   S.   Parking lots and garages (81293).
   T.   Other personal services (81299).
   U.   Religious organizations (8131).
   V.   Public administration and government facilities and support services
(92).
   W.   Multi-tenant commercial/office building (see section
10-1-6, "Definitions", of this title).
   X.   Major utility facilities (see section
10-1-6, "Definitions", of this title). (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
   Y.   Mobile food vendor pods (722330). (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015; amd. Ord. 836,
6-4-2019)
10-4A-6: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Reserved. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4A-7: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards apply to all new developments in
the DC zone and are intended to provide a consistent development pattern that
ensures a safe, orderly, efficient, economically viable and aesthetically
pleasing environment throughout each zone district.
Existing developed properties are expected to meet these requirements to the
extent reasonably possible. Similar to findings that demonstrate how a
development proposal meets applicable standards, findings shall also justify
why a proposal is not able to meet applicable standards for existing developed
properties or structures. Cost may be considered, but shall not be the sole
determinant if the cost is reasonable within the overall scope of the
development proposal.
   A.   Basic Site Development Standards:
      1.   Minimum Lot Size And Lot Width; Building Setbacks; Maximum Building
Height And Site Coverage:
 
Minimum lot or parcel size:
 Commercial uses            None
 Residential uses           None; density shall comply with R-3 district
                            requirements
 Minimum lot width          None
                                    10 feet; the maximum front yard setback
                                    may be increased by 10 feet if the
Maximum front or street side yard   setback is occupied by an outdoor
setback                             feature relating to the business or
                                    public amenity such as seating or
                                    artwork
Minimum yard setbacks:
 Front and rear yards               0 feet or 10 feet if adjacent to a
                                    residential district
 Side yard                          0 feet or 10 feet if adjacent to a
                                    residential district
 Street side yard                   1 foot
Parking space                       10 feet wide; see chapter 9 of this
                                    title for parking standards
Maximum building height             35 feet
Maximum site coverage (building and 95 percent
impervious surface)
 
   B.   Site Development Impact Standards:
      1.   Traffic Impact Analysis: A traffic impact analysis meeting the
requirements under subsection 10-11-10C of this title shall be required to be
submitted to the city with a land use application, when the community
development director determines that the application involves one or more of
the following actions:
         a.   A change in zoning or plan amendment designation; or
         b.   The proposal is projected to cause one or more of the following
effects, which can be determined by field counts, site observation, traffic
impact analysis or study, field measurements, crash history, Institute Of
Transportation Engineers' "Trip Generation Manual"; and information and studies
provided by the local reviewing jurisdiction and/or ODOT:
            (1)   An increase in site traffic volume generation by two hundred
fifty (250) average daily trips (ADT) or more (or as required by the city
engineer). The latest edition of the "Trip Generation Manual", published by the
Institute Of Transportation Engineers (ITE) shall be used as standards by which
to gauge average daily vehicle trips; or
            (2)   An increase in use of adjacent streets by vehicles exceeding
the twenty thousand (20,000) pounds' gross vehicle weight by ten (10) vehicles
or more per day; or
            (3)   The location of the access driveway does not meet minimum
intersection sight distance requirements, or is located where vehicles entering
or leaving the property are restricted, or vehicles queue or hesitate, creating
a safety hazard; or
            (4)   The location of the access driveway does not meet the access
spacing standard of the roadway on which the driveway is located; or
            (5)   A change in internal traffic patterns that may cause safety
problems, such as backup onto the highway or traffic crashes in the approach
area.
      2.   Floodplain, Wetland And Riparian Areas: See chapter 7 of this title
and title 12 of this code.
The requirements under chapter 7 of this title and title 12 of this code are
triggered when development is proposed within a designated floodplain or
riparian area as identified by the official flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
prepared by the U.S. federal emergency management agency (FEMA); or when
property contains wetland areas as identified on the national wetlands
inventory (NWI) map prepared by the U.S. fish and wildlife service (USFWS).
      3.   Stormwater Surface Drainage:
         a.   Surface water runoff shall be handled on site through the use of
landscaped areas, grassy swales or similar natural features to the extent
reasonably feasible. Where surface water runoff cannot be entirely managed on
site, adequate provisions shall be made so that runoff will not adversely
affect the use of adjoining or downstream properties, unless a drainage
easement has been obtained.
         b.   Where it is anticipated by the city public works director that
the additional runoff resulting from a proposed development will overload an
existing drainage facility, the city shall withhold approval of the development
until provisions have been made for improvement of the potential condition or
until provisions have been made for storage of additional runoff caused by the
development in accordance with city standards.
         c.   In order to accommodate upstream drainage, culverts and other
drainage facilities shall be large enough to accommodate existing and potential
future runoff from the entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside
the development. Such facilities shall be subject to review and approval by the
city public works director.
      4.   Vehicle Access, Driveway And Circulation Standards:
         a.   New Vehicle Access Connections: New access connections shall not
be permitted within the functional area (see section 10-1-6, "Definitions", of
this title) of an intersection or interchange as defined by the connection
spacing standards of this title, the comprehensive plan and public works
standards, unless no other reasonable access to the property is available. See
also subsection 10-11-4C of this title regarding vision clearance areas.
         b.   Access Connections: Where no other alternative exists, the city
may allow construction of an access connection along the property line farthest
from the intersection. In such cases, directional connections (i.e., right in/
out, right in only, or right out only) may be required.
         c.   Cross Access Drives, Pedestrian Access: Adjacent commercial or
office properties such as shopping plazas and office parks that are major
traffic generators shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to
allow circulation between sites.
         d.   Separation Distance: The city may allow a reduction of the
required separation distance of access points where they prove impractical,
provided all of the following requirements are met:
            (1)   Joint access driveways and cross access easements are
provided.
            (2)   The site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation
system.
            (3)   The property owner enters into a written agreement with the
city, recorded with the deed, that preexisting connections on the site will be
closed and eliminated after construction of each side of a joint use driveway.
            (4)   The city may modify or waive the requirements of this
subsection where the characteristics or layout of abutting properties would
make a development of a unified or shared access and circulation system
impractical.
         e.   Phased Developments: Development sites under the same ownership
or consolidated for the purpose of development and comprising more than one
building site, shall be reviewed as a single property for the purpose of
complying with access standards. The number of access points permitted shall be
the minimum number necessary to provide reasonable access to the site, not the
minimum for that frontage.
         f.   Corner Lots: Corner lots shall be required to locate motor
vehicle accesses on the street with the lower functional classification when
feasible provided such access will not be located within the functional area of
the intersection. This requirement may be waived or modified when a commercial
use would be required to take access from a street in a residential
neighborhood.
         g.   Nonconforming Access Features: Legal access connections in place
when this title was adopted that do not conform with the standards herein are
considered nonconforming features and shall be brought into compliance with
applicable standards when new access connection permits are requested or when
there is a change in use or enlargement or improvement that will increase trip
generation.
      5.   Driveway Standards:
         a.   If the driveway is one-way in or out, the minimum width shall be
ten feet (10') and appropriate sign(s) designating the driveway as a one-way
connection shall be provided.
         b.   For two-way accesses, each lane shall have a minimum width of ten
feet (10'). The maximum width for a driveway access, including both lanes, is
thirty five feet (35') for both lanes.
         c.   The length of a driveway shall be designed in accordance with the
anticipated storage length of entering and exiting vehicles to prevent vehicles
from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing unsafe
conflicts with on site circulation.
      6.   Utilities: All electrical, telephone and cable television utility
service installations or connections made as part of new construction of a
building or structure shall be underground in accordance with city standards.
      7.   Easements: An applicant should discuss with the city planning
official the likelihood that any easement will be required prior to making
application. When an easement is required based on findings that justify the
easement, the following standards shall apply:
         a.   Pedestrian Easements: In order to facilitate pedestrian access
from streets, lots, or developments to schools, parks, nearby streets, or other
developments, an easement no less than ten feet (10') wide with a paved pathway
no less than six feet (6') shall be required. Any sight obscuring barrier such
as a fence or planting at the edge of the easement shall not exceed three feet
(3') in height in order to maintain visibility of the walkway from adjacent
properties.
         b.   Open Space Easements: An open space easement may be required over
areas in private ownership of the floodplain or areas with unique natural
conditions. Such easement shall preclude development of the area when limiting
the use of a property is determined to be in the public interest.
         c.   General Public Easements: When topography or other conditions
make impractical the location of drainage facilities, sanitary sewer or water
lines within the public street right of way, an unobstructed easement shall be
provided across a property. Easements shall be of sufficient width to safely
excavate buried facilities, but generally shall be no less than fifteen feet
(15') in width.
   C.   Special Site And Building Design Standards:
      1.   Building Orientation And Architectural Features:
         a.   Buildings shall have their primary entrances oriented toward the
street. On corner lots, building entrances shall face the primary fronting
street or the corner. New buildings located on the corner of 6th and I Streets
shall be designed with building fronts, which include display windows, facing
both 6th Street and I Street.
         b.   The primary building shall incorporate ground floor windows along
street facades, with at least twenty percent (20%) of any wall within thirty
feet (30') of a street consisting of display areas, windows or doorways.
         c.   Building facades facing a street shall include changes in relief
such as cornices, columns, gables, bay windows, recessed entryways, or similar
architectural or decorative elements.
         d.   Awnings that extend into the right of way over the public
sidewalk are permitted on commercial buildings. Awnings shall not bisect
transom windows.
      2.   Off Street Parking, Loading And Unloading: See chapter 9 of this
title for specific design standards for parking spaces and parking areas.
         a.   Within the DC zone, off street parking is not required.
         b.   When any new off street parking is provided, parking areas shall
be located behind buildings or to a nonstreet side yard such that buildings
separate parking areas from the street.
         c.   Existing off street parking areas between the front or side of a
building and the public right of way shall be separated from the right of way
with a minimum thirty inch (30") wide landscape strip (see landscape
requirements).
         d.   Parking bumpers shall be set at least six feet (6') from the
property/right of way line for off street parking spaces established
perpendicular to the right of way. Parking bumpers shall be securely fastened
to the pavement or ground.
         e.   Parking within the street right of way along a street side yard
shall maintain a six foot (6') separation from the edge of the right of way/
property line to allow for a pedestrian walkway. Separation shall be maintained
by the use of parking bumpers, an extruded curb or other barrier, as approved
by the city public works director. No parking shall be allowed within twenty
feet (20') of an intersection or crosswalk.
         f.   Loading and/or unloading of truck freight may occur on site, or
within an alley or a local side street, but not within the right of way of 6th
Street.
      3.   Bicycle And Pedestrian Facilities And Easements:
         a.   Bicycle or pedestrian easements and/or improvements may be
required if a portion of the subject property is included in the comprehensive
plan as necessary to complete a planned bicycle or pedestrian pathway or trail,
or to accommodate a portion thereof; or if findings justify the need to address
anticipated impacts from the proposed development.
         b.   Developments shall provide an on site pedestrian circulation
system that connects building entrances, public sidewalks, bicycle and
automobile parking areas, and parts of the site or abutting properties that may
attract pedestrians. Walkways shall maintain a clear width of at least five
feet (5') and shall be separated from vehicles by curbs, raised bumpers,
planter strips or similar barriers. Walkways through parking areas or crossing
driveways shall be clearly identified by a different material or pavement
markings, or both. Walkways shall be in clearly visible locations to promote
safety. Walkways shall be hard surfaced.
      4.   Landscaping, Lighting And Outdoor Storage:
         a.   When an existing or proposed building sets back five feet (5') or
more from a front or street side yard, a minimum thirty inch (30") wide
landscape strip along street frontages and building fronts shall be required to
enhance the street appearance of the development and to accommodate surface
water runoff from the site.
         b.   Landscaping shall include ground cover material such as
decorative rock, bark or lawn, and at least two (2) of the following landscape
elements: flowers, decorative shrubs, trees, boulders or decorative lighting.
         c.   Landscaped areas shall be provided with automatic irrigation
unless a letter from a licensed landscape architect is submitted with the
landscape plan certifying that the selected landscape plants will survive
without irrigation.
         d.   Parking areas shall be landscaped as prescribed in subsection
10-9-2D of this title.
         e.   Lighting may be required on the site, such as between parking
areas and buildings or along walkways, based on findings that justify the need
to protect the public health, safety or welfare. All on site lighting shall be
shielded to prevent off site glare or nuisance to traffic or neighboring
properties.
         f.   Outdoor storage and garbage collection areas shall be entirely
screened with a six foot (6') high sight obscuring fence, wall or vegetation.
Outdoor storage and garbage collection areas shall not be permitted within a
required vision clearance area.
         g.   Annual renewal of a business license for a commercial use shall
be contingent upon satisfactory maintenance of landscaped areas approved as
part of the site plan or conditional use review for the use.
      5.   Vision Clearance Area And Fences: See section
10-11-4 and subsection
10-11-1B of this title.
      6.   Signs: See
title 8, chapter 2 of this code. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4A-8: SITE PLAN DESIGN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
All uses permitted in the DC zone are subject to site plan design review. The
purpose of site plan design review is to provide a process to review proposals
to verify that compliance with the property development standards of the DC
zone under section
10-4A-7 of this article will be met, along with any other applicable provisions
of this code, or the comprehensive plan.
   A.   Permitted Uses: In the DC zone, site plan design review for a use
permitted outright or for a use permitted subject to standards shall follow the
public notice and review procedures in subsections
10-14-2B and
10-14-6B of this title for a type II decision, and the notice of decision
requirements under section
10-14-8 of this title.
   B.   Conditional Uses: Site plan design review shall be incorporated into
the type III review process required for all conditional uses permitted in the
DC zone. A type III decision includes the procedures under subsection
10-14-6C, and sections
10-14-7 and
10-14-8 of this title.
   C.   Application Requirements: An application for site plan design review
only, or in conjunction with a conditional use request, shall include the
information and materials listed under section
10-14-4 of this title.
   D.   Authority To Grant Exemption From Site Plan Design Review: The city
planning official is authorized to exempt a proposed use from the requirements
for site plan design review when:
      1.   The proposed use is listed in the DC zone as a use permitted
outright or as a use permitted subject to standards.
      2.   The proposed use is the same type of use as the most recent previous
use for the subject property for which site plan design review was approved by
the city.
      3.   No changes to the zoning regulations or development standards
applicable to the proposed use have occurred since the most recent site plan
design was approved and the previous use was in full compliance with all
conditions of the most recent site plan approval.
      4.   The applicant, and property owner if different, acknowledge in
writing the terms and conditions of the prior site plan design approval and
agree to abide by the terms and conditions of the approval. At the
determination of the city planning official, any change to the prior site plan
approval that would cause one or more of the current standards or conditions of
approval to no longer be met shall require a new site plan design review and
approval prior to making the change. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
ARTICLE B.  DOWNTOWN TRANSITIONAL (DT)
SECTION:
10-4B-1: Purpose And Intent
10-4B-2: Interpretation Of Uses
10-4B-3: Uses Permitted Outright
10-4B-4: Uses Permitted Subject To Standards
10-4B-5: Conditional Uses Permitted
10-4B-6: Temporary Uses Permitted
10-4B-7: Property Development Standards
10-4B-8: Site Plan Design Review Requirements And Procedures
10-4B-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the downtown transitional (DT) zone is to provide for a mix of
pedestrian friendly commercial uses and small scale, auto oriented commercial
uses. Commercial uses in this zone accommodate pedestrians and meet at least
one-half (1/2) of required parking on site. The DT zone is intended to serve as
a transition between pedestrian oriented commercial uses within the central
business district (DC zone) and predominantly auto oriented commercial uses
extending farther beyond the central business district along Highway 730. (Ord.
799, 11-3-2015)
10-4B-2: INTERPRETATION OF USES:
   A.   Types Of Uses: Within the DT zone, uses are classified as "permitted",
"permitted with standards", and "conditional". Further, uses are functionally
classified by the description of the particular activity (such as "single-
family residence") or by the general category with reference to the "North
American industry classification system" (NAICS). Permitted and conditional
uses shall be of a size and scale to meet the purpose and intent of the DT
zone.
   B.   North American Industry Classification System (NAICS): Uses
functionally classified with reference to the NAICS are described with the
NAICS index number. Some activities, otherwise included under the NAICS
category, may be specifically excluded by this article. The excluded activity
will be placed in the general NAICS category, but identified by the preceding
words - "but (or and) excluding". For example, "food store (54), but excluding
freezer and locker meat provisioners".
   C.   Interpretation Of Uses: Where a use is not described with reference to
the NAICS or otherwise defined in section
10-1-6 of this title, the words of this zoning ordinance describing such use
are to be given their ordinarily accepted meaning, except where the context in
which they are used otherwise clearly requires.
   D.   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specifically identified as permitted,
permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted within the zone, or
otherwise allowed through interpretation, shall be considered prohibited uses.
A use specifically permitted in one zone, but not another, shall not be
interpreted as being permitted in another zone under a different
classification. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4B-3: USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT:
The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright in the DT
zone subject to the property development standards of the DT zone, and the site
plan design review requirements and procedures under sections
10-4B-7 and
10-4B-8 of this article:
   A.   Automotive parts and accessories stores (44131).
   B.   Furniture and home furnishings (442).
   C.   Electronic and appliance stores (443).
   D.   Paint and wallpaper stores (44412).
   E.   Hardware stores (44413).
   F.   Specialty food stores (4452).
   G.   Beer, wine and liquor stores (4453).
   H.   Pharmacies and drugstores (44611).
   I.   Cosmetics, beauty supplies, and perfume stores (44612).
   J.   Optical goods (44613).
   K.   Food (health) supplement and other health and personal care stores
(44619).
   L.   Clothing stores (4481).
   M.   Shoe stores (4482).
   N.   Jewelry, luggage, and leather goods stores (4483).
   O.   Sporting goods, hobby, and musical instruments stores (4511).
   P.   Bookstores and news dealers (4512).
   Q.   Miscellaneous store retailers (453) limited to the following:
      1.   Florists (4531).
      2.   Office supplies, stationery, and gift stores (4532).
      3.   Pet and pet supplies stores (45391).
      4.   Art dealers (45392).
      5.   Tobacco stores (453991).
   R.   Information industries - except internet (51); examples include
publishing industries, motion picture and sound recording industries, radio and
television broadcasting and data processing, hosting and related services.
   S.   Finance and insurance (52).
   T.   Offices of real estate agents and brokers (5312) and activities related
to real estate (5313).
   U.   Consumer goods rental (5322).
   V.   Professional, scientific, and technical services (541) limited to the
following:
      1.   Legal services (5411).
      2.   Accounting, tax preparation, bookkeeping and payroll services
(5412).
      3.   Architecture, engineering, and related services (5413) not including
testing lab (54138).
      4.   Specialized design services (5414).
      5.   Computer systems design and related services (5415).
      6.   Management, scientific, and technical consulting services (5416).
      7.   Advertising, public relations, and related services (5418).
      8.   Marketing research and public opinion polling (54191).
      9.   Photographic services (54192).
      10.   Translation and interpretation services (54193).
      11.   Management of companies and enterprises (551).
   W.   Administrative and support services (561) limited to the following:
      1.   Office administrative services (5611).
      2.   Employment services (5613).
      3.   Business support services (5614).
      4.   Travel arrangement and reservation services (5615).
      5.   Investigation and security services (5616).
      6.   Services to buildings and dwellings (5617).
   X.   Educational services (611) limited to the following:
      1.   Business schools and computer and management training (6114).
      2.   Technical and trade schools (6115).
      3.   Fine arts schools (61161).
      4.   Sports and recreation instruction (61162).
      5.   Language schools (61163).
      6.   Educational support services (6117).
   Y.   Offices of physicians, dentists and other health practitioners (6211,
6212 and 6213).
   Z.   Medical and diagnostic laboratories (6215) and other ambulatory
healthcare services (62199).
   AA.   Social assistance services (624) limited to the following:
      1.   Individual and family services (6241).
      2.   Vocational rehabilitation services (6243).
   BB.   Performing arts companies (7111).
   CC.   Fitness and recreational sports centers (71394).
   DD.   Bowling centers (71395).
   EE.   Public recreational park, facility or trail, provided:
      1.   The site is inventoried in the comprehensive plan for park, trail or
other recreational purposes.
      2.   Development of the park, facility or trail will be in accordance
with an adopted master development plan for the park, facility or trail.
   FF.   Food services and drinking places (722).
   GG.   Electronic and precision equipment repair and maintenance (8112).
   HH.   Personal and household goods repair and maintenance (8114).
   II.   Personal care services (8121); examples include barbershops and beauty
salons.
   JJ.   Dry cleaning and laundry services (8123) except industrial launderers
(812332).
   KK.   Other personal services (8129) limited to the following:
      1.   Pet care (except veterinary) services (81291).
      2.   Photofinishing (81292).
      3.   Other personal services (81299).
   LL.   Grant making, civic, professional, and similar organizations (813) but
excluding religious organizations (8131). (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4B-4: USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO STANDARDS:
The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in the DT zone
subject to the standards listed thereunder, the property development standards
of the DT zone, and the site plan design review requirements and procedures
under sections
10-4B-7 and
10-4B-8 of this article, unless otherwise specified for the use:
   A.   Drive-through for any use, subject to the following standards:
      1.   A drive-through window or use shall be oriented to the side or rear
of a building and shall be designed to minimize conflicts with pedestrians and
vehicles.
      2.   A drive-through window that uses access from 6th Street (Highway
730) is allowed only if use of the access from 6th Street for the drive-through
window is limited to either ingress or egress.
   B.   Creation of a new city, county or state road, or realignment of an
existing city, county or state road or any portion thereof and which does not
involve a land partition, subject to the following:
      1.   The road or realignment complies with applicable street standards,
as specified in the comprehensive plan or other implementing ordinances and the
city's public works standards, for the existing or intended street
classification.
      2.   Review for compliance with the requirements under subsection B1 of
this section, shall be subject to the procedures and requirements for a type
III decision.
      3.   The use is subject to inspections, as determined by the city public
works director, to certify that all improvements have been constructed to city
standards.
   C.   Specialty trade contractors (238), subject to the following standards:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of seven thousand five hundred
(7,500) square feet.
      2.   At least one-third (1/3) of the building area is used for office use
and retail product display.
      3.   There is no outside storage of materials.
   D.   Other building material dealers (44419), subject to the following
standards:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of ten thousand (10,000) square
feet.
      2.   At least forty percent (40%) of the building area is used for office
use and retail product display.
   E.   Convenience stores (44512), subject to the following standard:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of six thousand (6,000) square feet.
   F.   Used merchandise stores (4533), subject to the following standards:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of seven thousand five hundred
(7,500) square feet.
      2.   There is no outside storage or display of goods or materials.
   G.   Automotive equipment rental and leasing (5321), subject to the
following standard:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet
including buildings and any outdoor storage of vehicles or other equipment.
   H.   General rental centers (5323), subject to the following standards:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of seven thousand five hundred
(7,500) square feet.
      2.   There is no outside storage or display of goods or materials.
   I.   Veterinary services (54194), subject to the following standards:
      1.   The use is limited to the care and treatment of small animals up to
two hundred (200) pounds on premises.
      2.   There is no outside storage of materials or outside containment of
animals.
   J.   Local utility distribution facilities (see section 10-1-6,
"Definitions", of this title), subject to the following:
      1.   A permit for the proposed distribution line or facility has been
obtained from the public works director in accordance with the requirements of
title 7 of this code, prior to construction. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4B-5: CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
The following conditional uses are permitted in the DT zone subject to the
property development standards of the DT zone, the decision criteria and any
additional applicable standards in chapter 12 of this title specific to the
use, and the site plan design review requirements and procedures under sections
10-4B-7 and
10-4B-8 of this article.
The applicant bears the burden of proof for demonstrating, based on factual
information and arguments, how the proposed use complies with all standards and
decision criteria upon which the planning commission must base its decision.
   A.   Residential use on the second floor or above provided ground floor
occupied by or readily available solely for commercial use.
   B.   Automobile dealers (4411).
   C.   Motorcycle, boat, ATV and other motor vehicle dealers (4412) but
excluding recreational vehicle dealers (44121).
   D.   Tire dealers (44132).
   E.   Home centers (44411).
   F.   Lawn and garden equipment and supplies stores (4442).
   G.   Supermarkets and other grocery stores (44511 - except convenience
stores).
   H.   Gasoline stations (4471).
   I.   General merchandise stores (other - 45299).
   J.   Taxi and limousine service (4853).
   K.   Motor vehicles towing (48841).
   L.   Postal service (4911).
   M.   Couriers and express delivery services (4921).
   N.   Local messengers and local delivery (4922).
   O.   Architecture, engineering and related services (5413) with testing lab
(54138).
   P.   Scientific research and development services (5417).
   Q.   Facilities support services (5612) and other support services (5619).
   R.   Ambulatory healthcare services (621) limited to the following:
      1.   Outpatient care centers (6214).
      2.   Home healthcare services (6216).
      3.   Ambulance services (62191).
   S.   Specialty hospitals - except psychiatric and substance abuse (6223).
   T.   Nursing and residential care facilities (623).
   U.   Community food, housing, emergency and other relief services (6242).
   V.   Child daycare services (6244).
   W.   Museums, historical sites and similar institutions (7121).
   X.   Arcades (7131) and other amusement and recreation industries (71399).
   Y.   Public recreational park, facility or trail not identified in the
comprehensive plan.
   Z.   Hotels and motels (72111).
   AA.   RV parks and recreational camps (7212).
   BB.   Rooming and boarding houses (7213).
   CC.   Automotive repair and maintenance (8111).
   DD.   Commercial and industrial machinery and equipment repair and
maintenance (8113).
   EE.   Death care services (8122) but excluding cemeteries (81222).
   FF.   Parking lots and garages (81293).
   GG.   Religious organizations (8134).
   HH.   Public administration and government facilities and support services
(92).
   II.   Multi-tenant commercial/commercial building (see section
10-1-6, "Definitions", of this title).
   JJ.   Major utility facilities (see section
10-1-6, "Definitions", of this title).
   KK.   Mobile food vendor pods (722330).  (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015; amd. Ord.
836, 6-4-2019) (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4B-6: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Reserved. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4B-7: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards apply to all new developments in
the DT zone and are intended to provide a consistent development pattern that
ensures a safe, orderly, efficient, economically viable and aesthetically
pleasing environment throughout each zone district.
Existing developed properties are expected to meet these requirements to the
extent reasonably possible. Similar to findings that demonstrate how a
development proposal meets applicable standards, findings shall also justify
why a proposal is not able to meet applicable standards for existing developed
properties or structures. Cost may be considered, but shall not be the sole
determinant if the cost is reasonable within the overall scope of the
development proposal.
   A.   Basic Site Development Standards:
      1.   Minimum Lot Size And Lot Width; Building Setbacks; Maximum Building
Height And Site Coverage:
 
Minimum lot or parcel size:
 Commercial uses                    None
 Minimum lot width                  None
                                    10 feet; the maximum front yard setback
                                    may be increased by 10 feet if the
Maximum front or street side yard   setback is occupied by an outdoor
setback                             feature relating to the business or
                                    public amenity such as seating or
                                    artwork
Minimum yard setbacks:
 Front and rear yards               0 feet or 10 feet if adjacent to a
                                    residential district
 Side yard                          0 feet or 10 feet if adjacent to a
                                    residential district
 Street side yard                   1 foot
Parking space                       10 feet wide; see chapter 9 of this
                                    title for parking standards
Maximum building height             35 feet
Maximum site coverage (building and 95 percent
impervious surface)
 
   B.   Site Development Impact Standards:
      1.   Traffic Impact Analysis: A traffic impact analysis meeting the
requirements under subsection 10-11-10C of this title shall be required to be
submitted to the city with a land use application, when the community
development director determines that the application involves one or more of
the following actions:
         a.   A change in zoning or plan amendment designation; or
         b.   The proposal is projected to cause one or more of the following
effects, which can be determined by field counts, site observation, traffic
impact analysis or study, field measurements, crash history, Institute Of
Transportation Engineers' "Trip Generation Manual"; and information and studies
provided by the local reviewing jurisdiction and/or ODOT:
            (1)   An increase in site traffic volume generation by two hundred
fifty (250) average daily trips (ADT) or more (or as required by the city
engineer). The latest edition of the "Trip Generation Manual", published by the
Institute Of Transportation Engineers (ITE) shall be used as standards by which
to gauge average daily vehicle trips; or
            (2)   An increase in use of adjacent streets by vehicles exceeding
the twenty thousand (20,000) pounds' gross vehicle weight by ten (10) vehicles
or more per day; or
            (3)   The location of the access driveway does not meet minimum
intersection sight distance requirements, or is located where vehicles entering
or leaving the property are restricted, or vehicles queue or hesitate, creating
a safety hazard; or
            (4)   The location of the access driveway does not meet the access
spacing standard of the roadway on which the driveway is located; or
            (5)   A change in internal traffic patterns that may cause safety
problems, such as backup onto the highway or traffic crashes in the approach
area.
      2.   Floodplain, Wetland And Riparian Areas: See chapter 7 of this title
and title 12 of this code.
The requirements under chapter 7 of this title and title 12 of this code are
triggered when development is proposed within a designated floodplain or
riparian area as identified by the official flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
prepared by the U.S. federal emergency management agency (FEMA); or when
property contains wetland areas as identified on the national wetlands
inventory (NWI) map prepared by the U.S. fish and wildlife service (USFWS).
      3.   Stormwater Surface Drainage:
         a.   Surface water runoff shall be handled on site through the use of
landscaped areas, grassy swales or similar natural features to the extent
reasonably feasible. Where surface water runoff cannot be entirely managed on
site, adequate provisions shall be made so that runoff will not adversely
affect the use of adjoining or downstream properties, unless a drainage
easement has been obtained.
         b.   Where it is anticipated by the city public works director that
the additional runoff resulting from a proposed development will overload an
existing drainage facility, the city shall withhold approval of the development
until provisions have been made for improvement of the potential condition or
until provisions have been made for storage of additional runoff caused by the
development in accordance with city standards.
         c.   In order to accommodate upstream drainage, culverts and other
drainage facilities shall be large enough to accommodate existing and potential
future runoff from the entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside
the development. Such facilities shall be subject to review and approval by the
city public works director.
      4.   Vehicle Access, Driveway And Circulation Standards:
         a.   New Vehicle Access Connections: New access connections shall not
be permitted within the functional area (see section
10-1-6, "Definitions", of this title) of an intersection or interchange as
defined by the connection spacing standards of this title, the comprehensive
plan and public works standards, unless no other reasonable access to the
property is available. See also subsection
10-11-4C of this title regarding vision clearance areas.
         b.   Access Connections: Where no other alternative exists, the city
may allow construction of an access connection along the property line farthest
from the intersection. In such cases, directional connections (i.e., right in/
out, right in only, or right out only) may be required.
         c.   Cross Access Drives, Pedestrian Access: Adjacent commercial or
office properties such as shopping plazas and office parks that are major
traffic generators shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to
allow circulation between sites.
         d.   Separation Distance: The city may reduce the required separation
distance of access points where they prove impractical, provided all of the
following requirements are met:
            (1)   Joint access driveways and cross access easements are
provided.
            (2)   The site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation
system.
            (3)   The property owner enters into a written agreement with the
city, recorded with the deed, that preexisting connections on the site will be
closed and eliminated after construction of each side of a joint use driveway.
            (4)   The city may modify or waive the requirements of this section
where the characteristics or layout of abutting properties would make a
development of a unified or shared access and circulation system impractical.
         e.   Phased Developments: Development sites under the same ownership
or consolidated for the purpose of development and comprising more than one
building site, shall be reviewed as a single property for the purpose of
complying with access standards. The number of access points permitted shall be
the minimum number necessary to provide reasonable access to the site, not the
minimum for that frontage.
         f.   Corner Lots: Corner lots shall be required to locate motor
vehicle accesses on the street with the lower functional classification when
feasible provided such access will not be located within the functional area of
the intersection. This requirement may be waived or modified when a commercial
use would be required to take access from a street in a residential
neighborhood.
         g.   Nonconforming Access Features: Legal access connections in place
when this title was adopted that do not conform with the standards herein are
considered nonconforming features and shall be brought into compliance with
applicable standards when new access connection permits are requested or when
there is a change in use or enlargement or improvement that will increase trip
generation.
      5.   Driveway Standards:
         a.   If the driveway is one-way in or out, the minimum width shall be
ten feet (10') and appropriate sign(s) designating the driveway as a one-way
connection shall be provided.
         b.   For two-way accesses, each lane shall have a minimum width of ten
feet (10'). The maximum width for a driveway access, including both lanes, is
thirty five feet (35') for both lanes.
         c.   The length of a driveway shall be designed in accordance with the
anticipated storage length of entering and exiting vehicles to prevent vehicles
from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing unsafe
conflicts with on site circulation.
      6.   Utilities: All electrical, telephone and cable television utility
service installations or connections made as part of new construction of a
building or structure shall be underground in accordance with city standards.
      7.   Easements: An applicant should discuss with the city planning
official the likelihood that any easement will be required prior to making
application. When an easement is required based on findings that justify the
easement, the following standards shall apply:
         a.   Pedestrian Easements: In order to facilitate pedestrian access
from streets, lots, or developments to schools, parks, nearby streets, or other
developments, an easement no less than ten feet (10') wide with a paved pathway
no less than six feet (6') shall be required. Any sight obscuring barrier such
as a fence or planting at the edge of the easement shall not exceed three feet
(3') in height in order to maintain visibility of the walkway from adjacent
properties.
         b.   Open Space Easements: An open space easement may be required over
areas in private ownership of the floodplain or areas with unique natural
conditions. Such easement shall preclude development of the area when limiting
the use of a property is determined to be in the public interest.
         c.   General Public Easements: When topography or other conditions
make impractical the location of drainage facilities, sanitary sewer or water
lines within the public street right of way, an unobstructed easement shall be
provided across a property. Easements shall be of sufficient width to safely
excavate buried facilities, but generally shall be no less than fifteen feet
(15') in width.
   C.   Special Site And Building Design Standards:
      1.   Building Orientation And Architectural Features:
         a.   The primary building and entry shall be oriented toward the
fronting street. On corner lots, building entrances shall face the primary
fronting street or the corner.
         b.   The primary building shall incorporate ground floor windows along
street facades, with at least twenty percent (20%) of any wall within thirty
feet (30') of a street consisting of display areas, windows or doorways.
         c.   Building facades facing a street shall include changes in relief
such as cornices, columns, gables, bay windows, recessed entryways, or similar
architectural or decorative elements.
         d.   Awnings that extend into the right of way over the public
sidewalk are permitted on commercial buildings. Awnings shall not bisect
transom windows.
      2.   Off Street Parking, Loading And Unloading: See chapter 9 of this
title for specific design standards for parking spaces and parking areas.
         a.   Within the DT zone, the minimum off street parking requirement
shall be one-half (1/2) of the number of parking spaces specified for uses in
chapter 9 of this title and parking spaces on the public street adjacent to the
subject property may be counted to fulfill the parking requirement.
         b.   When any new off street parking is provided, parking areas shall
be located behind buildings or to a nonstreet side yard such that buildings
separate parking areas from the street, unless there is no feasible
alternative.
         c.   Existing or proposed off street parking areas between the front
or side of a building and the public right of way shall be separated from the
right of way with a minimum thirty inch (30") wide landscape strip (see
landscape requirements).
         d.   Parking bumpers shall be set at least six feet (6') from the
property/right of way line for parking spaces established perpendicular to the
right of way. Parking bumpers shall be securely fastened to the pavement or
ground.
         e.   Parking within the street right of way along a street side yard
shall maintain a six foot (6') separation from the edge of the right of way/
property line to allow for a pedestrian walkway. Separation shall be maintained
by the use of parking bumpers, an extruded curb or other barrier, as approved
by the city public works director. No parking shall be allowed within twenty
feet (20') of an intersection or crosswalk.
         f.   Loading and/or unloading of truck freight may occur on site, or
within an alley or a local side street, but not within the right of way of 6th
Street.
      3.   Bicycle And Pedestrian Facilities And Easements:
         a.   Bicycle or pedestrian easements and/or improvements may be
required if a portion of the subject property is included in the comprehensive
plan as necessary to complete a planned bicycle or pedestrian pathway or trail,
or to accommodate a portion thereof; or if findings justify the need to address
anticipated impacts from the proposed development.
         b.   Developments shall provide an on site pedestrian circulation
system that connects building entrances, public sidewalks, bicycle and
automobile parking areas, and parts of the site or abutting properties that may
attract pedestrians. Walkways shall maintain a clear width of at least five
feet (5') and shall be separated from vehicles by curbs, raised bumpers,
planter strips or similar barriers. Walkways through parking areas or crossing
driveways shall be clearly identified by a different material or pavement
markings, or both. Walkways shall be in clearly visible locations to promote
safety. Walkways shall be hard surfaced.
      4.   Landscaping, Lighting And Outdoor Storage:
         a.   At least five percent (5%) of the site shall be landscaped. A
minimum thirty inch (30") wide landscape strip along street frontages and
building fronts must be included in the landscape plan to accommodate surface
water runoff from the site and to enhance the street appearance of the
development.
         b.   Landscaping shall include ground cover material such as
decorative rock, bark or lawn, and at least two (2) of the following landscape
elements: flowers, decorative shrubs, trees, boulders or decorative lighting.
         c.   Landscaped areas shall be provided with automatic irrigation
unless a letter from a licensed landscape architect is submitted with the
landscape plan certifying that the selected landscape plants will survive
without irrigation.
         d.   Pedestrian amenities, such as benches, plazas, fountains, and
sculptures that are high quality and provided for public use or enjoyment, may
replace up to one-third (1/3) of the required landscaping, but shall not
replace required landscaping along street frontages or building fronts.
         e.   Parking areas shall be landscaped as prescribed in subsection
10-9-2D of this title.
         f.   Lighting may be required on the site, such as between parking
areas and buildings or along walkways based on findings that justify the need
to protect the public health, safety or welfare. All on site lighting shall be
shielded to prevent off site glare or nuisance to traffic or neighboring
properties.
         g.   Outdoor storage and garbage collection areas shall be entirely
screened with a six foot (6') high sight obscuring fence, wall or vegetation.
Outdoor storage and garbage collection areas shall not be permitted within a
required vision clearance area.
         h.   Annual renewal of a business license for a commercial use shall
be contingent upon satisfactory maintenance of landscaped areas approved as
part of the site plan or conditional use review for the use.
      5.   Vision Clearance Area And Fences: See section
10-11-4 and subsection
10-11-1B of this title.
      6.   Signs: See
title 8, chapter 2 of this code. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4B-8: SITE PLAN DESIGN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
All uses permitted in the DT zone are subject to site plan design review. The
purpose of site plan design review is to provide a process to review proposals
to verify that compliance with the property development standards of the DT
zone under section
10-4B-7 of this article will be met, along with any other applicable provisions
of this code, or the comprehensive plan.
   A.   Permitted Uses: In the DT zone, site plan design review for a use
permitted outright or for a use permitted subject to standards shall follow the
public notice and review procedures in subsections
10-14-2B and
10-14-6B of this title for a type II decision, and the notice of decision
requirements under section
10-14-8 of this title.
   B.   Conditional Uses: Site plan design review shall be incorporated into
the type III review process required for all conditional uses permitted in the
DT zone. A type III decision includes the procedures under subsection
10-14-6C, and sections
10-14-7 and
10-14-8 of this title.
   C.   Application Requirements: An application for site plan design review
only, or in conjunction with a conditional use request, shall include the
information and materials listed under section
10-14-4 of this title.
   D.   Authority To Grant Exemption From Site Plan Design Review: The city
planning official is authorized to exempt a proposed use from the requirements
for site plan design review when:
      1.   The proposed use is listed in the DT zone as a use permitted
outright or as a use permitted subject to standards.
      2.   The proposed use is the same type of use as the most recent previous
use for the subject property for which site plan design review was approved by
the city.
      3.   No changes to the zoning regulations or development standards
applicable to the proposed use have occurred since the most recent site plan
design was approved and the previous use was in full compliance with all
conditions of the most recent site plan approval.
      4.   The applicant, and property owner if different, acknowledge in
writing the terms and conditions of the prior site plan design approval and
agree to abide by the terms and conditions of the approval. At the
determination of the city planning official, any change to the prior site plan
approval that would cause one or more of the current standards or conditions of
approval to no longer be met shall require a new site plan design review and
approval prior to making the change. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
ARTICLE C.  NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (NC)
SECTION:
10-4C-1: Purpose And Intent
10-4C-2: Interpretation Of Uses
10-4C-3: Uses Permitted Outright
10-4C-4: Uses Permitted Subject To Standards
10-4C-5: Conditional Uses Permitted
10-4C-6: Temporary Uses Permitted
10-4C-7: Property Development Standards
10-4C-8: Site Plan Design Review Requirements And Procedures
10-4C-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the neighborhood commercial (NC) zone is to provide convenient
locations intended for small scale commercial developments such as convenience
stores, personal services, small repair shops and similar businesses offering
goods and services purchased frequently and which can be sustained within a
neighborhood or similar limited trade area. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4C-2: INTERPRETATION OF USES:
   A.   Types Of Uses: Within the NC zone, uses are classified as "permitted",
"permitted with standards", and "conditional". Further, uses are functionally
classified by the description of the particular activity (such as "single-
family residence") or by the general category with reference to the "North
American industry classification system" (NAICS). Permitted and conditional
uses shall be of a size and scale to meet the purpose and intent of the NC
zone.
   B.   North American Industry Classification System (NAICS): Uses
functionally classified with reference to the NAICS are described with the
NAICS index number. Some activities, otherwise included under the NAICS
category, may be specifically excluded by this article. The excluded activity
will be placed in the general NAICS category, but identified by the preceding
words - "but (or and) excluding". For example, "food store (54), but excluding
freezer and locker meat provisioners".
   C.   Interpretation Of Uses: Where a use is not described with reference to
the NAICS or otherwise defined in section 10-1-6 of this title, the words of
this zoning ordinance describing such use are to be given their ordinarily
accepted meaning, except where the context in which they are used otherwise
clearly requires.
   D.   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specifically identified as permitted,
permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted within the zone, or
otherwise allowed through interpretation, shall be considered prohibited uses.
A use specifically permitted in one zone, but not another, shall not be
interpreted as being permitted in another zone under a different
classification. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4C-3: USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT:
The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright in the NC
zone subject to the property development standards of the NC zone, and the site
plan design review requirements and procedures under sections
10-4C-7 and
10-4C-8 of this article:
   A.   Specialty food stores (4452).
   B.   Cosmetics, beauty supplies, and perfume stores (44612).
   C.   Optical goods (44613).
   D.   Food (health) supplement and other health and personal care stores
(44619).
   E.   Bookstores and news dealers (4512).
   F.   Florists (4531).
   G.   Legal services (5411).
   H.   Accounting, tax preparation, bookkeeping and payroll services (5412).
   I.   Specialized design services (5414).
   J.   Computer systems design and related services (5415).
   K.   Photographic services (54192).
   L.   Translation and interpretation services (54193).
   M.   Office administrative services (5611).
   N.   Investigation and security services (5616).
   O.   Language schools (61163).
   P.   Educational support services (6117).
   Q.   Public recreational park, facility or trail, provided:
      1.   The site is inventoried in the comprehensive plan for park, trail or
other recreational purposes.
      2.   Development of the park, facility or trail will be in accordance
with an adopted master development plan for the park, facility or trail.
   R.   Personal care services (8121); examples include barbershops and beauty
salons.
   S.   Dry cleaning and laundry services (81232) except coin operated.
   T.   Photofinishing (81292). (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4C-4: USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO STANDARDS:
The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in the NC zone
subject to the standards listed thereunder, the property development standards
of the NC zone, and the site plan design review requirements and procedures
under sections
10-4C-7 and
10-4C-8 of this article, unless otherwise specified for the use:
   A.   Residential use, subject to the following:
      1.   The use will be situated on the second story or above within a
building in which the ground floor is occupied by or available solely for
commercial use.
      2.   Off street parking requirements meeting city standards are provided
for the use separate from those required for ground floor commercial uses.
      3.   The residential use complies with building, fire and other
applicable safety codes as mandated by local, state or federal laws.
   B.   Creation of a new city, county or state road, or realignment of an
existing city, county or state road or any portion thereof and which does not
involve a land partition, subject to the following:
      1.   The road or realignment complies with applicable street standards,
as specified in the comprehensive plan or other implementing ordinances and the
city's public works standards, for the existing or intended street
classification.
      2.   Review for compliance with the requirements under subsection B1 of
this section, shall be subject to the procedures and requirements for a type
III decision.
      3.   The use is subject to inspections, as determined by the city public
works director, to certify that all improvements have been constructed to city
standards.
   C.   Electronic and appliance stores (443) subject to the following
standards:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square
feet.
      2.   There is no outside storage or display of goods or materials.
   D.   Clothing stores (4481) and shoe stores (4482) subject to the following
standards:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square
feet.
      2.   There is no outside storage or display of goods or materials.
   E.   Office supplies, stationery and gift stores (4532) subject to the
following standards:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square
feet.
      2.   There is no outside storage or display of goods or materials.
   F.   Consumer goods rental (5322) subject to the following standards:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square
feet.
      2.   There is no outside storage or display of goods or materials.
   G.   Architecture, engineering and related services (5413) without testing
lab subject to the following standard:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square feet
in size.
   H.   Sports and recreation instruction (61162) subject to the following
standard:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of ten thousand (10,000) square
feet.
   I.   Electronic and precision equipment repair and maintenance (8112)
subject to the following standards:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square
feet.
      2.   At least ten percent (10%) of the building area is used for office
use and customer service.
      3.   There is no outside storage or display of goods or materials.
   J.   Personal and household goods repair and maintenance (8114) subject to
the following standards:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square
feet.
      2.   At least ten percent (10%) of the building area is used for office
use and customer service.
      3.   There is no outside storage or display of goods or materials.
   K.   Pet care (except veterinary) services (81291) subject to the following
standards:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square
feet.
      2.   The use is limited to the care and treatment of small animals up to
two hundred (200) pounds on premises.
      3.   There is no outside storage or display of materials or outside
containment of animals.
   L.   Civic and social organizations (8134) subject to the following
standard:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of seven thousand five hundred
(7,500) square feet.
   M.   Local utility distribution facilities, subject to the following:
      1.   A permit for the proposed distribution line or facility has been
obtained from the public works director in accordance with the requirements of
title 7 of this code, prior to construction. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4C-5: CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
The following conditional uses may be permitted in the NC zone subject to the
property development standards of the NC zone, the decision criteria and any
additional applicable standards in chapter 12 of this title specific to the
use, and the site plan design review requirements and procedures under sections
10-4C-7 and
10-4C-8 of this article.
The applicant bears the burden of proof for demonstrating, based on factual
information and arguments, how the proposed use complies with all standards and
decision criteria upon which the planning commission must base its decision.
   A.   Drive-through for any use.
   B.   Automotive parts and accessories stores (44131).
   C.   Convenience stores (44512).
   D.   Beer, wine and liquor stores (4453).
   E.   Pharmacies and drugstores (44611).
   F.   Gasoline stations (4471).
   G.   Sporting goods, hobby and musical instruments stores (4511).
   H.   Used merchandise stores (4533).
   I.   Pet and pet supplies stores (45391).
   J.   Art dealers (45392).
   K.   Tobacco stores (453991).
   L.   Taxi and limousine service (4853).
   M.   Postal service (4911).
   N.   Courier and express delivery services (4921).
   O.   Local messengers and local delivery (4922).
   P.   Warehousing and storage (4931).
   Q.   Finance and insurance (52).
   R.   Offices of real estate agents and brokers (5312).
   S.   Activities related to real estate (5313).
   T.   Business schools and computer and management training (6114).
   U.   Offices of physicians, dentists and other health practitioners (6211,
6212 and 6213).
   V.   Home healthcare services (6216).
   W.   Continuing care retirement communities and assisted living facilities
for the elderly (6233).
   X.   Individual and family services (6241).
   Y.   Community food, housing, emergency and other related services (6242).
   Z.   Vocational rehabilitation services (6243).
   AA.   Child daycare services (6244).
   BB.   Performing arts companies (7111).
   CC.   Arcades (7131).
   DD.   Fitness and recreation sports centers (71394).
   EE.   Bowling centers (71395).
   FF.   Other amusement and recreation industries (71399).
   GG.   Public recreational park, facility or trail not identified in
comprehensive plan and included in a master development plan.
   HH.   Bed and breakfast inns (721191).
   II.   Food services and drinking places (722) but excluding mobile food
services (72233).
   JJ.   Coin operated laundries and dry cleaners (81231).
   KK.   Religious organizations (8131).
   LL.   Public administration and government facilities and support services
(92).
   MM.   Major utility facilities (see section
10-1-6, "Definitions", of this title).
   NN.   Mobile food vendor pods (722330). (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015; amd. Ord. 836,
6-4-2019)
10-4C-6: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Reserved. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4C-7: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards apply to all new developments in
the NC zone and are intended to provide a consistent development pattern that
ensures a safe, orderly, efficient, economically viable and aesthetically
pleasing environment throughout each zone district.
Existing developed properties are expected to meet these requirements to the
extent reasonably possible. Similar to findings that demonstrate how a
development proposal meets applicable standards, findings shall also justify
why a proposal is not able to meet applicable standards for existing developed
properties or structures. Cost may be considered, but shall not be the sole
determinant if the cost is reasonable within the overall scope of the
development proposal.
   A.   Basic Site Development Standards:
      1.   Minimum Lot Size And Lot Width; Building Setbacks; Maximum Building
Height And Site Coverage:
 
Minimum lot or parcel size:
 Commercial uses                    4,000 square feet
 Residential uses                   None; density shall comply with R-
                                    3 district requirements
 Minimum lot width                  50 feet
Minimum yard setbacks:
 Front and rear yards               10 feet
 Side yard                          0 feet or 10 feet if adjacent to a
                                    residential district
 Street side yard                   10 feet
Parking space                       10 feet wide; see chapter 9 of this title
                                    for parking standards
Maximum building height             35 feet
Maximum site coverage (building and 95 percent
impervious surface)
 
   B.   Site Development Impact Standards:
      1.   Traffic Impact Analysis: A traffic impact analysis meeting the
requirements under subsection
10-11-10C of this title shall be required to be submitted to the city with a
land use application, when the community development director determines that
the application involves one or more of the following actions:
         a.   A change in zoning or plan amendment designation; or
         b.   The proposal is projected to cause one or more of the following
effects, which can be determined by field counts, site observation, traffic
impact analysis or study, field measurements, crash history, Institute Of
Transportation Engineers' "Trip Generation Manual"; and information and studies
provided by the local reviewing jurisdiction and/or ODOT:
            (1)   An increase in site traffic volume generation by two hundred
fifty (250) average daily trips (ADT) or more (or as required by the city
engineer). The latest edition of the "Trip Generation Manual", published by the
Institute Of Transportation Engineers (ITE) shall be used as standards by which
to gauge average daily vehicle trips; or
            (2)   An increase in use of adjacent streets by vehicles exceeding
the twenty thousand (20,000) pounds' gross vehicle weight by ten (10) vehicles
or more per day; or
            (3)   The location of the access driveway does not meet minimum
intersection sight distance requirements, or is located where vehicles entering
or leaving the property are restricted, or vehicles queue or hesitate, creating
a safety hazard; or
            (4)   The location of the access driveway does not meet the access
spacing standard of the roadway on which the driveway is located; or
            (5)   A change in internal traffic patterns that may cause safety
problems, such as backup onto the highway or traffic crashes in the approach
area.
      2.   Floodplain, Wetland And Riparian Areas: See chapter 7 of this title
and title 12 of this code.
The requirements under chapter 7 of this title and title 12 of this code are
triggered when development is proposed within a designated floodplain or
riparian area as identified by the official flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
prepared by the U.S. federal emergency management agency (FEMA); or when
property contains wetland areas as identified on the national wetlands
inventory (NWI) map prepared by the U.S. fish and wildlife service (USFWS).
      3.   Stormwater Surface Drainage:
         a.   Surface water runoff shall be handled on site through the use of
landscaped areas, grassy swales or similar natural features to the extent
reasonably feasible. Where surface water runoff cannot be entirely managed on
site, adequate provisions shall be made so that runoff will not adversely
affect the use of adjoining or downstream properties, unless a drainage
easement has been obtained.
         b.   Where it is anticipated by the city public works director that
the additional runoff resulting from a proposed development will overload an
existing drainage facility, the city shall withhold approval of the development
until provisions have been made for improvement of the potential condition or
until provisions have been made for storage of additional runoff caused by the
development in accordance with city standards.
         c.   In order to accommodate upstream drainage, culverts and other
drainage facilities shall be large enough to accommodate existing and potential
future runoff from the entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside
the development. Such facilities shall be subject to review and approval by the
city public works director.
      4.   Vehicle Access, Driveway And Circulation Standards:
         a.   New Vehicle Access Connections: New access connections shall not
be permitted within the functional area (see section 10-1-6, "Definitions", of
this title) of an intersection or interchange as defined by the connection
spacing standards of this title, the comprehensive plan and public works
standards, unless no other reasonable access to the property is available. See
also subsection 10-11-4C of this title regarding vision clearance areas.
         b.   Access Connections: Where no other alternative exists, the city
may allow construction of an access connection along the property line farthest
from the intersection. In such cases, directional connections (i.e., right in/
out, right in only, or right out only) may be required.
         c.   Cross Access Drives, Pedestrian Access: Adjacent commercial or
office properties such as shopping plazas and office parks that are major
traffic generators shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to
allow circulation between sites.
         d.   Separation Distance: The city may reduce the required separation
distance of access points where they prove impractical, provided all of the
following requirements are met:
            (1)   Joint access driveways and cross access easements are
provided.
            (2)   The site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation
system.
            (3)   The property owner enters into a written agreement with the
city, recorded with the deed, that preexisting connections on the site will be
closed and eliminated after construction of each side of a joint use driveway.
            (4)   The city may modify or waive the requirements of this section
where the characteristics or layout of abutting properties would make a
development of a unified or shared access and circulation system impractical.
         e.   Phased Developments: Development sites under the same ownership
or consolidated for the purpose of development and comprising more than one
building site, shall be reviewed as a single property for the purpose of
complying with access standards. The number of access points permitted shall be
the minimum number necessary to provide reasonable access to the site, not the
minimum for that frontage.
         f.   Corner Lots: Corner lots shall be required to locate motor
vehicle accesses on the street with the lower functional classification when
feasible provided such access will not be located within the functional area of
the intersection. This requirement may be waived or modified when a commercial
or industrial use would be required to take access from a street in a
residential neighborhood.
         g.   Nonconforming Access Features: Legal access connections in place
when this title was adopted that do not conform with the standards herein are
considered nonconforming features and shall be brought into compliance with
applicable standards when new access connection permits are requested or when
there is a change in use or enlargement or improvement that will increase trip
generation.
      5.   Driveway Standards:
         a.   If the driveway is one-way in or out, the minimum width shall be
ten feet (10') and appropriate sign(s) designating the driveway as a one-way
connection shall be provided.
         b.   For two-way accesses, each lane shall have a minimum width of ten
feet (10'). The maximum width for a driveway access, including both lanes, is
thirty five feet (35') for both lanes.
         c.   The length of a driveway shall be designed in accordance with the
anticipated storage length of entering and exiting vehicles to prevent vehicles
from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing unsafe
conflicts with on site circulation.
      6.   Utilities: All electrical, telephone and cable television utility
service installations or connections made as part of new construction of a
building or structure shall be underground in accordance with city standards.
      7.   Easements:
         a.   Pedestrian Easements: In order to facilitate pedestrian access
from streets, lots, or developments to schools, parks, nearby streets, or other
developments, an easement no less than ten feet (10') wide with a paved pathway
no less than six feet (6') shall be required. Any sight obscuring barrier such
as a fence or planting at the edge of the easement shall not exceed three feet
(3') in height in order to maintain visibility of the walkway from adjacent
properties.
         b.   Open Space Easements: An open space easement may be required over
areas in private ownership of the floodplain or areas with unique natural
conditions. Such easement shall preclude development of the area when limiting
the use of a property is determined to be in the public interest.
         c.   General Public Easements: When topography or other conditions
make impractical the location of drainage facilities, sanitary sewer or water
lines within the public street right of way, an unobstructed easement shall be
provided across a property. Easements shall be of sufficient width to safely
excavate buried facilities, but generally shall be no less than fifteen feet
(15') in width.
   C.   Special Site And Building Design Standards:
      1.   Building Orientation And Architectural Features:
         a.   The primary building and entry shall be oriented toward the
fronting street. On corner lots, building entrances shall face the primary
fronting street or the corner.
         b.   The primary building shall incorporate ground floor windows along
the fronting street facades, with at least twenty percent (20%) of the fronting
wall consisting of display areas, windows or doorways.
         c.   Building facades facing a street shall include changes in relief
such as cornices, columns, gables, bay windows, recessed entryways, or similar
architectural or decorative elements.
         d.   A drive-through window or use shall be oriented to the side or
rear of a building and shall be designed to minimize conflicts with pedestrians
and vehicles.
      2.   Off Street Parking, Loading And Unloading: See chapter 9 of this
title for specific design standards for parking spaces and parking areas.
         a.   Off street parking shall not be located within five feet (5') of
a property line separating the subject property from a public street.
         b.   Existing or proposed off street parking areas between the front
or side of a building and the public right of way shall be separated from the
right of way with a three foot (3') wide landscape strip (see landscape
requirements).
         c.   Parking bumpers shall be set at least six feet (6') from the
property/right of way line for parking spaces established perpendicular to the
right of way. Parking bumpers shall be securely fastened to the pavement or
ground.
         d.   A designated area (or areas) for loading and/or unloading of
materials or freight shall be provided to ensure all such activities occur
entirely on site.
         e.   Parking or loading areas which abut a residential zone along a
rear or side property line shall be separated from the property line by a
twenty foot (20') wide landscaped area. Alternatively, a ten foot (10') wide
landscaped area and a fence or wall six feet (6') in height may be used to
buffer the residential property.
      3.   Bicycle And Pedestrian Facilities And Easements:
         a.   Bicycle or pedestrian easements and/or improvements may be
required if a portion of the subject property is included in the comprehensive
plan as necessary to complete a planned bicycle or pedestrian pathway or trail,
or to accommodate a portion thereof; or if findings justify the need to address
anticipated impacts from the proposed development.
         b.   Developments shall provide an on site pedestrian circulation
system that connects building entrances, public sidewalks, bicycle and
automobile parking areas, and parts of the site or abutting properties that may
attract pedestrians. Walkways shall maintain a clear width of at least five
feet (5') and shall be separated from vehicles by curbs, raised bumpers,
planter strips or similar barriers. Walkways through parking areas or crossing
driveways shall be clearly identified by a different material or pavement
markings, or both. Walkways shall be in clearly visible locations to promote
safety. Walkways shall be hard surfaced.
      4.   Landscaping, Lighting And Outdoor Storage:
         a.   At least five percent (5%) of the site shall be landscaped. A
minimum thirty inch (30") wide landscape strip along street frontages and
building fronts must be included in the landscape plan to accommodate surface
water runoff from the site and to enhance the street appearance of the
development.
         b.   Pedestrian amenities, such as benches, plazas, fountains, and
sculptures that are high quality and provided for public use or enjoyment, may
replace up to one-third (1/3) of the required landscaping, but shall not
replace required landscaping along street frontages or building fronts.
         c.   Parking areas shall be landscaped as prescribed in subsection
10-9-2D of this title.
         d.   Landscaping shall include ground cover material such as
decorative rock, bark or lawn, and at least two (2) of the following landscape
elements: flowers, decorative shrubs, trees, boulders or decorative lighting.
         e.   Landscaped areas shall be provided with automatic irrigation
unless a letter from a licensed landscape architect is submitted with the
landscape plan certifying that the selected landscape plants will survive
without irrigation.
         f.   Lighting may be required on the site, such as between parking
areas and buildings or along walkways, based on findings that justify the need
to protect the public health, safety or welfare. All on site lighting shall be
shielded to prevent off site glare or nuisance to traffic or neighboring
properties.
         g.   Outdoor storage and garbage collection areas shall be entirely
screened with a six foot (6') high sight obscuring fence, wall or vegetation.
Outdoor storage and garbage collection areas shall not be permitted within a
required vision clearance area.
         h.   Annual renewal of a business license for a commercial use shall
be contingent upon satisfactory maintenance of landscaped areas approved as
part of the site plan or conditional use review for the use.
      5.   Vision Clearance Area And Fences: See section
10-11-4 and subsection
10-11-1B of this title.
      6.   Signs: See
title 8, chapter 2 of this code. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4C-8: SITE PLAN DESIGN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
All uses permitted in the NC zone are subject to site plan design review. The
purpose of site plan design review is to provide a process to review proposals
to verify that compliance with the property development standards of the NC
zone under section
10-4C-7 of this article will be met, along with any other applicable provisions
of this code, or the comprehensive plan.
   A.   Permitted Uses: In the NC zone, site plan design review for a use
permitted outright or for a use permitted subject to standards shall follow the
public notice and review procedures in subsections
10-14-2B and \B of this title for a type II decision, and the notice of
decision requirements under section
10-14-8 of this title.
   B.   Conditional Uses: Site plan design review shall be incorporated into
the type III review process required for all conditional uses permitted in the
NC zone. A type III decision includes the procedures under subsection 10-14-6C,
and sections
10-14-7 and
10-14-8 of this title.
   C.   Application Requirements: An application for site plan design review
only, or in conjunction with a conditional use request, shall include the
information and materials listed under section 10-14-4 of this title. (Ord.
799, 11-3-2015)
ARTICLE D.  GENERAL COMMERCIAL (GC)
SECTION:
10-4D-1: Purpose And Intent
10-4D-2: Interpretation Of Uses
10-4D-3: Uses Permitted Outright
10-4D-4: Uses Permitted Subject To Special Standards
10-4D-5: Conditional Uses Permitted
10-4D-6: Temporary Uses Permitted
10-4D-7: Property Development Standards
10-4D-8: General Commercial Gateway Subdistrict
10-4D-9: Site Plan Design Review Requirements And Procedures
10-4D-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the general commercial (GC) zone is to provide for commercial
uses up to fifty thousand (50,000) square feet in size and generally requiring
medium to large sites in areas that rely primarily on vehicle traffic and high
visibility and which can accommodate all required parking and other associated
activities on site. The intent of the GC zone is to allow for a broad range of
commercial retail and service uses in a manner that aesthetically enhances the
site and the surrounding area and that may include indoor and outdoor storage
or display of goods. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4D-2: INTERPRETATION OF USES:
   A.   Types Of Uses: Within the GC zone, uses are classified as "permitted",
"permitted with standards", and "conditional". Further, uses are functionally
classified by the description of the particular activity (such as "single-
family residence") or by the general category with reference to the "North
American industry classification system" (NAICS). Permitted and conditional
uses shall be of a size and scale to meet the purpose and intent of the GC
zone.
   B.   North American Industry Classification System (NAICS): Uses
functionally classified with reference to the NAICS are described with the
NAICS index number. Some activities, otherwise included under the NAICS
category, may be specifically excluded by this article. The excluded activity
will be placed in the general NAICS category, but identified by the preceding
words - "but (or and) excluding". For example, "food store (54), but excluding
freezer and locker meat provisioners".
   C.   Interpretation Of Uses: Where a use is not described with reference to
the NAICS or otherwise defined in section 10-1-6 of this title, the words of
this zoning ordinance describing such use are to be given their ordinarily
accepted meaning, except where the context in which they are used otherwise
clearly requires.
   D.   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specifically identified as permitted,
permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted within the zone, or
otherwise allowed through interpretation, shall be considered prohibited uses.
A use specifically permitted in one zone, but not another, shall not be
interpreted as being permitted in another zone under a different
classification. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4D-3: USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT:
The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright in the GC
zone subject to the property development standards of the GC zone, and the site
plan design review requirements and procedures under sections
10-4D-7,
10-4D-8 and
10-4D-9 of this article:
   A.   Drive-through window for any use.
   B.   Specialty trade contractors (238).
   C.   Automobile dealers (4411) and other motor vehicle dealers (4412).
   D.   Automotive parts, accessories, and tire stores (44131).
   E.   Furniture and home furnishings (442).
   F.   Electronic and appliance stores (443).
   G.   Building materials and supplies dealers (4441).
   H.   Lawn and garden equipment and supplies stores (4442).
   I.   Grocery stores (4451).
   J.   Specialty food stores (4452).
   K.   Beer, wine and liquor stores (4453).
   L.   Health and personal care stores (4461); examples include pharmacies,
drugstores, beauty supplies and optical goods stores.
   M.   Clothing stores (4481).
   N.   Shoe stores (4482).
   O.   Jewelry, luggage, and leather goods stores (4483).
   P.   Sporting goods, hobby, and musical instruments stores (4511).
   Q.   Bookstores and news dealers (4512).
   R.   Miscellaneous store retailers (453); examples include florists, office
supplies, pet and pet supplies stores, art dealers and tobacco stores.
   S.   Taxi and limousine service (4853).
   T.   Motor vehicle towing (48841).
   U.   Information industries - except internet (51); examples include
publishing industries, motion picture and sound recording industries, radio and
television broadcasting and data processing, hosting and related services.
   V.   Finance and insurance (52).
   W.   Offices of real estate agents and brokers (5312) and activities related
to real estate (5313).
   X.   Rental and leasing services (532) but excluding commercial and
industrial machinery and equipment rental and leasing (5324).
   Y.   Professional, scientific, and technical services (541) but excluding
veterinary services (54194).
   Z.   Management of companies and enterprises (551).
   AA.   Administrative and support services (561) but excluding other support
services (5619).
   BB.   Educational services (611) but excluding 6111, 6112 and 6113.
   CC.   Healthcare services (621) but excluding outpatient care centers (6214)
and ambulance services (62191).
   DD.   Social assistance services (624) limited to the following:
      1.   Individual and family services (6241).
      2.   Vocational rehabilitation services (6243).
   EE.   Performing arts companies (7111).
   FF.   Fitness and recreational sports centers (71394) and bowling centers
(71395).
   GG.   Public recreational park, facility or trail, provided:
      1.   The site is inventoried in the comprehensive plan for park, trail or
other recreational purposes.
      2.   Development of the park, facility or trail will be in accordance
with an adopted master development plan for the park, facility or trail.
   HH.   Food services and drinking places (722).
   II.   Repair and maintenance (811).
   JJ.   Personal care services (8121); examples include barbershops and beauty
salons.
   KK.   Dry cleaning and laundry services (8123) except industrial launderers
(812332).
   LL.   Other personal services (8129) but excluding parking lots and garages
(81293).
   MM.   Grant making, civic, professional, and similar organizations (813) but
excluding religious organizations (8131). (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4D-4: USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO SPECIAL STANDARDS:
The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in the GC zone
subject to the special standards listed for the use thereunder, the property
development standards of the GC zone, and the site plan design review
requirements and procedures under sections
10-4D-7,
10-4D-8 and
10-4D-9 of this article, unless otherwise specified for the use:
   A.   Creation of a new city, county or state road, or realignment of an
existing city, county or state road or any portion thereof and which does not
involve a land partition, subject to the following:
      1.   The road or realignment complies with applicable street standards,
as specified in the comprehensive plan or other implementing ordinances and the
city's public works standards, for the existing or intended street
classification.
      2.   Review for compliance with the requirements under subsection A1 of
this section, shall be subject to the procedures and requirements for a type
III decision.
      3.   The use is subject to inspections, as determined by the city public
works director, to certify that all improvements have been constructed to city
standards.
   B.   Department stores (45211) and other general merchandise stores (45299)
subject to the following standard:
      1.   The use is limited to a maximum of forty thousand (40,000) square
feet.
   C.   Couriers and express delivery services (4921), subject to the following
standards:
      1.   Delivery vehicles will not exceed more than twenty thousand (20,000)
pounds' GVW.
      2.   The use will not operate more than twenty (20) delivery vehicles.
      3.   All loading and unloading of delivery items will occur on site.
   D.   Local messengers and local delivery (4922), subject to the following
standards:
      1.   Delivery vehicles will not exceed eight thousand (8,000) pounds'
GVW.
      2.   Delivery vehicles are clearly marked with the name of the company,
business address and telephone number that allow for easy identification.
   E.   Local utility distribution facilities (see section 10-1-6,
"Definitions", of this title), subject to the following:
      1.   A permit for the proposed distribution line or facility has been
obtained from the public works director in accordance with the requirements of
title 7 of this code, prior to construction. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4D-5: CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
The following conditional uses are permitted in the GC zone subject to
compliance with the property development standards of the GC zone, the decision
criteria and any additional applicable standards in chapter 12 of this title
specific to the use, and the site plan design review requirements and
procedures under sections
10-4D-7,
10-4D-8 and
10-4D-9 of this article.
The applicant bears the burden of proof for demonstrating, based on factual
information and arguments, how the proposed use complies with all standards and
decision criteria upon which the planning commission must base its decision.
   A.   Residential use on the second floor or above, provided the ground floor
is occupied by or readily available for commercial use.
   B.   Motor vehicle and motor vehicle parts and supplies merchant wholesalers
(4231).
   C.   Household appliance and electrical and electric goods merchant
wholesalers (4236).
   D.   Hardware, and plumbing and heating equipment and supplies merchant
wholesalers (4237).
   E.   Machinery, equipment and supplies merchant wholesalers (4238).
   F.   Miscellaneous durable goods merchant wholesalers (4239).
   G.   Paper and paper products merchant wholesalers (4241).
   H.   Drugs and druggists' sundries merchant wholesalers (4242).
   I.   Apparel, piece goods, and notions merchant wholesalers (4243).
   J.   Grocery and related product merchant wholesalers (4244).
   K.   Beer, wine, and distilled alcoholic beverage merchant wholesalers
(42483).
   L.   Miscellaneous nondurable goods merchant wholesalers (4249).
   M.   Wholesale electronic markets and agents and brokers (4251).
   N.   Adult entertainment business or use (see section 10-1-6, "Definitions",
of this title), subject to the following:
      1.   The use will not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a
private or public elementary, middle or high school.
      2.   The use will not be located within six hundred feet (600') of a
similar adult entertainment business or use.
      3.   The distance referred to in subsections N1 and N2 of this section
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures
or obstructions, from the closest point of the property containing the adult
entertainment business or use to the closest point of the protected property.
   O.   Gasoline stations (4471), subject to the following standards:
      1.   The minimum area for a gasoline service station site is fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet; the maximum area is thirty thousand (30,000)
square feet.
      2.   The maximum street frontage for a gasoline service station site on a
corner lot shall be one hundred twenty feet (120').
      3.   A service station shall not be constructed within six hundred forty
(640) linear feet of any part of a building housing another gasoline service
station.
   P.   Medical marijuana dispensary or marijuana retailer (see section
10-1-6, "Definitions", of this title), subject to the following:
      1.   The use will not be located at the same address as a registered grow
site.
      2.   The use will not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a
private or public elementary, middle or high school, public library or
designated city park.
      3.   The use will not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of
another medical marijuana dispensary or marijuana retailer.
      4.   The distance referred to in subsections P2 and P3 of this section
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures
or obstructions, from the closest point of the property containing the
marijuana dispensary or related facility to the closest point of the protected
property.
   Q.   General freight trucking, local (48411).
   R.   Postal service (4911).
   S.   Warehousing and storage (4931), subject to the following standard:
      1.   The maximum site area is limited to ninety thousand (90,000) square
feet.
   T.   Commercial and industrial machinery and equipment rental and leasing
(5324), subject to the following standard:
      1.   The maximum site area is limited to sixty thousand (60,000) square
feet.
   U.   Veterinary services (54194).
   V.   Other support services, administrative (5619).
   W.   Outpatient care centers (6214).
   X.   Ambulance services (62191).
   Y.   Hospitals (622).
   Z.   Nursing and residential care facilities (623).
   AA.   Community food, housing, emergency and other relief services (6242).
   BB.   Child daycare services (6244).
   CC.   Museums, historical sites, and similar institutions (7121).
   DD.   Amusement arcades (7131).
   EE.   Gambling industries (7132).
   FF.   Other amusement and recreation industries (71399).
   GG.   Public recreational park, facility or trail not identified in the
comprehensive plan and included within a master development plan.
   HH.   Traveler accommodations (7211) but excluding other traveler
accommodations (72119).
   II.   RV parks and recreational camps (7212).
   JJ.   Death care services (8122) but excluding cemeteries (81222).
   KK.   Parking lots and garages (81293).
   LL.   Religious organizations (8131).
   MM.   Public administration and government facilities and support services
(92).
   NN.   Multi-tenant commercial/office building (see section
10-1-6, "Definitions", of this title).
   OO.   Major utility facilities (see section
10-1-6, "Definitions", of this title).
   PP.   Mobile food vendor pods (722330).  (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015; amd. Ord.
836, 6-4-2019)
10-4D-6: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Reserved. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4D-7: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards apply to all new developments in
the GC zone and are intended to provide a consistent development pattern that
ensures a safe, orderly, efficient, economically viable and aesthetically
pleasing environment throughout each zone district.
Existing developed properties are expected to meet these requirements to the
extent reasonably possible. Similar to findings that demonstrate how a
development proposal meets applicable standards, findings shall also justify
why a proposal is not able to meet applicable standards for existing developed
properties or structures. Cost may be considered, but shall not be the sole
determinant if the cost is reasonable within the overall scope of the
development proposal.
   A.   Basic Site Development Standards:
      1.   Minimum Lot Size And Lot Width; Building Setbacks; Maximum Building
Height And Site Coverage:
 
Minimum lot or parcel size:         5,000 square feet
 Minimum lot width                  50 feet
Minimum yard setbacks:
 Front yard                         10 feet
 Side yard                          0 feet or 20 feet if adjacent to a
                                    residential district
 Street side yard                   10 feet
 Rear yard                          0 feet or 20 feet if adjacent to a
                                    residential district
Parking space                       10 feet wide; see chapter 9 of this title
                                    for parking standards
                                    35 feet; maximum building height may be
Maximum building height             adjusted through the site review process if
                                    approved by the Umatilla rural fire
                                    protection district
Maximum site coverage (building and 90 percent
impervious surface)
 
   B.   Site Development Impact Standards:
      1.   Traffic Impact Analysis: A traffic impact analysis meeting the
requirements under subsection 10-11-10C of this title shall be required to be
submitted to the city with a land use application, when the community
development director determines that the application involves one or more of
the following actions:
         a.   A change in zoning or plan amendment designation; or
         b.   The proposal is projected to cause one or more of the following
effects, which can be determined by field counts, site observation, traffic
impact analysis or study, field measurements, crash history, Institute Of
Transportation Engineers' "Trip Generation Manual"; and information and studies
provided by the local reviewing jurisdiction and/or ODOT:
            (1)   An increase in site traffic volume generation by two hundred
fifty (250) average daily trips (ADT) or more (or as required by the city
engineer). The latest edition of the "Trip Generation Manual", published by the
Institute Of Transportation Engineers (ITE) shall be used as standards by which
to gauge average daily vehicle trips; or
            (2)   An increase in use of adjacent streets by vehicles exceeding
the twenty thousand (20,000) pounds' gross vehicle weight by ten (10) vehicles
or more per day; or
            (3)   The location of the access driveway does not meet minimum
intersection sight distance requirements, or is located where vehicles entering
or leaving the property are restricted, or vehicles queue or hesitate, creating
a safety hazard; or
            (4)   The location of the access driveway does not meet the access
spacing standard of the roadway on which the driveway is located; or
            (5)   A change in internal traffic patterns that may cause safety
problems, such as backup onto the highway or traffic crashes in the approach
area.
      2.   Floodplain, Wetland And Riparian Areas: See chapter 7 of this title
and title 12 of this code.
The requirements under chapter 7 of this title and title 12 of this code are
triggered when development is proposed within a designated floodplain or
riparian area as identified by the official flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
prepared by the U.S. federal emergency management agency (FEMA); or when
property contains wetland areas as identified on the national wetlands
inventory (NWI) map prepared by the U.S. fish and wildlife service (USFWS).
      3.   Stormwater Surface Drainage:
         a.   Surface water runoff shall be handled on site through the use of
landscaped areas, grassy swales or similar natural features to the extent
reasonably feasible. Where surface water runoff cannot be entirely managed on
site, adequate provisions shall be made so that runoff will not adversely
affect the use of adjoining or downstream properties, unless a drainage
easement has been obtained.
         b.   Where it is anticipated by the city public works director that
the additional runoff resulting from a proposed development will overload an
existing drainage facility, the city shall withhold approval of the development
until provisions have been made for improvement of the potential condition or
until provisions have been made for storage of additional runoff caused by the
development in accordance with city standards.
         c.   In order to accommodate upstream drainage, culverts and other
drainage facilities shall be large enough to accommodate existing and potential
future runoff from the entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside
the development. Such facilities shall be subject to review and approval by the
city public works director.
      4.   Vehicle Access, Driveway And Circulation Standards:
         a.   New Vehicle Access Connections: New access connections shall not
be permitted within the functional area (see section 10-1-6, "Definitions", of
this title) of an intersection or interchange as defined by the connection
spacing standards of this title, the comprehensive plan and public works
standards, unless no other reasonable access to the property is available. See
also subsection 10-11-4C of this title regarding vision clearance areas.
         b.   Access Connections: Where no other alternative exists, the city
may allow construction of an access connection along the property line farthest
from the intersection. In such cases, directional connections (i.e., right in/
out, right in only, or right out only) may be required.
         c.   Cross Access Drives, Pedestrian Access: Adjacent commercial or
office properties such as shopping plazas and office parks that are major
traffic generators shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to
allow circulation between sites.
         d.   Separation Distance: The city may reduce the required separation
distance of access points where they prove impractical, provided all of the
following requirements are met:
            (1)   Joint access driveways and cross access easements are
provided.
            (2)   The site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation
system.
            (3)   The property owner enters into a written agreement with the
city, recorded with the deed, that preexisting connections on the site will be
closed and eliminated after construction of each side of a joint use driveway.
            (4)   The city may modify or waive the requirements of this section
where the characteristics or layout of abutting properties would make a
development of a unified or shared access and circulation system impractical.
         e.   Phased Developments: Development sites under the same ownership
or consolidated for the purpose of development and comprising more than one
building site, shall be reviewed as a single property for the purpose of
complying with access standards. The number of access points permitted shall be
the minimum number necessary to provide reasonable access to the site, not the
minimum for that frontage.
         f.   Corner Lots: Corner lots shall be required to locate motor
vehicle accesses on the street with the lower functional classification when
feasible provided such access will not be located within the functional area of
the intersection. This requirement may be waived or modified when a commercial
use would be required to take access from a street in a residential
neighborhood.
         g.   Nonconforming Access Features: Legal access connections in place
when this title was adopted that do not conform with the standards herein are
considered nonconforming features and shall be brought into compliance with
applicable standards when new access connection permits are requested or when
there is a change in use or enlargement or improvement that will increase trip
generation.
      5.   Driveway Standards:
         a.   If the driveway is one-way in or out, the minimum width shall be
ten feet (10') and appropriate sign(s) designating the driveway as a one-way
connection shall be provided.
         b.   For two-way accesses, each lane shall have a minimum width of ten
feet (10'). The maximum width for a driveway access, including both lanes, is
thirty five feet (35') for both lanes.
         c.   The length of a driveway shall be designed in accordance with the
anticipated storage length of entering and exiting vehicles to prevent vehicles
from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing unsafe
conflicts with on site circulation.
      6.   Utilities: All electrical, telephone and cable television utility
service installations or connections made as part of new construction of a
building or structure shall be underground in accordance with city standards.
      7.   Easements: An applicant should discuss with the city planning
official the likelihood that any easement will be required prior to making
application. When an easement is required based on findings that justify the
easement, the following standards shall apply:
         a.   Pedestrian Easements: In order to facilitate pedestrian access
from streets, lots, or developments to schools, parks, nearby streets, or other
developments, an easement no less than ten feet (10') wide with a paved pathway
no less than six feet (6') shall be required. Any sight obscuring barrier such
as a fence or planting at the edge of the easement shall not exceed three feet
(3') in height in order to maintain visibility of the walkway from adjacent
properties.
         b.   Open Space Easements: An open space easement may be required over
areas in private ownership of the floodplain or areas with unique natural
conditions. Such easement shall preclude development of the area when limiting
the use of a property is determined to be in the public interest.
         c.   General Public Easements: When topography or other conditions
make impractical the location of drainage facilities, sanitary sewer or water
lines within the public street right of way, an unobstructed easement shall be
provided across a property. Easements shall be of sufficient width to safely
excavate buried facilities, but generally shall be no less than fifteen feet
(15') in width.
   C.   Special Site And Building Design Standards:
      1.   Building Orientation And Architectural Features:
         a.   The primary building and entry shall be oriented toward the
fronting street. On corner lots, building entrances shall face the primary
fronting street or the corner.
         b.   The primary building shall incorporate ground floor windows along
the fronting street facades, with at least twenty percent (20%) of the fronting
wall consisting of display areas, windows or doorways.
         c.   Building facades facing a street shall include changes in relief
such as cornices, columns, gables, bay windows, recessed entryways, or similar
architectural or decorative elements.
         d.   A drive-through window or use shall be oriented to the side or
rear of a building and shall be designed to minimize conflicts with pedestrians
and vehicles.
      2.   Off Street Parking, Loading And Unloading: See chapter 9 of this
title for specific design standards for parking spaces and parking areas.
         a.   Off street parking shall not be located within five feet (5') of
a property line separating the subject property from a public street.
         b.   Existing or proposed off street parking areas between the front
or side of a building and the public right of way shall be separated from the
right of way with a minimum three foot (3') wide landscape strip (see landscape
requirements).
         c.   Parking bumpers shall be set at least six feet (6') from the
right of way for parking spaces established perpendicular to the right of way.
Parking bumpers shall be securely fastened to the ground.
         d.   A designated area (or areas) for loading and/or unloading of
materials or freight shall be provided to ensure all such activities occur
entirely on site.
         e.   Parking or loading areas which abut a residential zone along a
rear or side property line shall be separated from the property line by a five
foot (5') wide landscaped area and a six foot (6') high fence or wall to buffer
the residential property.
      3.   Bicycle And Pedestrian Facilities And Easements:
         a.   Bicycle or pedestrian easements and/or improvements may be
required if a portion of the subject property is included in the comprehensive
plan as necessary to complete a planned bicycle or pedestrian pathway or trail,
or to accommodate a portion thereof; or if findings justify the need to address
anticipated impacts from the proposed development.
         b.   Developments shall provide an on site pedestrian circulation
system that connects building entrances, public sidewalks, bicycle and
automobile parking areas, and parts of the site or abutting properties that may
attract pedestrians. Walkways shall maintain a clear width of at least five
feet (5') and shall be separated from vehicles by curbs, raised bumpers,
planter strips or similar barriers. Walkways through parking areas or crossing
driveways shall be clearly identified by a different material or pavement
markings, or both. Walkways shall be in clearly visible locations to promote
safety. Walkways shall be hard surfaced.
      4.   Landscaping, Lighting And Outdoor Storage:
         a.   At least ten percent (10%) of the site shall be landscaped. A
minimum three foot (3') wide landscape strip along street frontages and
building fronts must be included in the landscape plan to accommodate surface
water runoff from the site and to enhance the street appearance of the
development.
         b.   Landscaping shall include ground cover material such as
decorative rock, bark or lawn, and at least two (2) of the following landscape
elements: flowers, decorative shrubs, trees, boulders or decorative lighting.
         c.   Landscaped areas shall be provided with automatic irrigation
unless a letter from a licensed landscape architect is submitted with the
landscape plan certifying that the selected landscape plants will survive
without irrigation.
         d.   Parking areas shall be landscaped as prescribed in subsection
10-9-2D of this title.
         e.   Lighting may be required on the site, such as between parking
areas and buildings or along walkways, based on findings that justify the need
to protect the public health, safety or welfare. All on site lighting shall be
shielded to prevent off site glare or nuisance to traffic or neighboring
properties.
         f.   Outdoor storage and garbage collection areas shall be entirely
screened with a six foot (6') high sight obscuring fence, wall or vegetation.
Outdoor storage and garbage collection areas shall not be permitted within a
required vision clearance area.
         g.   Annual renewal of a business license for a commercial use shall
be contingent upon satisfactory maintenance of landscaped areas approved as
part of the site plan or conditional use review for the use.
      5.   Vision Clearance Area And Fences: See section
10-11-4 and subsection
10-11-1B of this title.
      6.   Signs: See
title 8, chapter 2 of this code. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4D-8: GENERAL COMMERCIAL GATEWAY SUBDISTRICT:
The purpose of the general commercial gateway subdistrict is to implement
provisions of the interchange area management plan (IAMP) including the
realignment of Brownell Boulevard and the future redevelopment of the port of
entry site following its planned eventual relocation through the use of
measures intended to limit high volume traffic generating uses, carefully
manage accesses, and to improve the aesthetic "gateway" nature of the area
through attractive landscaping, lighting and other visual enhancement measures.
   A.   Applicability: The provisions of this section shall be applicable only
to development on the port of entry site (5N28E17AD tax lot 100; 5N28E17AA tax
lot 701; 5N28E16BB tax lots 8700, 8600, 8200, 8000, 7800; 5N28E16BC tax lot
100).
The provisions and requirements of the general commercial zone shall be
applicable to this site, except as modified in this section.
   B.   Development Approval: Development proposals within the general
commercial gateway subdistrict must reflect and implement the realignment of
Brownell Boulevard as planned for in the I-82/U.S. 730 interchange area
management plan (IAMP). Narratives, plans and drawings submitted pursuant to
section 10-4D-9 of this article for development proposals within the gateway
subdistrict must collectively address the location, timing and financing of the
realignment of Brownell Boulevard through the site, consistent with the IAMP.
   C.   Conditional Uses Permitted: In the gateway subdistrict, the following
uses and their accessory uses may be permitted subject to the provisions of
chapter 12 of this title:
Drive-through uses.
   D.   Uses Prohibited: The following uses are prohibited in the general
commercial gateway subdistrict:
Adult entertainment business or use (see section
10-1-6, "Definitions", of this title).
Any use related to the production, processing or retail sale of marijuana for
recreational or medical use, including medical marijuana dispensaries.
Automobile service station.
Commercial uses that are not conducted wholly within an enclosed building,
including uses that require outdoor storage or display of products such as
lumberyards and plant nurseries. Outdoor seating that is secondary to an eating
establishment use is an exception and shall be permitted.
Junkyard (scrap yard, recycling station).
Manufactured home sales.
Modular home sales.
Motor vehicle sales lots, including recreational vehicle sales.
Self-service storage.
Tire store.
Truck stop.
Vehicle repair.
   E.   Development Standards:
      1.   Setbacks:
         a.   Maximum Front And Side Yard Setback: Ten feet (10').
         b.   Minimum Setback: Zero feet (0').
         c.   Build-To Line: Zero feet (0'). At least one primary building
entrance shall be built no farther from the street right of way than the build-
to line; except where a greater setback is required for a planned street
improvement, then the build-to line increases proportionately. The build-to
line may be increased through site review when pedestrian amenities are
provided between a primary building entrance and the street right of way.
      2.   Building Orientation: Buildings shall have at least one primary
entrance oriented toward the street. New buildings located adjacent to the
realigned Brownell Boulevard shall be designed with building fronts, which
include display windows, facing the street.
      3.   Maximum Building Height: Thirty five feet (35').
         a.   Maximum building height may be adjusted through the site review
process if approved by the Umatilla rural fire protection district.
      4.   Parking: Parking shall not be located between the building and a
public street.
      5.   Landscaping:
         a.   Landscaping Requirements: A minimum of ten percent (10%) of lot
area shall be devoted to landscaping. The minimum dimension of any landscaped
area shall be five feet (5'). Landscaping shall be located between a structure
and the fronting street, or as best provides a pleasant environment for
pedestrians. Required landscaping in parking areas may contribute to the ten
percent (10%) requirement.
         b.   Parking Areas: A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the total
surface area of all parking areas, as measured around the perimeter of all
parking spaces and maneuvering areas, shall be landscaped. Such landscaping
shall consist of "evenly distributed" shade trees and shrubs and/or ground
cover plants. "Evenly distributed" means that the trees and other plants are
distributed around the parking lot perimeter and between parking bays to
provide a partial canopy. At a minimum, one tree per six (6) parking spaces on
average shall be planted to create a partial tree canopy over and around the
parking area. All parking areas with more than twenty (20) spaces shall include
landscape islands with trees to break up the parking area into rows of not more
than twelve (12) contiguous parking spaces. All parking area landscapes shall
have dimensions of not less than twenty four (24) square feet of area, or not
less than four feet (4') in width by six feet (6') in length, to ensure
adequate soil, water, and space for healthy plant growth.
         c.   Vegetative Requirements: At least seventy five percent (75%) of
the required landscape area must be covered by plant material, lawn, and trees.
Pedestrian amenities, such as benches, plazas, fountains, and sculptures, may
replace up to ten percent (10%) of the required vegetative area.
         d.   Irrigation: Maintained landscaped areas shall be provided with
automatic irrigation unless a qualified landscape professional certifies that
plants will survive without irrigation.
      6.   Lighting:
         a.   Parking areas shall have lighting to provide at least two (2)
foot-candles of illumination over parking spaces and walkways. Light standards
shall be directed downward only and shielded to prevent lighting spillover into
any adjacent residential district or use.
         b.   Pedestrian oriented lighting shall be required on the Brownell
Boulevard realignment. Lighting shall be similar in scale and design to example
shown in figure 10-1 on file in the city.
         c.   Lighting fixtures shall be limited to heights of twenty four feet
(24') for parking lots and sixteen feet (16') for pedestrian walkways. (Ord.
799, 11-3-2015)
10-4D-9: SITE PLAN DESIGN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
All uses permitted in the GC zone are subject to site plan design review. The
purpose of site plan design review is to provide a process to review proposals
to verify that compliance with the property development standards of the GC
zone under sections
10-4D-7 and
10-4D-8 of this article will be met, along with any other applicable provisions
of this code, or the comprehensive plan.
   A.   Permitted Uses: In the GC zone, site plan design review for a use
permitted outright or for a use permitted subject to standards shall follow the
public notice and review procedures in subsections 10-14-2B and 10-14-6B of
this title for a type II decision, and the notice of decision requirements
under section 10-14-8 of this title.
   B.   Conditional Uses: Site plan design review shall be incorporated into
the type III review process required for all conditional uses permitted in the
GC zone. A type III decision includes the procedures under subsection 10-14-6C,
and sections
10-14-7 and
10-14-8 of this title.
   C.   Application Requirements: An application for site plan design review
only, or in conjunction with a conditional use request, shall include the
information and materials listed under section 10-14-4 of this title. (Ord.
799, 11-3-2015)
ARTICLE E.  HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL (HC)
SECTION:
10-4E-1: Purpose And Intent
10-4E-2: Interpretation Of Uses
10-4E-3: Uses Permitted Outright
10-4E-4: Uses Permitted Subject To Standards
10-4E-5: Conditional Uses Permitted
10-4E-6: Temporary Uses Permitted
10-4E-7: Property Development Standards
10-4E-8: Site Plan Design Review Requirements And Procedures
10-4E-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the highway commercial (HC) zone is to provide for commercial
uses, including those exceeding fifty thousand (50,000) square feet, and
generally requiring large sites in areas that rely primarily on vehicle traffic
and high visibility and which can accommodate all required parking and other
associated activities on site. The intent of the HC zone is to allow for a full
range of commercial retail, wholesale and service uses in a manner that
aesthetically enhances the site and the surrounding area and that may include
indoor and outdoor storage or display of goods. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4E-2: INTERPRETATION OF USES:
   A.   Types Of Uses: Within the HC zone, uses are classified as "permitted",
"permitted with standards", and "conditional". Further, uses are functionally
classified by the description of the particular activity (such as "single-
family residence") or by the general category with reference to the "North
American industry classification system" (NAICS). Permitted and conditional
uses shall be of a size and scale to meet the purpose and intent of the HC
zone.
   B.   North American Industry Classification System (NAICS): Uses
functionally classified with reference to the NAICS are described with the
NAICS index number. Some activities, otherwise included under the NAICS
category, may be specifically excluded by this article. The excluded activity
will be placed in the general NAICS category, but identified by the preceding
words - "but (or and) excluding". For example, "food store (54), but excluding
freezer and locker meat provisioners".
   C.   Interpretation Of Uses: Where a use is not described with reference to
the NAICS or otherwise defined in section 10-1-6 of this title, the words of
this zoning ordinance describing such use are to be given their ordinarily
accepted meaning, except where the context in which they are used otherwise
clearly requires.
   D.   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specifically identified as permitted,
permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted within the zone, or
otherwise allowed through interpretation, shall be considered prohibited uses.
A use specifically permitted in one zone, but not another, shall not be
interpreted as being permitted in another zone under a different
classification. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4E-3: USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT:
The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in the HC zone
subject to the property development standards of the HC zone, and the site plan
design review requirements and procedures under sections
10-4E-7 and
10-4E-8 of this article:
   A.   Specialty trade contractors (238).
   B.   Automobile dealers (4411) and other motor vehicle dealers (4412).
   C.   Automotive parts, accessories and tire stores (4413).
   D.   Furniture and home furnishings (442).
   E.   Electronic and appliance stores (443).
   F.   Building materials and supplies dealers (4441).
   G.   Lawn and garden equipment and supplies stores (4442).
   H.   Grocery stores (4451) and specialty food stores (4452).
   I.   Beer, wine and liquor stores (4453).
   J.   Health and personal care stores (4461).
   K.   Clothing stores (4481), shoe stores (4482) and jewelry, luggage and
leather goods stores (4483).
   L.   Sporting goods, hobby, and musical instruments stores (4511).
   M.   Bookstores and news dealers (4512).
   N.   Department stores (45211) and other general merchandise stores (45291).
   O.   Miscellaneous store retailers (453).
   P.   Taxi and limousine service (4853).
   Q.   Motor vehicle towing (48841).
   R.   Couriers and express delivery services (4921) and local messengers and
local delivery (4922).
   S.   Information industries - except internet (51).
   T.   Finance and insurance (52).
   U.   Real estate (531).
   V.   Rental and leasing services (532).
   W.   Professional, scientific, and technical services (541) except
veterinary services (54194).
   X.   Administrative and support services (561).
   Y.   Educational services (611).
   Z.   Healthcare services (621) but excluding outpatient care centers (6214)
and ambulance services (62191).
   AA.   Social assistance services (624) limited to the following:
      1.   Individual and family services (6241).
      2.   Vocational rehabilitation services (6243).
   BB.   Performing arts companies (7111).
   CC.   Fitness and recreational sports centers (71394).
   DD.   Bowling centers (71395).
   EE.   Public recreational park, facility or trail, provided:
      1.   The site is inventoried in the comprehensive plan for park, trail or
other recreational purposes.
      2.   Development of the park, facility or trail will be in accordance
with an adopted master development plan for the park, facility or trail.
   FF.   Hotels (72111).
   GG.   Food services and drinking places (722).
   HH.   Repair and maintenance (811).
   II.   Personal care services (8121 - examples include barbershops and beauty
salons).
   JJ.   Death care services (8122) but excluding cemeteries (81222).
   KK.   Dry cleaning and laundry services (8123) except industrial launderers
(812332).
   LL.   Other personal services (8129) limited to the following:
      1.   Pet care (except veterinary) services (81291).
      2.   Photofinishing (81292).
   MM.   Grant making, civic, professional, and similar organizations (813) but
excluding religious organizations (8131). (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4E-4: USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO STANDARDS:
The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in the HC zone
subject to the standards listed thereunder, the property development standards
of the HC zone, and the site plan design review requirements and procedures
under sections
10-4E-7 and
10-4E-8 of this article, unless otherwise specified for the use:
   A.   Creation of a new city, county or state road, or realignment of an
existing city, county or state road or any portion thereof and which does not
involve a land partition, subject to the following:
      1.   The road or realignment complies with applicable street standards,
as specified in the comprehensive plan or other implementing ordinances and the
city's public works standards, for the existing or intended street
classification.
      2.   Review for compliance with the requirements under subsection A1 of
this section, shall be subject to the procedures and requirements for a type
III decision.
      3.   The use is subject to inspections, as determined by the city public
works director, to certify that all improvements have been constructed to city
standards.
   B.   Gasoline stations (4471) subject to the following standards:
      1.   The minimum area for a gasoline service station site is fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet; the maximum area is thirty thousand (30,000)
square feet.
      2.   The maximum street frontage for a gasoline service station site on a
corner lot shall be one hundred twenty feet (120').
      3.   A service station shall not be constructed within six hundred forty
(640) linear feet of any part of a building housing another gasoline service
station.
   C.   General freight trucking, local (48411) subject to the following
standard:
      1.   The maximum site area is limited to ninety thousand (90,000) square
feet.
   D.   Warehousing and storage (4931) subject to the following standard:
      1.   The maximum site area is limited to one hundred twenty thousand
(120,000) square feet.
   E.   Local utility distribution facilities (see section 10-1-6,
"Definitions", of this title), subject to the following:
      1.   A permit for the proposed distribution line or facility has been
obtained from the public works director in accordance with the requirements of
title 7 of this code, prior to construction. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4E-5: CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
The following conditional uses are permitted in the HC zone subject to the
property development standards of the HC zone, the decision criteria and any
additional applicable standards in chapter 12 of this title specific to the
use, and the site plan design review requirements and procedures under sections
10-4E-7 and
10-4E-8 of this article.
The applicant bears the burden of proof for demonstrating, based on factual
information and arguments, how the proposed use complies with all standards and
decision criteria upon which the planning commission must base its decision.
   A.   Motor vehicle and motor vehicle parts and supplies merchant wholesalers
(4231).
   B.   Furniture and home furnishing merchant wholesalers (4232).
   C.   Lumber and other construction materials merchant wholesalers (4233).
   D.   Professional and commercial equipment and supplies merchant wholesalers
(4234).
   E.   Household appliances and electrical and electronic goods merchant
wholesalers (4236).
   F.   Hardware, and plumbing and heating equipment and supplies merchant
wholesalers (4237).
   G.   Machinery, equipment, and supplies merchant wholesalers (4238).
   H.   Miscellaneous durable goods merchant wholesalers (4239), except
recyclable material merchant wholesalers (42393).
   I.   Paper and paper products merchant wholesalers (4241).
   J.   Drugs and druggists' sundries merchant wholesalers (4242).
   K.   Apparel, piece goods, and notions merchant wholesalers (4243).
   L.   Grocery and related product merchant wholesalers (4244).
   M.   Beer, wine, and distilled alcoholic beverage merchant wholesalers
(4248).
   N.   Miscellaneous nondurable goods merchant wholesalers (4249).
   O.   Wholesale electronic markets and agents and brokers (4251).
   P.   Adult entertainment business or use (see section 10-1-6, "Definitions",
of this title), subject to the following:
      1.   The use will not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a
private or public elementary, middle or high school.
      2.   The use will not be located within six hundred feet (600') of a
similar adult entertainment business or use.
      3.   The distance referred to in subsections P1 and P2 of this section
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures
or obstructions, from the closest point of the property containing the adult
entertainment business or use to the closest point of the protected property.
   Q.   Warehouse clubs and supercenters (45291).
   R.   Medical marijuana dispensary or marijuana retailer (see section
10-1-6, "Definitions", of this title), subject to the following:
      1.   The use will not be located at the same address as a registered grow
site.
      2.   The use will not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a
private or public elementary, middle or high school, public library or
designated city park.
      3.   The use will not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of
another medical marijuana dispensary or marijuana retailer.
      4.   The distance referred to in subsections R2 and R3 of this section
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures
or obstructions, from the closest point of the property containing the
marijuana dispensary or related facility to the closest point of the protected
property.
   S.   General freight trucking, long distance (48412).
   T.   Specialized freight trucking (4842).
   U.   Postal service (4911).
   V.   Veterinary services (54194).
   W.   Outpatient care centers (6214).
   X.   Ambulance services (62191).
   Y.   Hospitals (622).
   Z.   Nursing and residential care facilities (623).
   AA.   Community food, housing, emergency and other relief services (6242).
   BB.   Child daycare services (6244).
   CC.   Museums, historical sites and similar institutions (7121).
   DD.   Amusement parks and arcades (7131).
   EE.   Gambling industries (7132); examples include bingo halls, off track
betting parlors or gambling device arcades or parlors.
   FF.   Golf course and country clubs (71391).
   GG.   Other amusement and recreations industries (71399).
   HH.   Public recreational park, facility or trail not identified in the
comprehensive plan and included within a master development plan.
   II.   Motels (72111).
   JJ.   RV parks and recreational camps (7212).
   KK.   Death care services (8122) but excluding cemeteries (81222).
   LL.   Parking lots and garages (81293).
   MM.   Religious organizations (8131).
   NN.   Public administration and government facilities and services (92).
   OO.   Multi-tenant commercial/office building (see section
10-1-6, "Definitions", of this title).
   PP.   Major utility facilities (see section
10-1-6, "Definitions", of this title).
   QQ.   Mobile food vendor pods (722330). (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015; amd. Ord. 836,
6-4-2019)
10-4E-6: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Reserved. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4E-7: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards apply to all new developments in
the HC zone and are intended to provide a consistent development pattern that
ensures a safe, orderly, efficient, economically viable and aesthetically
pleasing environment throughout each zone district.
Existing developed properties are expected to meet these requirements to the
extent reasonably possible. Similar to findings that demonstrate how a
development proposal meets applicable standards, findings shall also justify
why a proposal is not able to meet applicable standards for existing developed
properties or structures. Cost may be considered, but shall not be the sole
determinant if the cost is reasonable within the overall scope of the
development proposal.
   A.   Basic Site Development Standards:
      1.   Minimum Lot Size And Lot Width; Building Setbacks; Maximum Building
Height And Site Coverage:
 
Minimum lot or parcel size:         None
 Minimum lot width                  None
Minimum yard setbacks:
 Front yard                         10 feet
 Side yard                          0 feet or 20 feet if adjacent to a
                                    residential district
 Street side yard                   10 feet
 Rear yard                          0 feet or 20 feet if adjacent to a
                                    residential district
Parking space                       10 feet wide; see also chapter 9 of this
                                    title
                                    35 feet; maximum building height may be
Maximum building height             adjusted through the site review process if
                                    approved by the Umatilla rural fire
                                    protection district
Maximum site coverage (building and 90 percent
impervious surface)
 
   B.   Site Development Impact Standards:
      1.   Traffic Impact Analysis: A traffic impact analysis meeting the
requirements under subsection
10-11-10C of this title shall be required to be submitted to the city with a
land use application, when the community development director determines that
the application involves one or more of the following actions:
         a.   A change in zoning or plan amendment designation; or
         b.   The proposal is projected to cause one or more of the following
effects, which can be determined by field counts, site observation, traffic
impact analysis or study, field measurements, crash history, Institute Of
Transportation Engineers' "Trip Generation Manual"; and information and studies
provided by the local reviewing jurisdiction and/or ODOT:
            (1)   An increase in site traffic volume generation by two hundred
fifty (250) average daily trips (ADT) or more (or as required by the city
engineer). The latest edition of the "Trip Generation Manual", published by the
Institute Of Transportation Engineers (ITE) shall be used as standards by which
to gauge average daily vehicle trips; or
            (2)   An increase in use of adjacent streets by vehicles exceeding
the twenty thousand (20,000) pounds' gross vehicle weight by ten (10) vehicles
or more per day; or
            (3)   The location of the access driveway does not meet minimum
intersection sight distance requirements, or is located where vehicles entering
or leaving the property are restricted, or vehicles queue or hesitate, creating
a safety hazard; or
            (4)   The location of the access driveway does not meet the access
spacing standard of the roadway on which the driveway is located; or
            (5)   A change in internal traffic patterns that may cause safety
problems, such as backup onto the highway or traffic crashes in the approach
area.
      2.   Floodplain, Wetland And Riparian Areas: See chapter 7 of this title
and title 12 of this code.
The requirements under chapter 7 of this title and title 12 of this code are
triggered when development is proposed within a designated floodplain or
riparian area as identified by the official flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
prepared by the U.S. federal emergency management agency (FEMA); or when
property contains wetland areas as identified on the national wetlands
inventory (NWI) map prepared by the U.S. fish and wildlife service (USFWS).
      3.   Stormwater Surface Drainage:
         a.   Surface water runoff shall be handled on site through the use of
landscaped areas, grassy swales or similar natural features to the extent
reasonably feasible. Where surface water runoff cannot be entirely managed on
site, adequate provisions shall be made so that runoff will not adversely
affect the use of adjoining or downstream properties, unless a drainage
easement has been obtained.
         b.   Where it is anticipated by the city public works director that
the additional runoff resulting from a proposed development will overload an
existing drainage facility, the city shall withhold approval of the development
until provisions have been made for improvement of the potential condition or
until provisions have been made for storage of additional runoff caused by the
development in accordance with city standards.
         c.   In order to accommodate upstream drainage, culverts and other
drainage facilities shall be large enough to accommodate existing and potential
future runoff from the entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside
the development. Such facilities shall be subject to review and approval by the
city public works director.
      4.   Vehicle Access, Driveway And Circulation Standards:
         a.   New Vehicle Access Connections: New access connections shall not
be permitted within the functional area (see section
10-1-6, "Definitions", of this title) of an intersection or interchange as
defined by the connection spacing standards of this title, the comprehensive
plan and public works standards, unless no other reasonable access to the
property is available. See also subsection
10-11-4C of this title regarding vision clearance areas.
         b.   Access Connections: Where no other alternative exists, the city
may allow construction of an access connection along the property line farthest
from the intersection. In such cases, directional connections (i.e., right in/
out, right in only, or right out only) may be required.
         c.   Cross Access Drives, Pedestrian Access: Adjacent commercial or
office properties such as shopping plazas and office parks that are major
traffic generators shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to
allow circulation between sites.
         d.   Separation Distance: The city may reduce the required separation
distance of access points where they prove impractical, provided all of the
following requirements are met:
            (1)   Joint access driveways and cross access easements are
provided.
            (2)   The site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation
system.
            (3)   The property owner enters into a written agreement with the
city, recorded with the deed, that preexisting connections on the site will be
closed and eliminated after construction of each side of a joint use driveway.
            (4)   The city may modify or waive the requirements of this section
where the characteristics or layout of abutting properties would make a
development of a unified or shared access and circulation system impractical.
         e.   Phased Developments: Development sites under the same ownership
or consolidated for the purpose of development and comprising more than one
building site, shall be reviewed as a single property for the purpose of
complying with access standards. The number of access points permitted shall be
the minimum number necessary to provide reasonable access to the site, not the
minimum for that frontage.
         f.   Corner Lots: Corner lots shall be required to locate motor
vehicle accesses on the street with the lower functional classification when
feasible provided such access will not be located within the functional area of
the intersection. This requirement may be waived or modified when a commercial
use would be required to take access from a street in a residential
neighborhood.
         g.   Nonconforming Access Features: Legal access connections in place
when this title was adopted that do not conform with the standards herein are
considered nonconforming features and shall be brought into compliance with
applicable standards when new access connection permits are requested or when
there is a change in use or enlargement or improvement that will increase trip
generation.
      5.   Driveway Standards:
         a.   If the driveway is one-way in or out, the minimum width shall be
ten feet (10') and appropriate sign(s) designating the driveway as a one-way
connection shall be provided.
         b.   For two-way accesses, each lane shall have a minimum width of ten
feet (10'). The maximum width for a driveway access, including both lanes, is
thirty five feet (35') for both lanes.
         c.   The length of a driveway shall be designed in accordance with the
anticipated storage length of entering and exiting vehicles to prevent vehicles
from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing unsafe
conflicts with on site circulation.
      6.   Utilities: All electrical, telephone and cable television utility
service installations or connections made as part of new construction of a
building or structure shall be underground in accordance with city standards.
      7.   Easements: An applicant should discuss with the city planning
official the likelihood that any easement will be required prior to making
application. When an easement is required based on findings that justify the
easement, the following standards shall apply:
         a.   Pedestrian Easements: In order to facilitate pedestrian access
from streets, lots, or developments to schools, parks, nearby streets, or other
developments, an easement no less than ten feet (10') wide with a paved pathway
no less than six feet (6') shall be required. Any sight obscuring barrier such
as a fence or planting at the edge of the easement shall not exceed three feet
(3') in height in order to maintain visibility of the walkway from adjacent
properties.
         b.   Open Space Easements: An open space easement may be required over
areas in private ownership of the floodplain or areas with unique natural
conditions. Such easement shall preclude development of the area when limiting
the use of a property is determined to be in the public interest.
         c.   General Public Easements: When topography or other conditions
make impractical the location of drainage facilities, sanitary sewer or water
lines within the public street right of way, an unobstructed easement shall be
provided across a property. Easements shall be of sufficient width to safely
excavate buried facilities, but generally shall be no less than fifteen feet
(15') in width.
   C.   Special Site And Building Design Standards:
      1.   Building Orientation And Architectural Features:
         a.   The primary building and entry shall be oriented toward the
fronting street. On corner lots, building entrances shall face the primary
fronting street or the corner.
         b.   The primary building shall incorporate ground floor windows along
the fronting street facades, with at least twenty percent (20%) of the fronting
wall consisting of display areas, windows or doorways.
         c.   Building facades facing a street shall include changes in relief
such as cornices, columns, gables, bay windows, recessed entryways, or similar
architectural or decorative elements.
         d.   A drive-through window or use shall be oriented to the side or
rear of a building and shall be designed to minimize conflicts with pedestrians
and vehicles.
      2.   Off Street Parking, Loading And Unloading: See chapter 9 of this
title for specific design standards for parking spaces and parking areas.
         a.   Off street parking shall not be located within five feet (5') of
a property line separating the subject property from a public street.
         b.   Existing or proposed off street parking areas between a building
and a public street right of way shall be separated from the right of way with
a minimum three foot (3') wide landscape strip (see landscape requirements).
         c.   Parking bumpers shall be set at least six feet (6') from the
right of way for parking spaces established perpendicular to the right of way.
Parking bumpers shall be securely fastened to the ground.
         d.   A designated area (or areas) for loading and/or unloading of
materials or freight shall be provided to ensure all such activities occur
entirely on site.
         e.   Parking or loading areas which abut a residential zone along a
rear or side property line shall be separated from the property line by a six
foot (6') wide landscaped area and a fence or wall six feet (6') in height to
buffer the residential property.
      3.   Bicycle And Pedestrian Facilities And Easements:
         a.   Bicycle or pedestrian easements and/or improvements may be
required if a portion of the subject property is included in the comprehensive
plan as necessary to complete a planned bicycle or pedestrian pathway or trail,
or to accommodate a portion thereof; or if findings justify the need to address
anticipated impacts from the proposed development.
         b.   Developments shall provide an on site pedestrian circulation
system that connects building entrances, public sidewalks, bicycle and
automobile parking areas, and parts of the site or abutting properties that may
attract pedestrians. Walkways shall maintain a clear width of at least five
feet (5') and shall be separated from vehicles by curbs, raised bumpers,
planter strips or similar barriers. Walkways through parking areas or crossing
driveways shall be clearly identified by a different material or pavement
markings, or both. Walkways shall be in clearly visible locations to promote
safety. Walkways shall be hard surfaced.
      4.   Landscaping, Lighting And Outdoor Storage:
         a.   At least ten percent (10%) of the site shall be landscaped. A
minimum three foot (3') wide landscape strip along street frontages and
building fronts must be included in the landscape plan to accommodate surface
water runoff from the site and to enhance the street appearance of the
development.
         b.   Landscaping shall include ground cover material such as
decorative rock, bark or lawn, and at least two (2) of the following landscape
elements: flowers, decorative shrubs, trees, boulders or decorative lighting.
         c.   Landscaped areas shall be provided with automatic irrigation
unless a letter from a licensed landscape architect is submitted with the
landscape plan certifying that the selected landscape plants will survive
without irrigation.
         d.   Pedestrian amenities, such as benches, plazas, fountains, and
sculptures that are high quality and provided for public use or enjoyment, may
replace up to one-fourth (1/4) of the required landscaping, but shall not
replace required landscaping along street frontages or building fronts.
         e.   Parking areas shall be landscaped as prescribed in subsection
10-9-2D of this title.
         f.   Lighting may be required on the site, such as between parking
areas and buildings or along walkways, based on findings that justify the need
to protect the public health, safety or welfare. All on site lighting shall be
shielded to prevent off site glare or nuisance to traffic or neighboring
properties.
         g.   Outdoor storage and garbage collection areas shall be entirely
screened with a six foot (6') high sight obscuring fence, wall or vegetation.
Outdoor storage and garbage collection areas shall not be permitted within a
required vision clearance area.
         h.   Annual renewal of a business license for a commercial use shall
be contingent upon satisfactory maintenance of landscaped areas approved as
part of the site plan or conditional use review for the use.
      5.   Vision Clearance Area And Fences: See section
10-11-4 and subsection
10-11-1B of this title.
      6.   Signs: See
title 8, chapter 2 of this code. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4E-8: SITE PLAN DESIGN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
All uses permitted in the HC zone are subject to site plan design review. The
purpose of site plan design review is to provide a process to review proposals
to verify that compliance with the property development standards of the HC
zone under section
10-4E-7 of this article will be met, along with any other applicable provisions
of this code, or the comprehensive plan.
   A.   Permitted Uses: In the HC zone, site plan design review for a use
permitted outright or for a use permitted subject to standards shall follow the
public notice and review procedures in subsections
10-14-2B and
10-14-6B of this title for a type II decision, and the notice of decision
requirements under section
10-14-8 of this title.
   B.   Conditional Uses: Site plan design review shall be incorporated into
the type III review process required for all conditional uses permitted in the
GC zone. A type III decision includes the procedures under subsection
10-14-6C, and sections
10-14-7 and
10-14-8 of this title.
   C.   Application Requirements: An application for site plan design review
only, or in conjunction with a conditional use request, shall include the
information and materials listed under section
10-14-4 of this title. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
CHAPTER 4
COMMERCIAL ZONES
ARTICLE F.  MCNARY CENTER MIXED USE (MC)
SECTION:      
10-4F-1:  Purpose And Intent
10-4F-2:  Interpretation Of Uses
10-4F-3:  Uses Permitted Outright
10-4F-4:  Uses Permitted Subject To Standards
10-4F-5:  Conditional Uses Permitted
10-4F-6:  Temporary Uses Permitted
10-4F-7:  Property Development Standards
10-4F-8:  Site Plan Design Review Requirements And Procedures
10-4F-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the McNary Center Mixed Use (MC) Zone is to allow for a mix of
residential, and small- to medium-scale commercial retail, service and
professional developments intended to provide convenient shopping, access to
needed services, professional office space, and recreational opportunities
within reasonable walking distance from all neighborhoods in McNary and which
are at a scale appropriate for the McNary area. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4F-2: INTERPRETATION OF USES:
A.   Types Of Uses: Within the MC Zone, uses are classified as "permitted,"
"permitted with standards," and "conditional."  Further, uses are functionally
classified by the description of the particular activity (such as "single-
family residence") or by the general category with reference to the "North
American Industry Classification System" (NAICS).  Permitted and conditional
uses shall be of a size and scale to meet the purpose and intent of the MC
Zone.
B.   North American Industry Classification System (NAICS):  Uses functionally
classified with reference to the NAICS are described with the NAICS index
number.  Some activities, otherwise included under the NAICS category, may be
specifically excluded by this Ordinance. The excluded activity will be placed
in the general NAICS category, but identified by the preceding words – "BUT (or
AND) EXCLUDING."  For example, "Food store (54), BUT EXCLUDING freezer and
locker meat provisioners."
C.   Interpretation Of Uses: Where a use is not described with reference to the
NAICS or otherwise defined in Section 10-1-6, the words of this zoning
ordinance describing such use are to be given their ordinarily accepted
meaning, except where the context in which they are used otherwise clearly
requires.
D.   Prohibited Uses:  Uses not specifically identified as permitted, permitted
with standards, or conditionally permitted within the zone, or otherwise
allowed through interpretation, shall be considered prohibited uses.  A use
specifically permitted in one zone, but not another, shall not be interpreted
as being permitted in another zone under a different classification. (Ord. 799,
11-3-2015)
10-4F-3: USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT:
The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright in the MC
Zone subject to the property development standards of the MC Zone, and the site
plan design review requirements and procedures under Subsections 10-4F-7 and
10-4F-8.
A.   Specialty food stores (4452).
B.   Pharmacies and drug stores (44611).
C.   Cosmetics, beauty supplies, and perfume stores (44612).
D.   Optical goods (44613).
E.   Food (health) supplement and other health and personal care stores
(44619).
F.   Book stores and news dealers (4512).
G.   Florists (4531).
H.   Motion picture theaters (512131).
I.   Sound recording industries (5122).
J.   Radio and television broadcasting (5151).
K.   Data processing, hosting and related services (5182).
L.   Legal services (5411).
M.   Specialized design services (5414).
N.   Computer systems design and related services (5415).
O.   Accounting, tax preparation, bookkeeping and payroll services (5412).
P.   Architecture, engineering and related services (5413) WITHOUT testing lab.
Q.   Photographic services (54192).
R.   Translation and interpretation services (54193).
S.   Office administrative services (5611).
T.   Investigation and security services (5616).
U.   Language schools (61163).
V.   Educational support services (6117).
W.   Offices of physicians, dentists and other health practitioners (6211, 6212
and 6213).
X.   Restaurants and other eating places1 (7225) but excluding mobile food
services (72233).
Y.   Public recreational park, facility or trail, provided:
   1.   The site is inventoried in the Comprehensive Plan for park, trail or
other recreational purposes.
   2.   Development of the park, facility or trail will be in accordance with
an adopted master development plan for the park, facility or trail.
Z.   Personal care services (8121) – examples include barber shops and beauty
salons.
AA.   Drycleaning and laundry services (81232) EXCEPT Coin-operated.
BB.   Pet care (except veterinary) services (81291).
CC.   Photofinishing (81292).
DD.   Civic And social organizations (8134). (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
   1.   Includes food services where meals are the primary service or
attraction provided and which may include beer, wine or other alcoholic
beverages that are incidental to meals. May include a portion of the premises
that is age-restricted due to serving alcoholic beverages that is not separated
from view of the remainder of the premises.
10-4F-4: USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO STANDARDS:
The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in the MC Zone
subject to the standards listed thereunder, the property development standards
of the MC Zone, and the site plan design review requirements and procedures
under Subsections 10-4F-7 and 10-4F-8, unless otherwise specified for the use.
A.   Residential Use, subject to the following:
   1.   The use will be situated on the second story or above within a building
in which the ground floor is occupied by or readily available for commercial
use.
   2.   Off-street parking requirements meeting city standards are provided for
the use separate from those required for ground floor commercial uses.
   3.   The residential use will comply with applicable building, fire and
other safety codes as mandated by local, state or federal laws.
B.   Creation of a new City, County or State road, or realignment of an
existing City, County or State road or any portion thereof and which does not
involve a land partition, subject to the following:
   1.   The road or realignment complies with applicable street standards, as
specified in the Comprehensive Plan or other implementing ordinances and the
City's Public Works standards, for the existing or intended street
classification.
   2.   Review for compliance with the requirements under subsection 10-4A-4(F)
(1) above, shall be subject to the procedures and requirements for a Type III
decision.
   3.   The use is subject to inspections, as determined by the City Public
Works Director, to certify that all improvements have been constructed to City
standards.
C.   Consumer Goods Rental (5322), subject to the following standards:
   1.   The use is limited to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square feet.
   2.   There will be no outside storage or display of goods or materials.
D.   Sports and Recreation Instruction (61162), subject to the following
standards:
   1.   The use is limited to a maximum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
E.   Alcoholic Beverage Drinking Places (7224) - Examples include pub, tavern,
sports bar or nightclub, subject to the following standards:
   1.   The use will not be located within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of a
school, public library or designated city park.
   2.   The use will not be located within one hundred feet (100') of the
right-of-way of Columbia Boulevard westward from its intersection with
Willamette Avenue.
F.   Electronic and Precision Equipment Repair and Maintenance (8112), subject
to the following standards:
   1.   The use is limited to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square feet.
   2.   At least fifteen percent (15%) of the building area is used for office
use and customer service.
   3.   There will be no outside storage of materials.
G.   Personal and Household Goods Repair and Maintenance (8114), subject to the
following standards:
   1.   The use is limited to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square feet.
   2.   At least fifteen percent (15%) of the building area is used for office
use and customer service.
   3.   There will be no outside storage of materials.
H.   Warehousing and Storage (4931), subject to the following standards:
   1.   The maximum site area for the use is limited to forty thousand (40,000)
square feet.
   2.   Outside storage is limited to recreational vehicles and boats.
I.   Local Utility Distribution Facilities (see Definitions), subject to the
following:
   1.   A permit for the proposed distribution line or facility has been
obtained from the Public Works Director in accordance with the requirements of
Title 7 of the Municipal Code, prior to construction. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4F-5:  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
The following conditional uses may be permitted in the MC Zone subject to the
property development standards of the MC Zone, the decision criteria and any
additional applicable standards in Chapter 12 specific to the use, and the site
plan design review requirements and procedures under Subsections 10-4F-7 and
10-4F-8.
The applicant bears the burden of proof for demonstrating, based on factual
information and arguments, how the proposed use complies with all standards and
decision criteria upon which the Planning Commission must base its decision.
A.   Multi-family dwellings.
B.   Drive-through for any use.
C.   Convenience stores (44512).
D.   Beer, wine and liquor stores (4453).
E.   Gasoline stations (4471).
F.   Used merchandise stores (4533).
G.   Taxi and limousine service (4853).
H.   Postal service (4911).
I.   Local messengers and local delivery (4922).
J.   Commercial banks, savings institutions, credit unions and other depository
credit intermediation (5221).
K.   Insurance carriers and related activities (524).
L.   Offices of real estate agents and brokers (5312) and activities related to
real estate (5313).
M.   Business schools and computer and management training (6114).
N.   Outpatient care centers (6214).
O.   Home health care services (6216).
P.   Ambulance services (62191).
Q.   Other ambulatory health care services (62199).
R.   Nursing care facilities – skilled (6231).
S.   Continuing care retirement communities and assisted living facilities for
the elderly (6233).
T.   Individual and family services (6241).
U.   Community food, housing, emergency and other related services (6242).
V.   Child day care services (6244).
W.   Performing arts companies (7111).
X.   Arcades (7131).
Y.   Fitness and recreation sports centers (71394) and bowling centers (71395).
Z.   Other amusement and recreation industries (71399).
AA.   Public recreational park, facility or trail not identified in
comprehensive plan and included in a master development plan.
BB.   Hotels (72111).
CC.   Coin-operated laundries and drycleaners (81231).
DD.   Religious organizations (8131).
EE.   Public administration and government facilities and support services
(92).
FF.   Multi-tenant commercial/office building (see Definitions).
GG.   Major utility facilities (see Definitions). (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4F-6: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Reserved. (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4F-7: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards apply to all new developments in
the MC Zone and are intended to provide a consistent development pattern that
ensures a safe, orderly, efficient, economically viable and aesthetically
pleasing environment throughout each zone district.
Existing developed properties are expected to meet these requirements to the
extent reasonably possible.  Similar to findings that demonstrate how a
development proposal meets applicable standards, findings shall also justify
why a proposal is not able meet applicable standards for existing developed
properties or structures.  Cost may be considered, but shall not be the sole
determinant if the cost is reasonable within the overall scope of the
development proposal.
A.   Basic Site Development Standards:
   1.   Minimum Lot Size and Lot Width; Building Setbacks; Maximum Building
Height and Site Coverage:
 
Minimum lot or parcel size
Commercial uses                     4,000 square feet
Minimum lot width                   50 feet
Residential uses                    None; density shall comply with R-
                                    3 district requirements
Minimum yard setbacks
   Front and rear yards          10 feet
   Side yard                     0 feet or 10 feet if adjacent to a
                                    residential district
   Street side yard              10 feet
Parking space                       10 feet wide; see Chapter 9 for parking
                                    standards
Maximum building height             35 feet
Maximum site coverage (building and 95 percent
impervious surface)
 
B.   Site Development Impact Standards:
   1.   Traffic Impact Analysis: A Traffic Impact Analysis meeting the
requirements under Section 10-11-10(C) shall be required to be submitted to the
City with a land use application, when the Community Development Director
determines that the application involves one or more of the following actions:
      a.   A change in zoning or plan amendment designation; or
      b.   The proposal is projected to cause one or more of the following
effects, which can be determined by field counts, site observation, traffic
impact analysis or study, field measurements, crash history, Institute of
Transportation Engineers Trip Generation manual; and information and studies
provided by the local reviewing jurisdiction and/or ODOT:
         (1)    An increase in site traffic volume generation by two hundred
fifty (250) Average Daily Trips (ADT) or more (or as required by the City
Engineer). The latest edition of the Trip Generation manual, published by the
Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) shall be used as standards by which
to gauge average daily vehicle trips; or
         (2)   An increase in use of adjacent streets by vehicles exceeding the
twenty thousand (20,000) pound gross vehicle weights by ten (10) vehicles or
more per day; or
         (3)   The location of the access driveway does not meet minimum
intersection sight distance requirements, or is located where vehicles entering
or leaving the property are restricted, or vehicles queue or hesitate, creating
a safety hazard; or
         (4)    The location of the access driveway does not meet the access
spacing standard of the roadway on which the driveway is located; or
         (5)    A change in internal traffic patterns that may cause safety
problems, such as back up onto the highway or traffic crashes in the approach
area.
   2.   Floodplain, Wetland And Riparian Areas – See Section 10-7; Also Title
12: The requirements under Section 10-7 and Title 12 are triggered when
development is proposed within a designated floodplain or riparian area as
identified by the official Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) prepared by the U.S.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); or when property contains wetland
areas as identified on the National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) map prepared by
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS).
   3.   Stormwater Surface Drainage:
      a.   Surface water run-off shall be handled on-site through the use of
landscaped areas, grassy swales or similar natural features to the extent
reasonably feasible.  Where surface water runoff cannot be entirely managed on-
site, adequate provisions shall be made so that run-off will not adversely
affect the use of adjoining or downstream properties, unless a drainage
easement has been obtained.
      b.   Where it is anticipated by the City Public Works Director that the
additional runoff resulting from a proposed development will overload an
existing drainage facility, the City shall withhold approval of the development
until provisions have been made for improvement of the potential condition or
until provisions have been made for storage of additional runoff caused by the
development in accordance with City standards.
      c.   In order to accommodate upstream drainage, culverts and other
drainage facilities shall be large enough to accommodate existing and potential
future runoff from the entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside
the development.  Such facilities shall be subject to review and approval by
the City Public Works Director.
   4.   Vehicle Access, Driveway And Circulation Standards:
      a.   New Vehicle Access Connections:  New access connections shall not be
permitted within the functional area (see definitions) of an intersection as
defined by the connection spacing standards of this Title, the Comprehensive
Plan and public works standards, unless no other reasonable access to the
property is available – see also Section 10-11-4(C) regarding vision clearance
areas.
      b.   Access Connections:  Where no other alternative exists, the City may
allow construction of an access connection along the property line farthest
from the intersection. In such cases, directional connections (i.e., right in/
out, right-in only, or right-out only) may be required.
      c.   Cross Access Drives, Pedestrian Access: Adjacent commercial or
office properties such as shopping plazas and office parks that are major
traffic generators shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to
allow circulation between sites.
      d.   Separation Distance: The City may reduce the required separation
distance of access points where they prove impractical, provided all of the
following requirements are met:
         (1)   Joint access driveways and cross access easements are provided.
         (2)   The site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation
system.
         (3)   The property owner enters into a written agreement with the
City, recorded with the deed, that pre-existing connections on the site will be
closed and eliminated after construction of each side of a joint use driveway.
         (4)   The City may modify or waive the requirements of this section
where the characteristics or layout of abutting properties would make a
development of a unified or shared access and circulation system impractical.
      e.   Phased Developments: Development sites under the same ownership or
consolidated for the purpose of development and comprising more than one
building site, shall be reviewed as a single property for the purpose of
complying with access standards.  The number of access points permitted shall
be the minimum number necessary to provide reasonable access to the site, not
the minimum for that frontage.
      f.   Nonconforming Access Features:  Legal access connections in place
when this Title was adopted that do not conform with the standards herein are
considered nonconforming features and shall be brought into compliance with
applicable standards when new access connection permits area requested or when
there is a change in use or enlargement or improvement that will increased trip
generation.
   5.   Driveway Standards:
      a.   If the driveway is one way in or out, the minimum width shall be ten
feet (10') and appropriate sign(s) designating the driveway as a one-way
connection shall be provided.
      b.   For two-way accesses, each lane shall have a minimum width of ten
feet (10').  The maximum width for a driveway access, including both lanes, is
thirty-five feet (35') for both lanes.
      c.   The length of a driveway shall be designed in accordance with the
anticipated storage length of entering and exiting vehicles to prevent vehicles
from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing unsafe
conflicts with on-site circulation.
   6.   Utilities: All electrical, telephone and cable television utility
service installations or connections made as part of new construction of a
building or structure shall be underground in accordance with city standards.
   7.   Easements: An applicant should discuss with the City Planning Official
the likelihood that any easement will be required prior to making application. 
When an easement is required based on findings that justify the easement, the
following standards shall apply:
      a.   Pedestrian Easements: In order to facilitate pedestrian access from
streets, lots, or developments to schools, parks, nearby streets, or other
developments, an easement no less than ten feet (10') wide with a paved pathway
no less than six feet (6') shall be required.  Any sight obscuring barrier such
as a fence or planting at the edge of the easement shall not exceed three feet
(3') in height in order to maintain visibility of the walkway from adjacent
properties.
      b.   Open Space Easements: An open space easement may be required over
areas in private ownership of the floodplain or areas with unique natural
conditions. Such easement shall preclude development of the area when limiting
the use of a property is determined to be in the public interest.
      c.   General Public Easements: When topography or other conditions make
impractical the location of drainage facilities, sanitary sewer or water lines
within the public street right-of-way, an unobstructed easement shall be
provided across a property.  Easements shall be of sufficient width to safely
excavate buried facilities, but generally shall be no less than fifteen feet
(15') in width.
C.   Special Site And Building Design Standards:
   1.   Building Orientation And Architectural Features:
      a.   The primary building and entry shall be oriented toward the fronting
street.  Buildings shall have their primary entrances oriented toward the
street.  On corner lots, building entrances shall face the primary fronting
street or the corner.
      b.   The primary building shall incorporate ground floor windows along
the fronting street facade, with at least twenty percent (20%) of the fronting
wall consisting of display areas, windows or doorways.
      c.   Building facades facing a street shall include changes in relief
such as cornices, columns, gables, bay windows, recessed entryways, or similar
architectural or decorative elements.
      d.    A drive through window or use shall be oriented to the side or rear
of a building and shall be designed to minimize conflicts with pedestrians and
vehicles.
   2.   Off-Street Parking, Loading And Unloading: See Section 10-9 for
specific design standards for parking spaces and parking areas.
      a.   Off-street parking shall not be located within five feet (5’) of a
property line separating the subject property from a public street.
      b.   Existing or proposed off-street parking areas between the front or
side of a building and the public right-of-way shall be separated from the
right-of-way with a three foot (3’) wide landscape strip (see landscape
requirements).
      c.   Parking bumpers shall be set at least six feet (6’) from the
property/right-of-way line for parking spaces established perpendicular to the
right-of-way.  Parking bumpers shall be securely fastened to the pavement or
ground.
      d.   A designated area (or areas) for loading and/or unloading of
materials or freight shall be provided to ensure all such activities occur
entirely on-site.
      e.   Parking or loading areas which abut a residential zone along a rear
or side property line shall be separated from the property line by a six foot
(6') wide landscaped area and a fence or wall six feet (6') in height to buffer
the residential property.
   3.   Bicycle And Pedestrian Facilities And Easements:
      a.   Bicycle or pedestrian easements and/or improvements may be required
if a portion of the subject property is included in the comprehensive plan as
necessary to complete a planned bicycle or pedestrian pathway or trail, or to
accommodate a portion thereof; or if findings justify the need to address
anticipated impacts from the proposed development.
      b.   Developments shall provide an on-site pedestrian circulation system
that connects building entrances, public sidewalks, bicycle and automobile
parking areas, and parts of the site or abutting properties that may attract
pedestrians.  Walkways shall maintain a clear width of at least five feet (5')
and shall be separated from vehicles by curbs, raised bumpers, planter strips
or similar barriers.  Walkways through parking areas or crossing driveways
shall be clearly identified by a different material or pavement markings, or
both.  Walkways shall be in clearly visible locations to promote safety. 
Walkways shall be hard surfaced.
   4.   Landscaping, Lighting And Outdoor Storage:
      a.   At least five percent (5%) of the site shall be landscaped.  A
minimum thirty inch (30”) wide landscape strip along street frontages and
building fronts must be included in the landscape plan to accommodate surface
water runoff from the site and to enhance the street appearance of the
development.
      b.   Pedestrian amenities, such as benches, plazas, fountains, and
sculptures that are high quality and provided for public use or enjoyment, may
replace up to one-third (1/3) of the required landscaping, but shall not
replace required landscaping along street frontages or building fronts.
      c.   Parking areas shall be landscaped as prescribed in Section 10-9-2
(D).
      d.   Landscaping shall include ground cover material such as decorative
rock, bark or lawn, and at least two of the following landscape elements:
flowers, decorative shrubs, trees, boulders or decorative lighting.
      e.   Landscaped areas shall be provided with automatic irrigation unless
a letter from a licensed landscape architect is submitted with the landscape
plan certifying that the selected landscape plants will survive without
irrigation.
      f.   Lighting may be required on the site, such as between parking areas
and buildings or along walkways, based on findings that justify the need to
protect the public health, safety or welfare.  All on-site lighting shall be
shielded to prevent off-site glare or nuisance to traffic or neighboring
properties.
      g.   Outdoor storage and garbage collection areas shall be entirely
screened with a six-foot (6') high sight-obscuring fence, wall or vegetation. 
Outdoor storage and garbage collection areas shall not be permitted within a
required vision clearance area.
      h.   Annual renewal of a business license for a commercial use shall be
contingent upon satisfactory maintenance of landscaped areas approved as part
of the site plan or conditional use review for the use.
   5.   Vision Clearance Area And Fences: See Section 10-11-4.
   6.   Signs: See Title 8 Chapter 2 of the Umatilla Municipal Code. (Ord. 688,
6-15-1999; amd. Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
10-4F-8: SITE PLAN DESIGN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
All uses permitted in the MC Zone are subject to site plan design review. The
purpose of site plan design review is to provide a process to review proposals
to verify that compliance with the property development standards under Section
10-4F-7 of the MC Zone will be met, along with any other applicable provisions
of this Code, or the Comprehensive Plan.
A.   In the MC Zone, site plan design review for a use permitted outright or
for a use permitted subject to standards shall follow the public notice and
review procedures in Sections 10-14-2(B) and 10-14-6(B) for a Type II decision,
and the notice of decision requirements under Section 10-14-8.
B.   Site plan design review shall be incorporated into the Type III review
process required for all conditional uses permitted in the MC Zone.  A Type III
decision includes the procedures under Sections 10-14-6(C), 10-14-7 and 10-14-
8.
C.   Application Requirements: An application for site plan design review only,
or in conjunction with a conditional use request, shall include the information
and materials listed under Section 10-14-4.  (Ord. 799, 11-3-2015)
CHAPTER 5
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A.  LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (M-1)
SECTION:
10-5A-1: Purpose
10-5A-2: Uses Permitted
10-5A-3: Conditional Uses Permitted
10-5A-4: Development Standards
10-5A-5: Limitations On Use
10-5A-1: PURPOSE:
The Light Industrial District provides for a wide variety of manufacturing
uses, with limited outdoor storage and display areas. All uses are subject to
site review. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-5A-2: USES PERMITTED:
In an M-1 District, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted:
Establishments engaged in manufacturing, processing, packing, assembly,
distribution, repair, finishing or refinishing, testing, fabrication, research
and development, warehousing, and servicing activities. Up to one hundred
percent (100%) of the total floor area may consist of these manufacturing and
distribution uses.
Executive and administrative offices relating to the industrial use.
Retail outlets for products manufactured on-site, such as bread and related
goods from a bakery. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-5A-3: CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
In an M-1 District, the following uses and their accessory uses may be
permitted subject to the provisions of Chapter 12 of this Title:
Automobile service station - retail mini-market facility.
Community Services uses as provided by Chapter 6 of this Title.
Recreational vehicle park. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-5A-4: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Buffer Area: If a use in this District abuts or faces a residential
district, a landscape area of twenty feet (20') along the entire frontage will
be required on the side abutting or facing the adjacent district in order to
provide a buffer area. Screening, landscaping or other conditions necessary to
preserve the character of the adjacent district may be required to be
established and maintained by the property owner. The setback may be reduced if
appropriate and compensating screening measures are proposed and approved
through site review.
   B.   Storage: Materials shall be stored and grounds maintained in a manner
that will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or otherwise
create a health hazard. Outside storage in a required yard shall not exceed ten
feet (10') in height. Storage area shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
site.
   C.   Screening: Screening of storage or for other purposes shall consist of
a sight-obscuring fence or landscaping, or other similar barrier. If screening
is used to obstruct the view from adjacent residentially designated properties,
the screening shall be of a material and design that is compatible with
adjacent residences, shall be free of advertising, and shall be constructed
according to plans submitted by the owner or his authorized agent and approved
through site review.
   DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
 
Minimum lot area                    5,000 square feet
Minimum lot width                   50 feet
Minimum yard setbacks:
     Front yard                 10 feet or 20 feet if adjacent to a
                                    residential district
     Side yard                  0 feet or 20 feet if adjacent to a
                                    residential district
     Side street yard           10 feet or 20 feet if adjacent to a
                                    residential district
     Rear yard                  0 feet or 20 feet if adjacent to a
                                    residential district
     Parking area               10 feet
Maximum building height             35 feet
Maximum site coverage (building and 60 percent
impervious surface)
 
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-5A-5: LIMITATIONS ON USE:
   A.   All uses are subject to site review.
   B.   A chainlink fence that is made in part with barbed wire may be
permitted for the purpose of security when it is not along a sidewalk or public
right of way.
   C.   Any fence allowed or required in an M-1 District more than six feet
(6') in height shall comply with setbacks for structures.
   D.   Loading areas shall not be located within a required yard setback.
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
ARTICLE B.  HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (M-2)
SECTION:
10-5B-1: Purpose
10-5B-2: Uses Permitted
10-5B-3: Conditional Uses Permitted
10-5B-4: Development Standards
10-5B-5: Limitations On Use
10-5B-1: PURPOSE:
The Heavy Industrial District provides areas for industrial uses which are
generally not compatible with residential development because of their
operational characteristics, which can include noise and air pollution. The
Heavy Industrial District is also intended for uses that may require extensive
outdoor storage areas to conduct business activities or for product storage or
display. The Heavy Industrial District is appropriate for areas near major
transportation facilities and not adjacent to residential districts. (Ord. 688,
6-15-1999)
10-5B-2: USES PERMITTED:
Any use permitted in the Light Industrial District.
Establishments engaged in manufacturing, processing, and storage, such as, but
not limited to, business engaged in the manufacture of concrete, brick and clay
products, crushing or processing of rock, manufacture of acid, fertilizer, gas,
and paper products, breweries, and similar businesses.
Sand or gravel storage yard. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-5B-3: CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
Accessory dwelling (1 only) for the owner or operator of each existing
permitted use.
Any use involving the handling or storage of hazardous chemicals or flammable
liquids such as fireworks, blasting agents, explosives, corrosive liquids,
flammable solids, high toxic materials, oxidizing materials, poisonous gases,
radioactive materials, unstable chemicals, ammonium nitrate and liquefied
petroleum gases.
Automobile service station - retail mini-market facility.
Automobile wrecking yard or junkyard, if located one thousand feet (1,000') or
more from a residential district.
Commercial gravel pit, surface mining, rock crushing or asphalt plant.
Community Services uses as provided by Chapter 6 of this Title.
Recreational vehicle park. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-5B-4: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Buffer Area: If a use in this District abuts or faces a residential
district, a landscape area of twenty feet (20') along the entire frontage will
be required on the side abutting or facing the adjacent district in order to
provide a buffer area. Screening, landscaping or other conditions necessary to
preserve the character of the adjacent district may be required to be
established and maintained by the property owner. The setback may be reduced if
appropriate screening measures are proposed and approved through site review.
   B.   Storage: Materials shall be stored and grounds maintained in a manner
that will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or otherwise
create a health hazard. Outside storage in a required yard shall not exceed ten
feet (10') in height.
   C.   Screening: Screening of storage or for other purposes shall consist of
a sight-obscuring fence or landscaping, or other similar barrier. If screening
is used to obstruct the view from adjacent residentially designated properties,
the screening shall be of a material and design that is compatible with
adjacent residences, shall be free of advertising, and shall be constructed
according to plans submitted by the owner or his authorized agent and approved
through site review.
   DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
 
Minimum lot width                        80 feet
Minimum lot depth                        100 feet
Minimum yard setbacks:
     Front yard                      10 feet or 20 feet if adjacent to a
                                         residential district
     Side yard                       0 feet or 20 feet if adjacent to a
                                         residential district
     Side street yard                10 feet or 20 feet if adjacent to a
                                         residential district
     Rear yard                       0 feet or 20 feet if adjacent to a
                                         residential district
     Parking area                    10 feet
Maximum building height                  35 feet
Maximum site coverage (building, storage 100 percent
area, and impervious surface)
 
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-5B-5: LIMITATIONS ON USE:
   A.   Site Review: All uses are subject to site review.
   B.   Fence Material: A chainlink fence that is made in part with barbed wire
may be permitted for the purpose of security when it is not along a sidewalk or
public right of way.
   C.   Fence Height: Any fence allowed or required in an M-2 District more
than six feet (6') in height shall comply with setbacks for structures.
   D.   Loading Areas: Loading areas shall not be located within a required
yard setback.
   E.   Nuisances: A use is prohibited which has been declared a nuisance by
statute, by action of the City Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   F.   Health Hazards: Materials shall be stored and grounds shall be
maintained in a manner that will not attract or aid the propagation of insects
or rodents or otherwise create a health hazard. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
CHAPTER 6
COMMUNITY SERVICES (CS)
SECTION:
10-6-1: Community Services Uses
10-6-2: Procedure
10-6-3: Development Standards
10-6-1: COMMUNITY SERVICES USES:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a procedure and standards for the
review of special uses which, by reason of their public convenience, necessity,
unusual character, technical need or effect on the neighborhood, may be
appropriate in any district but not suitable for listing within the other
sections of this Title.
The following uses may be approved as Community Services uses:
Adult or senior center.
Boat moorage, marina, or houseboat moorage.
Building used for religious worship.
Cemetery, crematory, mausoleum, mortuary, or funeral home.
Childcare facility for thirteen (13) or more children.
Drug and alcohol treatment facility.
Elderly housing.
Helicopter landing facility.
Hospital and medical offices developed in conjunction with a hospital facility.
Public building or use, including, but not limited to, a City hall, post
office, or library.
Public or private park, including a golf course, trail system, or similar
recreational facility.
Public or private preschool or kindergarten, elementary school, middle school,
high school, or college (schools that are customarily commercial rather than
academic in nature such as business, dance, karate, and other similar schools
shall not be considered a Community Services use).
Sewerage or drainageway system structures.
Utility facility, including generating facilities, substations, telephone
switching stations, and other facilities required for the transmission of power
or communications.
Water system structures. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-6-2: PROCEDURE:
Community Services uses shall be considered a Type III review process.
   A.   Application: All Community Services uses shall be reviewed as
conditional uses according to the procedures and criteria of Chapters 12 and 14
of this Title. Plans shall be submitted for the site that identify the location
of the use, building, parking area, landscaping, screening, and any other
features on the site. The applicant shall submit a narrative that explains why
the use is necessary for the community and why the particular site best serves
the community. The narrative shall also consider impacts upon surrounding uses
and possible mitigating measures, including, but not limited to, the location
of parking, effects of off-site parking, traffic generation, street access
points, buffering and screening, noise, illumination controls, structure
height, hours of operation, crime prevention, design elements such as scale,
structural design, form and materials, signage, and any other impacts unique to
the specific use.
The approval of a Community Services use is for a specific use. Any change or
expansion of an approved use shall be subject to the review procedures of this
Chapter.
   B.   Zoning Map: A Community Services use approval shall not be construed as
an amendment to the Zoning Map, although the same may be depicted thereon by
appropriate color designation, symbol or short title identification. (Ord. 688,
6-15-1999)
10-6-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Minimum yard setbacks:
   A.   Residential Districts: In any residential district, setbacks shall be
as follows:
Front yard, 30 feet.
Side yard or side street yard, 20 feet for one story building; 25 feet for 2 or
more stories.
Rear yard, 25 feet.
   B.   Other Districts: In any district other than a residential district,
setbacks shall be as required in the district. A CS use adjacent to a
residential district shall comply with setbacks in subsection A of this
Section; a CS use adjacent to nonresidentially designated land shall comply
with setback requirements of the district.
   C.   Site Review: Site review is required for all Community Services uses.
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
CHAPTER 7
FLOOD PLAIN AND WETLAND AND RIPARIAN AREA PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
10-7-1: Flood Plain (FP) District
10-7-2: Uses Permitted
10-7-3: Riparian Areas - Definitions And Inventory
10-7-4: Activities Within The Riparian Area
10-7-5: Alteration Requiring Mitigation
10-7-6: Wetland Notification Procedures
10-7-1: FLOOD PLAIN (FP) DISTRICT:
The purpose of the Flood Plain District is to promote and protect the public
health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize flood losses by provisions
designed to do the following:
   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood or which cause increased flood heights or
velocities.
   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
that serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial
construction.
   C.   Protect individuals from buying lands that are unsuited for some
purposes because of flood hazard.
   D.   Protect existing wildlife habitat. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-7-2: USES PERMITTED:
In a Flood Plain (FP) District, the following uses and their accessory uses are
permitted:
Agriculture.
Boat landings and docks for pleasure, but not including incidental buildings.
Golf courses and driving ranges, but not including incidental buildings.
Parks, playgrounds and community centers, but not including incidental
buildings. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-7-3: RIPARIAN AREAS - DEFINITIONS AND INVENTORY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to protect and restore water
bodies and their associated riparian areas, thereby protecting and restoring
the hydrologic, ecologic, and land conservation functions these areas provide.
Specifically, this Chapter is intended to protect habitat for fish and other
aquatic life, protect habitat for wildlife, protect water quality for human
uses and for aquatic life, control erosion and limit sedimentation, and reduce
the effects of flooding. This Chapter attempts to meet these goals by excluding
structures from buffer areas around fish-bearing lakes, streams and associated
wetlands, and by restricting vegetation removal or other alteration in those
buffers. For cases of hardship, this Chapter provides a procedure to reduce the
riparian buffer. Alteration of the riparian area in such cases shall be offset
by appropriate restoration or mitigation, as stipulated in this Chapter.
   B.   Definitions:
   BUILDING ENVELOPE: The land area, outside of all required setbacks, which is
available for construction of a primary structure on a particular property.
   FISH USE: Inhabited at any time of the year by anadromous or game fish
species or fish that are listed as threatened or endangered species under the
Federal or State Endangered Species Acts. Fish use is determined from Oregon
Department of Forestry Stream Classification maps.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any material which reduces and prevents absorption of
storm water into previously undeveloped land.
   LAWN: Grass or similar materials maintained as a ground cover of less than
six inches (6") in height. For purposes of this Chapter, lawn is not considered
native vegetation regardless of the species used.
   MITIGATION: Taking one or more of the following actions listed in order of
priority:
      1.   Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain development
action or parts of that action;
      2.   Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the
development action and its implementation;
      3.   Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the
affected environment;
      4.   Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and
maintenance operations during the life of the development action by monitoring
and taking appropriate corrective measures;
      5.   Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing comparable
substitute resources or environments.
   NET LOSS: A permanent loss of habitat units or habitat value resulting from
a development action despite mitigation measures having been taken.
   NONCONFORMING: A structure or use that does not conform to the standards of
this Title but has been in continuous existence from prior to the date of
adoption hereof up to the present. Nonconforming uses are not considered
violations and are generally allowed to continue, though expansion,
reconstruction, or substantial improvement may be regulated.
   OFF-SITE MITIGATION: Habitat mitigation measures undertaken in areas distant
from a development action, and which are intended to benefit fish and wildlife
populations other than those directly affected by that action.
   ON-SITE MITIGATION: Habitat mitigation measures undertaken within or in
proximity to areas affected by a development action, and which are intended to
benefit fish and wildlife populations directly affected by that action.
   RIPARIAN AREA: The area adjacent to a river, lake, or stream, consisting of
the area of transition from an aquatic ecosystem to a terrestrial ecosystem.
   STREAM: A channel such as a river or creek that carries flowing surface
water, including perennial streams and intermittent streams with defined
channels, and excluding manmade irrigation and drainage channels.
   STRUCTURE: A building or other major improvement that is built, constructed
or installed, not including minor improvements, such as fences, utility poles,
flagpoles, or irrigation system components, that are not customarily regulated
through zoning ordinances.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either:
      1.   Before the improvement or repair is started, or
      2.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement"
is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not the
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
The term does not, however, include either:
      3.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
      4.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
   TOP OF BANK: The stage or elevation at which water overflows the natural
banks of streams or other waters of the State and begins to inundate upland
areas. In the absence of physical evidence, the 2-year recurrence interval
flood elevation may be used to approximate the bank full stage or delineate the
top of bank.
   C.   Riparian Corridors: The inventory of riparian areas contained in the
Comprehensive Plan specifies which streams and lakes are fish-bearing, and the
stream-size category. Based on the classification contained in this inventory,
the following riparian corridors shall be established:
      1.   Along all fish-bearing lakes, and fish-bearing streams with average
annual stream flow less than one thousand cubic feet per second (1,000 cfs),
the riparian corridor boundary shall be fifty feet (50') from the top of bank,
except as identified below.
      2.   Along all streams with average annual stream flow greater than one
thousand cubic feet per second (1,000 cfs), the riparian corridor boundary
shall be seventy five feet (75') upland from the top of each bank.
      3.   Where the riparian corridor includes all or portions of a
significant wetland as identified in the Goal 5 or Goal 17 elements of the
Comprehensive Plan, the standard distance to the riparian corridor boundary
shall be measured from, and include, the upland edge of the wetland.
      4.   Except as provided for in subsection C3 of this Section, the
measurement of distance to the riparian corridor boundary shall be from the top
of bank. The measurement shall be a slope distance. In areas where the top of
each bank is not clearly defined, the riparian corridor boundary shall be
measured from the ordinary high water level, or the line of nonaquatic
vegetation, whichever is most landward. In areas where the predominant terrain
consists of steep cliffs, the distance to the corridor boundary shall be
measured as a horizontal distance until the top of the cliff is reached, and as
a slope distance on from that point. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-7-4: ACTIVITIES WITHIN THE RIPARIAN AREA:
   A.   Permanent Alteration, Exceptions: The permanent alteration of the
riparian area by grading or by the placement of structures or impervious
surfaces is prohibited, except for the following uses, provided they are
designed to minimize intrusion into the riparian area, and no other options or
locations are feasible:
      1.   Streets, roads, and paths;
      2.   Drainage facilities, utilities, and irrigation pumps;
      3.   Water-related and water-dependent uses;
      4.   Replacement of existing structures with structures in the same
location that do not disturb additional riparian surface area;
      5.   Structures or other nonconforming alterations existing fully or
partially within the riparian area may be expanded, provided the expansion does
not occur within the riparian area. Substantial improvement of a nonconforming
structure in the riparian area shall require compliance with the standards of
this Chapter;
      6.   Existing lawn within the riparian area may be maintained, but not
expanded within the riparian area. Development activities on the property shall
not justify replacement of riparian area with lawn;
      7.   Existing shoreline stabilization and flood control structures may be
maintained. Any expansion of existing structures or development of new
structures shall be evaluated by the City Administrator and the appropriate
natural resource agency staff. Such alteration of the riparian area shall be
approved only if less invasive or nonstructural methods will not adequately
meet the stabilization or flood control needs.
   B.   Removal Of Vegetation: Removal of riparian vegetation is prohibited,
except for:
      1.   Removal of nonnative vegetation and replacement with native plant
species. The replacement vegetation shall cover, at a minimum, the area from
which vegetation was removed, and shall maintain or exceed the density of the
removed vegetation.
      2.   Removal of vegetation necessary for the development of approved
water-related or water-dependent uses. Vegetation removal shall be kept to the
minimum necessary to allow the water-dependent or water-related use.
      3.   Trees in danger of falling and thereby posing a hazard to life or
property may be removed, following consultation and approval from the City
Administrator. If no hazard will be created, the City Administrator may require
these trees, once felled, to be left in place in the riparian area.
   C.   Exceptions: The following activities are not required to meet the
standards of this Section:
      1.   Commercial forest practices regulated by the Oregon Forest Practices
Act.
      2.   Normal and accepted farming practices other than buildings or
structures, occurring on land designated for exclusive farm use and existing in
the riparian area since prior to the date of adoption hereof. Ongoing
agricultural practices existing in the riparian area since prior to the date of
adoption hereof on land not designated for exclusive farm use are allowed in
the riparian area subject to the definition and requirements of nonconforming
uses. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-7-5: ALTERATION REQUIRING MITIGATION:
   A.   Allowable Alterations: Permanent alteration of the riparian area by
placement of structures or impervious surfaces is allowable under the following
procedures, subject to the mitigation requirements of subsection B of this
Section:
      1.   A setback adjustment as allowed under subsection C of this Section.
      2.   A variance to the riparian setback approved through the procedures
of subsection D of this Section.
      3.   On streams having average annual stream flow exceeding one thousand
(1,000) cubic feet per second and having a seventy five foot (75') riparian
buffer established under this Chapter, the riparian setback may be reduced as
allowed under subsection E of this Section.
   B.   Proposals: Proposals for development activities within the riparian
area allowed in subsection A of this Section shall be reviewed by the Oregon
Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW), as per Oregon Administrative Rules 635-
415 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Mitigation Policy. A mitigation recommendation
shall be obtained from ODFW. For purposes of implementing Goal 5, the goal is
no net loss of protected resources; correspondingly, for purposes of designing
appropriate mitigation, sites should be considered at least in "Habitat
Category 2" (OAR 635-415-030), which strives for no net loss of habitat values.
   C.   Setback Adjustment:
      1.   Qualifying Lots: Lots on which the riparian setback required by this
Chapter exceeds any other setbacks in a particular yard, and which, when
combined with other required yard setbacks, results in a building area depth of
twenty five feet (25') or less or a building envelope of eight hundred (800)
square feet or less.
      2.   Setback Reduction Procedure: Setback reduction shall be the minimum
necessary to create a building envelope twenty five feet (25') deep or a
building envelope of eight hundred (800) square feet (whichever requires a
lesser reduction of the setback). The yard setback opposite the riparian area
may be reduced up to one-half (1/2) the standard setback. If this does not
create a sufficient building envelope, the riparian setback may be reduced up
to one-half (1/2) the required setback. Additional reductions of setbacks
require a variance. Removal of vegetation within the original riparian setback
shall be the minimum necessary to allow development of the use, and shall
otherwise conform with the standards of subsection 10-7-4B of this Chapter.
   D.   Variance:
      1.   In cases where the provision for a setback adjustment under
subsection C of this Section are not sufficient, a property owner may request a
variance to the riparian setback. Granting of a variance requires findings
that:
         a.   The proposed development requires deviation from the riparian
standards; and
         b.   Strict adherence to the riparian setback and other applicable
standards would effectively preclude a use of the parcel that could be
reasonably expected to occur in the district, and that the property owner would
be precluded a substantial property right enjoyed by the majority of landowners
in the vicinity; and
         c.   The provisions of subsection C of this Section are insufficient
to remedy the hardship.
   E.   Large Stream Riparian Reduction: On streams having average annual
stream flow exceeding one thousand (1,000) cubic feet per second and having a
seventy five foot (75') riparian buffer established under this Chapter,
structures and impervious surfaces may be placed within the riparian setback as
follows:
      1.   The removal of vegetation shall be limited to the minimum amount
necessary to accommodate the use. Any vegetation removed in excess of this
standard shall be nonnative species, and the proposal shall specify replacement
of that vegetation with native species.
      2.   The applicant shall provide sufficient information regarding the
proposed development and potential impacts to riparian resources to allow the
City Administrator, in consultation with the ODFW, to determine whether the
proposal will provide equal or better protection of riparian resources. This
information includes, but is not necessarily limited to: a plot plan showing
the top of the stream or water body bank, the extent of development within the
riparian setback, uses that will occur within the riparian setback and
potential impacts (for example: chemical runoff, noise, etc.), the extent of
vegetation removal proposed, characteristics of the existing vegetation (types,
density), any proposed alterations of topography or drainage patterns, existing
uses on the property and any potential impacts they could have on riparian
resources.
      3.   In no case shall such alterations occupy more than fifty percent
(50%) of the width of the riparian area measured from the upland edge of the
corridor. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-7-6: WETLAND NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Written notice shall be provided to the Oregon Division of State Lands
of applications which involve lands which are wholly or partially within areas
that are identified as wetlands on the State-wide Wetlands Inventory as
follows:
      1.   Within five (5) working days of the acceptance of a complete
application for the following:
         a.   Subdivisions.
         b.   Building permits for new structures.
         c.   Other development permits and approvals that allow physical
alteration of the land involving excavation and grading, including permits for
removal or fill, or both, or development permits in flood plains and floodways.
         d.   Conditional use permits and variances that involve physical
alterations to the land or construction of new structures.
         e.   Planned unit development approvals.
      2.   If, after acceptance of an application, the City receives
information that there is a possible wetland on the subject property from a
party responding to the public notice for any of the above, the City
Administrator shall also provide written notice to the Oregon Division of State
Lands.
      3.   Notice is not required for any application listed in subsection A of
this Section if a permit has been issued by the Division of State Lands for
that activity.
      4.   If the Division of State Lands fails to respond to the notice from
the City within thirty (30) days of the postmark date of the notice, the City
may issue an approval for the proposed activity with written notice to the
applicant and owner of record that the proposed activity may require State or
Federal permits.
      5.   The City may issue an approval for a Comprehensive Plan Map or
Zoning Map amendment for parcels identified as or including wetlands on the
State-wide Wetlands Inventory upon providing to the applicant and the owner of
record of the affected parcel a written notice of the possible presence of
wetlands and the potential need for State and Federal permits and providing the
Division of State Lands with a copy of the notification of Comprehensive Plan
Map or Zoning Map amendments for specific properties.
      6.   The City may issue approval for any activity listed in subsection A
of this Section providing that the approval includes one of the following
statements:
         a.   Issuance of a permit under Oregon Revised Statutes 196.665 and
196.800 to 196.900 by the Division of State Lands is required for the proposed
project before any physical alteration takes place within the wetlands;
         b.   Notice from the Division of State Lands that no permit is
required; or
         c.   Notice from the Division of State Lands that no permit is
required until specific proposals to remove, fill, or alter the wetlands are
submitted to the Division.
      7.   Notice of activities authorized within an approved wetland
conservation plan shall be provided to the Division of State Lands within five
(5) days following approval by the City.
      8.   Failure of the City to provide notice to the Division of State Lands
as required in this Section will not invalidate City approval of the proposed
activity. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
CHAPTER 8
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD)
SECTION:
10-8-1: Planned Development
10-8-2: Site Development Requirements
10-8-3: Procedure
10-8-4: Density Provisions
10-8-5: Open Space
10-8-6: Modifications To Site Development Standards
10-8-7: Building Permits Within An Approved Planned Development
10-8-8: Modifications Of An Approved Planned Development
10-8-9: Approval Criteria
10-8-1: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT:
The purpose of planned development is intended to encourage the appropriate
development of tracts of land that are sufficiently large to allow site
planning, to encourage the most efficient use of the land through a higher
density of residential development, to promote inclusion of open space within
developments, and to provide flexibility in the application of zoning
regulations to accommodate varying physical conditions on a site. The planned
development should promote a harmonious variety of uses, the economy of shared
services and facilities, compatibility with surrounding areas, and create an
attractive, healthful, efficient and stable environment for living, shopping,
and working. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-8-2: SITE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Primary Use: The primary use of land in a planned development shall
reflect the type of use indicated on the Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Map for
the area. For sites with more than one Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Map
designation, uses may be mixed within the site without regard for the specific
boundary locations as long as the balance of land allocation is generally
maintained and the site design promotes the purposes of this Chapter. Housing
types may be mixed within the development. In addition to uses specified within
the zoning district, the following uses may be allowed within a planned
development:
      1.   Community buildings and recreation facilities serving the
development.
      2.   Recreational vehicle storage area.
      3.   Single-family residences, two-family residences, attached housing,
and multiple-family housing, except that in the R-1 District no more than four
(4) dwellings may be attached in a single structure.
   B.   Site Size: Planned development shall not be permitted on a parcel less
than two and one-half (21/2) acres in area unless an applicant can show cause
why a smaller site is suitable and satisfies the requirements of this Chapter.
   C.   Ownership Required: The tract or tracts of land included in a proposed
planned development must be in one ownership or control, or the subject of a
joint application by the owners of all the property included. The holder of a
written option to purchase shall be deemed the owner of such land for the
purposes of this Chapter.
   D.   Performance Bonds: Performance bonds for construction of any public
facilities or utilities shall be provided as required in Title 11 of this Code.
   E.   Site Review: Site review is required for a planned development. (Ord.
688, 6-15-1999)
10-8-3: PROCEDURE:
A planned development involving a land division shall be submitted as part of
an application for land division as provided in Title 11 of this Code and
reviewed as a Type III procedure. A planned development that does not involve a
land division shall be submitted as a conditional use permit, as provided in
Chapter 12 of this Title and reviewed as a Type III procedure. In addition to
any other submittal requirements for a subdivision or conditional use, the
preliminary plat or site plan shall show proposed building locations, with
setbacks and dimensions, and designate the type of building (e.g., single-
family attached, two-family attached, recreational building). (Ord. 688, 6-15-
1999)
10-8-4: DENSITY PROVISIONS:
In order to preserve the integrity of the Comprehensive Plan and relate it to
the planned development, the number of dwelling units permitted shall be
determined as follows:
   A.   Residential density shall be calculated by dividing the gross site area
by the minimum lot area allowed in the applicable zoning district. Where more
than one zoning district affects a site, the residential density or intensity
of commercial use shall be calculated for the site area designated, but the
actual uses on the site within the planned development may be located without
regard for zoning boundaries.
   B.   The total number of dwelling units proposed for the entire planned
development shall be no less than seventy five percent (75%) of the maximum
allowed density. For purposes of this calculation, the gross area may be
reduced by the area of land with slopes in excess of fifteen percent (15%) or
affected by any other physical constraint, such as flood plain, wetland, or
similar site constraint. However, the Planning Commission may reduce the
required maximum density if it finds that there are physical constraints that
limit the potential density and that the City's purposes listed in Section
10-8-1 of this Chapter are met.
   C.   Allowable density may be modified to reflect the provision of open
space. A development that provides open space in excess of the minimum
requirement may be allowed to increase density by as much as twenty percent
(20%), in a direct relationship with the amount of additional open space
provided. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-8-5: OPEN SPACE:
   A.   A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the gross land area of the site
proposed for a planned development shall be allocated to open space. Open space
will be maintained in public or private common ownership, with provisions for
maintenance specified through the approval process, and shall be available for
use for all residents or occupants of the planned development. Landscaping
within open space areas shall be provided with automatic watering systems or a
letter from a certified landscape architect shall attest that landscaping will
be likely to survive without a watering system. Open space shall not include
public rights of way or private spaces within lots.
   B.   Proposed open space areas shall be located to maximize the conservation
of natural features, the protection of steep slopes, water resources,
historically or culturally significant sites, and ecologically or
scientifically significant areas, where these features are present on a site.
Open space in this category need not be improved except to mitigate damage or
improve the natural features.
   C.   Proposed open space areas that do not include the features identified
in subsection B of this Section may be approved if either of the following
conditions can be demonstrated:
      1.   Open space is improved with active recreation uses, including
swimming pools; tennis, basketball, volleyball, and/or badminton courts;
children's play areas; picnic and barbecue facilities; community gardens; or
other similar facilities, and appropriate landscaping with automatic sprinkling
systems (unless an exception is authorized).
      2.   Open space is improved for passive recreation uses, including
pedestrian pathways not associated with streets that provide convenient
connections through the development; landscaping with automatic sprinkling
systems (unless an exception is authorized); view corridors; benches and seats;
and similar improvements.
   D.   Maintenance of landscaping and other improvements within the designated
open space area shall be included in the guarantee for completion and
maintenance of public facilities as required for a subdivision or shall be
guaranteed by a bond or other form of surety acceptable to the City through a
condition of approval for any conditional use permit. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-8-6: MODIFICATIONS TO SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Dimensional requirements of the underlying district or districts may be
adjusted to better achieve the purposes of the planned development, including
lot dimensions, minimum lot area, and so on. However, setbacks around the
perimeter of the development shall conform to the requirements of the
underlying district. Street right-of-way and pavement widths may be reduced to
the minimum necessary to ensure adequate service levels and public safety, but
in no case shall a right of way be less than twenty five feet (25') with a
pavement width of twenty feet (20'). A sidewalk shall be provided within the
right of way along at least one side of all streets within a planned
development. Modifications shall be considered within the context of the
planned development and need not be considered as variances. (Ord. 688, 6-15-
1999)
10-8-7: BUILDING PERMITS WITHIN AN APPROVED PLANNED DEVELOPMENT:
Building permits shall be issued within an approved and platted planned
development only on the basis of the approved final plat and after acceptance
by the city of any required public improvements. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-8-8: MODIFICATIONS OF AN APPROVED PLANNED DEVELOPMENT:
Modifications of an approved preliminary plat of a planned development and
subdivision shall only be made as provided in title 11 of this code. (Ord. 688,
6-15-1999)
10-8-9: APPROVAL CRITERIA:
The planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application based upon its findings. The planning commission shall find that
the following criteria have been met, in addition to criteria and standards of
chapter 12 of this title or title 11 of this code, as applicable. Any
conditions shall be directly related to an identified deficiency in the
proposed plan.
   A.   There are special physical conditions of the site or objectives of the
development that justify the modification of standards and densities allowed by
a planned development. The physical conditions or objectives shall be
identified and related to the purposes of the planned development.
   B.   The site design provides for open spaces through efficient design and
layout of the development. The open space is designed to preserve natural
features on the site or function as passive or recreational area within the
development.
   C.   Proposed streets, sidewalks, and pathways in the development are
adequate for the anticipated traffic and for emergency services vehicles. In
the I-82/U.S. 730 interchange area management plan (IAMP) management area,
proposed access shall be consistent with the access management plan in section
7 of the IAMP.
   D.   The site design provides for adequate light, air, and privacy, to
secure safety from fire, flood, and other danger, and to prevent overcrowding
of the land.
   E.   Any modifications to site development standards or public works
standards support the objectives of this chapter and other provisions of this
code; are justified by conditions of the site or objectives of the proposal;
and satisfy emergency access requirements. (Ord. 766, 12-6-2011)
CHAPTER 9
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
10-9-1: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-9-2: Design Standards For Off Street Parking Facilities
10-9-3: Required Number Of Vehicle And Bicycle Parking Spaces
10-9-4: Off Street Loading, Passengers
10-9-5: Off Street Loading, Merchandise
10-9-6: Off Street Surface Parking Matrix
10-9-1: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
   A.   Scope: At the time a structure is erected or floor area is enlarged by
ten percent (10%), or the use of a structure or parcel of land is changed
within any district, off street parking spaces for motor vehicles and bicycles
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this chapter unless
greater requirements are otherwise established.
   B.   Compliance: Occupancy of a building or use will not be permitted
without complying with this chapter. If parking space has been provided in
connection with an existing use, the parking space shall not be eliminated if
it would result in less than is required by this chapter. A permit for the use
of property is contingent upon the unqualified continuance and availability of
the amount of parking space required by this title. Reduction of the amount of
required off street parking shall be considered a violation of this title.
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
   C.   General Requirements:
      1.   Gross Floor Area: Where square feet are specified, the area measured
shall be the gross floor area primary to the functioning of the particular use
of property.
      2.   Number Of Employee Parking Spaces: Where employees are specified,
persons counted shall be those working on the premises, including proprietors,
during the largest shift at peak season.
      3.   Vehicle Parking; Loading Spaces: Required vehicle parking shall be
available for the parking of operable automobiles and bicycles of residents,
customers and employees and shall not be used for the storage of vehicles,
materials or for the parking of trucks used in conducting business or use. A
required loading space shall not be used for any other purpose than the
immediate loading or unloading of goods.
      4.   Calculating Number Of Parking Spaces: For purposes of calculating
the required number of vehicle or bicycle parking spaces, a fractional space
shall be counted as a whole space.
      5.   Joint Use Of Facilities: The off street requirements of two (2) or
more uses, structures, or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking
or loading spaces used jointly to the extent that it can be shown by the owners
or operators of the uses, structures or parcels that their operations and
parking needs do not overlap in point of time. If the uses, structures, or
parcels are under separate ownership, the right to joint use of the parking
space must be evidenced by a deed, lease, contract, or other appropriately
written documents to establish the joint use.
      6.   Commercial Development Parking Spaces: The maximum number of parking
spaces for a commercial development shall not exceed one hundred fifty percent
(150%) of the required parking. (Ord. 723, 6-17-2003)
   D.   Accessible Parking Spaces: Accessible parking spaces shall be provided
as required under state and/or federal laws, and shall be clearly marked in a
manner to be approved by the building official. Accessible spaces shall be
located on the shortest practical accessible route to an accessible building
entry. Whenever practical, the accessible route shall not cross lanes of
vehicular traffic. Accessible parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet
(9') wide with a six foot (6') wide access aisle between each two (2) spaces.
Accessible parking shall be provided according to the following requirements:
 
Minimum Required Number  Accessible Spaces
Of Total Parking Spaces
1 - 25    1
26 - 50   2
51 - 75   3
76 - 100  4
101 - 150 5
151 - 200 6
Over 200  7 plus 1 per 100 or fraction thereof
 
One in eight (8) accessible parking spaces, but no less than one space, shall
be a van accessible parking space. A van accessible parking space shall be nine
feet (9') wide with an eight foot (8') wide aisle that can be shared between
another nine foot (9') accessible space. An appropriate sign designating the
space as "van accessible" shall be provided.
   E.   Joint Use: Owners of two (2) or more uses, structures or parcels of
land, may agree to utilize jointly the same parking and loading spaces when the
hours of operation do not overlap; provided, that satisfactory legal evidence
is presented to the City Administrator in the form of deeds, leases or
contracts to establish joint ownership. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-9-2: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES:
   A.   Surfacing: All off-street parking spaces and driveways shall be hard
surfaced with concrete, asphaltic cement, or similar surface that is resistant
to dust and mud. Type and thickness of this hard surface shall be approved by
the City Administrator.
   B.   Bumper Rails: All required off-street parking spaces, except those for
single-family residences, must be equipped with bumper rails located in such a
manner as to prevent vehicles from striking landscaping, fences, buildings, or
walls or from overhanging their spaces in a manner which might obstruct aisles,
walks, streets, or other spaces or property.
   C.   Access:
      1.   Groups of more than four (4) off-street parking spaces shall be
served by a driveway or aisle so that no backing movements or other maneuvering
within a street other than an alley will be required.
      2.   Service drives or aisles to off-street parking areas shall be
designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic and to provide
maximum safety to pedestrians and vehicular traffic on the site.
      3.   Service drives or aisles shall be clearly and permanently marked and
defined through the use of bumper rails, fences, buildings, walls, painting or
other appropriate markers and shall not be considered as parking spaces.
   D.   Landscaping:
      1.   All parking lots shall be developed with at least ten percent (10%)
of any uncovered parking area in plantings or other landscaping as approved by
the decision maker. Single- family detached and attached residences and two-
family residences are exempt from this requirement. Parking areas for three (3)
to five (5) dwelling structures may be exempt from this requirement if
landscaping is provided around the perimeter of the parking area.
      2.   Landscaping shall be located in planter areas that separate parking
spaces into groups of ten (10) or less spaces. Each planter area shall include
at least one tree with a caliper of 2.0 inches at time of planting and ground
cover.
      3.   Required planting areas shall have a minimum dimension of not less
than five feet (5').
      4.   Required landscaping shall be continuously maintained and shall be
provided with an automatic underground sprinkler system or a certification from
a landscape architect that plant materials can survive without an automatic
sprinkling system.
   E.   Space Size: Each off-street parking space shall have a net area of not
less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet, exclusive of access drives or
aisles, and shall be designed to the dimensional requirements of Figure 1,
Section 10-9-6 of this Chapter. If determined on a gross area basis, two
hundred eighty (280) square feet shall be allowed per vehicle. Parking spaces
shall be identified with painted stripes or other permanent markings.
   F.   Parking Area Plans: No building permit shall be issued until plans are
presented that show property that is and will remain available exclusively for
off-street parking. The subsequent use of property for which the permit is
issued shall be conditional upon the unqualified continuance and availability
of the amount of parking space required by this Title. Reduction of the amount
of required off-street parking shall be considered a violation of this Title.
Parking area plans shall be drawn to scale and shall delineate parking spaces,
aisle and maneuvering areas, and landscaped areas.
   G.   Space Location: Off-street parking facilities shall be located as
herein specified. Where a distance is specified, such distance shall be the
distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to the nearest
point of the building that such facility is required to serve.
      1.   For All Dwelling Structures And Motels: On the same lot with the
building they are to serve.
      2.   For Rooming Houses And Apartment Houses: Within one hundred feet
(100') of the building they are required to serve, including recreational
vehicle storage as may be required.
      3.   For Uses Other Than Specified Above: Within two hundred feet (200')
of the building they are required to serve. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-9-3: REQUIRED NUMBER OF VEHICLE AND BICYCLE PARKING SPACES:
Required off-street parking spaces are as listed in the following table. Where
alternative standards prevail, the greater applies in conflicting computations.
For uses not listed, the required vehicle and bicycle parking shall be the same
as for the most similar use, as determined by the City Administrator.
 
Use  Vehicle Parking Spaces  Bicycle Parking Spaces
                           1 space for each sleeping
Auto court, motel, hotel,  unit, guest room or suite  1 space per 10 guest
tourist home               plus 1 space for the       rooms
                           manager
                                                      2 spaces or 0.2 per 1,000
Automobile service         3 spaces plus 2 spaces     square feet of gross
station                    per service bay, if any    floor area, whichever is
                                                      greater
Automobile service                                    2 spaces or 0.2 per 1,000
station with convenience   1 space per 400 square     square feet of gross
market                     feet of gross floor area   floor area, whichever is
                                                      greater
Bank, business or          1 space for each 400
professional office with   square feet of gross
on-site customer service   floor area
                           1 space for each chair
Beauty/barbershops         and 1 space for each 2
                           employees
Bowling alley              3 spaces for each lane or
                           alley
                           1 space for each 50
Dance hall, skating rink   square feet of dance
                           floor or skating area
Food and beverage place    1 space for each 200       1 space per 1,000 square
(with drive-through)       square feet of gross       feet of gross floor area
                           floor area
Food and beverage place    1 space for each 150
with sale and consumption  square feet of gross       1 space per 1,000 square
on the premises (no        floor area                 feet of gross floor area
drive-through)
Hospital, nursing home or  1 space for each 2 beds
institution
                           1 space for each 300       1.5 spaces per 1,000
Library                    square feet of gross       square feet of gross
                           floor area                 floor area
Manufacturing uses,        1.5 spaces per 1,000
testing research,          square feet of gross
processing or assembly     floor area
uses
                           1 space for each 300
Medical or dental clinic   square feet of gross
                           floor area
Mortuary                   1 space for each 4 seats
                           in the chapel
                           2 spaces for each
                           dwelling unit for the
Multiplex and apartment    first 4 units; 1.5 spaces  1 space per dwelling unit
structures                 for each additional
                           dwelling in the same
                           structure
Office not providing       1 space for each 600
customer services on-      square feet of gross
premises                   floor area
                           1 space per 300 square
Preschool, childcare       feet of gross floor area,  1 space per classroom
facility or kindergarten   plus 1 space for each bus
                           kept on the premises
Retail store,              1 space for each 400
supermarket, department    square feet of gross
store and personal         floor area
service shop
Roadside stands            Minimum of 4 spaces
Schools, commercial        1 space per 300 square
                           feet of gross floor area
Schools, middle or high    1 space per employee,
school                     plus 1 space for each 6    3 spaces per classroom
                           students
Schools, primary and       1 space per employee       3 spaces per classroom
elementary
Service and repair shop    1 space for each 1,000
and retail store handling  square feet of gross
bulky merchandise such as  floor area
automobiles and furniture
Single-family attached     1 space for each dwelling  1 space (may be located
residential structures     unit                       within a garage)
Single-family detached
residential structures     2 spaces, 1 of which may   None required
including manufactured     be in a driveway
homes on lots or in parks
Stadium, sports area, or
similar enclosed place of  1 space for each 4 seats
assembly
Theater, auditorium,       1 space for each 4 seats
church, or similar         or 1 for each 72 square    1 space per 60 lineal
enclosed place of          feet of floor or assembly  feet of bench seating or
assembly                   area not containing fixed  equivalent
                           seating
Warehouse, storage and     1 space for each 2,000
wholesale business         square feet of gross
                           floor area
 
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-9-4: OFF-STREET LOADING, PASSENGERS:
Schools having a capacity greater than twenty five (25) students shall provide
a driveway designed for continuous forward flow of passenger vehicles for the
purpose of loading and unloading children. The driveway shall be located
outside of a normal travel lane. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-9-5: OFF-STREET LOADING, MERCHANDISE:
Any use which requires supply or delivery of goods or merchandise shall provide
off-street loading area which shall not interfere with traffic or block any
street, alley or required parking spaces. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-9-6: OFF-STREET SURFACE PARKING MATRIX:
FIGURE 1
[Image]
 
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
CHAPTER 10
NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
10-10-1: Continuation Of Nonconforming Use Or Structure
10-10-2: Nonconforming Structure
10-10-3: Discontinuance Of A Nonconforming Use
10-10-4: Change Of A Nonconforming Use
10-10-5: Destruction Of A Nonconforming Use
10-10-6: Completion Of Building
10-10-7: Verification Of A Nonconforming Status
10-10-8: General Exceptions
10-10-9: Nonconforming Manufactured Homes
10-10-1: CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE:
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, a nonconforming structure or use may
be continued and maintained in reasonable repair, but shall not be altered or
extended. The extension of a nonconforming use to a portion of a structure that
was arranged or designed for the nonconforming use at the time of passage of
this title is permitted. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-10-2: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE:
Except for signs or billboards, a structure conforming as to use, but
nonconforming as to height, setback, or coverage may be altered or extended;
providing the alteration or extension does not exceed the height, setback, or
coverage requirements of this title. A nonconforming sign or billboard shall
not be altered or extended except to make it comply with the requirements of
this title. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-10-3: DISCONTINUANCE OF A NONCONFORMING USE:
If a nonconforming use is discontinued from active use for a period of one
year, further use of the property shall be for a conforming use. (Ord. 688, 6-
15-1999)
10-10-4: CHANGE OF A NONCONFORMING USE:
If a nonconforming use is changed, it shall be changed to a use conforming to
the zoning regulations and after change, it shall not be changed back again to
the original nonconforming use. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-10-5: DESTRUCTION OF A NONCONFORMING USE:
If a nonconforming use is destroyed by any cause to an extent exceeding eighty
percent (80%) of its fair market value as indicated by the records of the
county assessor, a future structure or use on the site shall conform to this
title unless replaced within one year of destruction. (Ord. 722, 6-3-2003)
10-10-6: COMPLETION OF BUILDING:
Nothing contained in this title shall require any change in the plans,
construction, alteration, or designed use of a structure for which a permit has
been issued by the city and construction has commenced prior to the adoption of
this title; provided the structure, if nonconforming or intended for a
nonconforming use, is completed and in use within two (2) years from the time
the permit is issued. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-10-7: VERIFICATION OF A NONCONFORMING STATUS:
An owner or operator of an alleged nonconforming use or structure may apply for
a "verification of nonconforming status" through a type II procedure. The city
administrator shall review information provided by the applicant and any
pertinent records. The city administrator shall issue a decision that makes
findings that describe the circumstances and situation relating to the use or
structure. The decision shall establish the approximate date or length of time
the use or structure has been in existence and the date when a change in this
code made the use or structure nonconforming. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-10-8: GENERAL EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Lot Size Requirements: If a property ownership, consisting of the
entire contiguous landholdings held in a single ownership at the time of
passage of this title, has an area or dimension which does not meet the lot
size requirements of the district in which the property is located, the
holdings may be occupied by a use permitted in the district subject to the
other requirements of the district; provided that if there is an area of
deficiency, residential use shall be limited to a single-family dwelling or to
the number of dwelling units consistent with the density requirement of the
district. The record of ownership as recorded in the office of the county clerk
at the time of passage of this title shall be the basis for application of this
exception unless the owner submits proof that a different ownership existed at
the time the provisions of this title became applicable to the land concerned.
   B.   Yard Requirements: The following exceptions to yard requirements are
authorized for a lot in any district:
      1.   If there are buildings on both abutting lots which are within one
hundred feet (100') of the intervening lot, and the buildings have front yards
of less than the required depth for the district, the depth of the front yard
for the intervening lot need not exceed the average depth of the front yards of
the abutting lots.
      2.   If there is a building on one abutting lot which is within one
hundred feet (100') of the lot, and this building has a front yard of less than
the required depth for the district, the front yard for the lot need not exceed
a depth halfway between the depth of the front yard of the abutting lot and the
required front yard depth. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-10-9 NONCONFORMING MANUFACTURED HOMES:
Existing manufactured homes nonconforming to setbacks may be replaced provided
the replacement manufactured home does not further reduce existing setbacks.
Existing manufactured homes that are not multi-sectional may be replaced with a
similar manufactured home. Existing manufactured homes without a garage or
carport may be replaced without providing a garage or carport if providing a
garage or carport is infeasible due to lot size, configuration or other
development constraints. Cost shall not be a reason to justify replacement of
manufactured home without a garage or carport. Replacement manufactured homes
allowed by this standard shall have been manufactured within ten (10) years. 
(Ord. 835, 6-4-2019)
CHAPTER 11
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-11-1: General Accessory Use Provisions
10-11-2: Projections Into Required Yards, Setback And Height Exceptions
10-11-3: Maintenance Of Minimum Ordinance Requirements
10-11-4: Vision Clearance
10-11-5: Swimming Pools, Fish Ponds, Or Other Decorative Pools
10-11-6: Utilities
10-11-7: Easements
10-11-8: Manufactured Home Site Standards
10-11-9: Single-Family Dwelling Site Standards
10-11-10: Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA)
10-11-11: Accessory Dwelling Unit Site Standards
10-11-12: Mobile Food Vendors
10-11-13: Townhouse Site Standards
10-11-1: GENERAL ACCESSORY USE PROVISIONS:
Accessory uses shall comply with all requirements for the primary use except
where specifically modified by this title and shall comply with the following
limitations:
   A.   Home Occupation: A home occupation shall be conducted completely within
a residence by the occupant of the residence. No more than one nonresident
employee shall engage in the business. The residential character of the
building shall be maintained with no exterior changes to the appearance or
structure of the property and no signs shall be visible from the public street.
A home occupation shall occupy less than one-quarter (1/4) of the ground floor
areas of the main building. Home occupations shall not include repair of
vehicles.
   B.   Fences, Walls, And Similar Barriers:
      1.   Fences within the vision clearance area described in section
10-11-4 of this chapter, shall not exceed three feet (3') in height and shall
not create an obstruction to the vision of drivers.
      2.   Outside of the vision clearance area, fences are limited to a
maximum of six feet (6') in height, except that fences and walls, railings or
mature hedges shall not exceed four feet (4') in height within the required
front yard.
      3.   A fence permit from the City is required for fences over six feet
(6’) in height. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution.
   C.   Greenhouse: A greenhouse or hothouse may be maintained as an accessory
use to a residence only if there are no sales.
   D.   Guesthouse: A guesthouse may be maintained as an accessory use to a
dwelling provided that there are no cooking facilities in the guesthouse. (Ord.
830, 8-7-2018; amd. Ord. 834, 6-4-2019)
10-11-2: PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED YARDS, SETBACK AND HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Limit: Cornices, eaves, canopies, sunshades, gutters, chimneys, flues,
belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, and
other similar architectural features may project not more than two feet (2')
into a required yard or required open space.
   B.   Setbacks: Regardless of the side yard requirements of the district, a
side or rear yard may be reduced to three feet (3') for an accessory structure
erected more than sixty five feet (65') from a street other than an alley and
provided that the structure is detached from other buildings by six feet (6')
or more and does not exceed a height of one story nor an area of more than five
hundred (500) square feet.
   C.   Building Height Limitations: The following types of structures or
structural parts may exceed the building height limitations of this title:
      1.   Antennas for radio communications.
      2.   Belfries.
      3.   Chimneys.
      4.   Church spires.
      5.   Flagpoles. (Ord. 830, 8-7-2018; amd. Ord. 834, 6-4-2019)
10-11-3: MAINTENANCE OF MINIMUM ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS:
No lot area, yard, or other open space, or required off street parking or
loading area existing on or after the effective date of this title, shall be
reduced in area, dimensions, or size below the minimum required by this title,
nor shall any lot area, yard, or other open space or off street parking or
loading area which is required by this title for one use be used as the lot
area, yard, or other open space or off street parking or loading area
requirement for any other use, except as provided in chapter 9 of this title.
(Ord. 830, 8-7-2018)
10-11-4: VISION CLEARANCE:
A vision clearance area shall be an area that is roughly triangular in shape
that is established at the intersection of a street, alley, or driveway. It is
measured along right-of- way or property lines, according to the following
requirements:
   A.   Residential Districts: In a residential district, the minimum distance
shall be thirty feet (30'), or at intersections including an alley or driveway,
ten feet (10'), measured from the point of intersection.
   B.   Other Districts: In commercial and industrial districts, the minimum
distance shall be fifteen feet (15'), or ten feet (10') if the intersection
includes an alley or driveway.
   C.   Access To Public Right-Of-Way: Access to the public right- of-way
(public or private driveway) shall not be located within the vision clearance
area of an intersection, unless there is no other alternative for access to a
site. (Ord. 830, 8-7-2018)
10-11-5: SWIMMING POOLS, FISH PONDS, OR OTHER DECORATIVE POOLS:
   A.   Fence Required: Every manmade body of water with a depth of more than
eighteen inches (18") at any point shall be completely surrounded by a six foot
(6') high fence or comparable enclosure. The fence shall have a self-closing,
self-latching gate, with the latch mechanism located at least four feet (4')
above grade. The fence shall be designed to discourage children from climbing
and have no openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches (4") in any
dimension.
   B.   Building Permit Required: A building permit is required for a swimming
pool. Plans shall be filed with the City and meet the requirements of this
chapter and the Building Code. No pool shall be used until a final inspection
is made by the City after its construction is completed.
   C.   Setbacks: A swimming pool shall be set back from any interior side or
rear property line by a minimum of five feet (5'). Any associated structures
shall comply with setbacks for a building or accessory structure for the
district in which it is located.
   D.   Exceptions: This chapter shall not apply to public swimming pools or
wading pools maintained and operated by any public entity. (Ord. 830, 8-7-2018)
10-11-6: UTILITIES:
In all industrial, commercial, and residential districts, all electrical,
telephone, and cable television utility service installations or connections
made as part of new construction of a building or structure, shall be placed
underground in accordance with City standards. McNary Industrial Park is exempt
from this requirement. (Ord. 830, 8-7-2018)
10-11-7: EASEMENTS:
When an easement is required, the following standards shall apply:
   A.   Pedestrian Easements: In order to facilitate pedestrian access from
streets, lots, or developments, to schools, parks, nearby streets, or other
developments, an easement no less than ten feet (10') wide with a paved pathway
no less than six feet (6') shall be required. Any sight obscuring barrier such
as a fence or planting at the edge of the easement shall not exceed three feet
(3') in height in order to maintain visibility of the walkway from adjacent
properties.
   B.   Open Space Easements: An open space easement may be required over areas
in private ownership of the floodplain or areas with unique natural condition.
Such easement shall preclude development of the area when limiting the use of a
property is determined to be in the public interest.
   C.   General Public Easements: When topography or other conditions make
impractical the location of drainage facilities, sanitary sewer or water lines
within the public street right-of-way, an unobstructed easement shall be
provided across a property. Easements shall be of sufficient width to safely
excavate buried facilities, but generally shall be no less than fifteen feet
(15') in width. (Ord. 830, 8-7-2018)
10-11-8: MANUFACTURED HOME SITE STANDARDS:
Manufactured homes used as permanent residences and meeting the following
standards are allowed outside of manufactured home parks on individual lots in
any district where single- family residences are allowed:
   A.   The manufactured home shall be multi-sectional and enclose a space of
not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet.
   B.   The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and backfilled
foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the manufactured home is
located not more than twelve inches (12") above grade.
   C.   The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof, except that no
standard shall require a slope of greater than a nominal three feet (3') in
height for each twelve feet (12') in width.
   D.   The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in
color, material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing
material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or which
is comparable to the dominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as
determined by the City Administrator.
   E.   The manufactured home shall be certified by the manufacturer to have an
exterior thermal envelope meeting performance standards which reduce levels
equivalent to the performance standards required of single-family dwellings
constructed under the State Building Code as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes
455.010.
   F.   The manufactured home shall have a garage or carport constructed of
like materials.
   G.   The manufactured home is subject to any development standard,
architectural requirement, and minimum size requirement to which a conventional
single-family residential dwelling on the same lot would be subject.
   H.   Each manufactured home shall be provided with a paved driveway no less
than ten feet (10') wide for a single vehicle garage or carport or eighteen
feet (18') for a two (2) vehicle garage or carport. (Ord. 830, 8-7-2018)
10-11-9: SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING SITE STANDARDS:
   A.   The single-family dwelling shall enclose a space of not less than one
thousand (1,000) square feet.
   B.   Each single-family dwelling shall have a garage or carport constructed
of like materials and colors.
   C.   Each single-family dwelling shall be provided with a paved driveway not
less than ten feet (10') wide for a single vehicle garage or carport or
eighteen feet (18') for a two (2) vehicle garage or carport. (Ord. 830, 8-7-
2018)
10-11-10: TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA):
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to implement section 660-012-
0045(2)(e) of the State Transportation Planning Rule that requires the City to
adopt a process to apply conditions to specified land use proposals in order to
minimize adverse impacts to and protect transportation facilities. This section
establishes the standards for when a proposal must be reviewed for potential
traffic impacts; when a Traffic Impact Analysis must be submitted with an
application in order to determine whether conditions are needed to minimize
impacts to and protect transportation facilities; what must be in a Traffic
Impact Analysis; and who is qualified to prepare the analysis.
   B.   Applicability: A Traffic Impact Analysis shall be required to be
submitted to the City with a land use application, when the following
conditions apply:
      1.   The application involves one or more of the following actions:
         a.   A change in zoning or plan amendment designation; or
         b.   The proposal is projected to cause one or more of the following
effects, which can be determined by field counts, site observation, traffic
impact analysis or study, field measurements, crash history, Institute of
Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual; and information and studies
provided by the local reviewing jurisdiction and/or ODOT:
            (1)   An increase in site traffic volume generation by two hundred
fifty (250) average daily trips (ADT) or more (or as required by the City
Engineer). The latest edition of the Trip Generation Manual, published by the
Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) shall be used as standards by which
to gauge average daily vehicle trips; or
            (2)   An increase in use of adjacent streets by vehicles exceeding
the twenty thousand (20,000) pound gross vehicle weight by ten (10) vehicles or
more per day; or
            (3)   The location of the access driveway does not meet minimum
intersection sight distance requirements, or is located where vehicles entering
or leaving the property are restricted, or vehicles queue or hesitate, creating
a safety hazard; or
            (4)   The location of the access driveway does not meet the access
spacing standard of the roadway on which the driveway is located; or
            (5)   A change in internal traffic patterns that may cause safety
problems, such as backup onto the highway or traffic crashes in the approach
area.
   C.   Traffic Impact Analysis Requirements:
      1.   Preparation: A Traffic Impact Analysis shall be prepared by an
Oregon registered professional engineer that is qualified to perform traffic
engineering analysis and will be paid for by the applicant.
      2.   Transportation Planning Rule Compliance: See section 10-13-3,
"Amendments To The Zoning Text Or Map", of this title.
      3.   Pre-Application Conference: The applicant will meet with the
Umatilla Public Works Director and Planning Director prior to submitting an
application that requires a Traffic Impact Analysis. The City has the
discretion to determine the required elements of the TIA and the level of
analysis expected. The City shall also consult the Oregon Department of
Transportation (ODOT) on analysis requirements when the site of the proposal is
adjacent to or otherwise affects a State roadway.
   D.   Approval Criteria: When a Traffic Impact Analysis is required, approval
of the proposal requires satisfaction of the following criteria:
      1.   Traffic Impact Analysis was prepared by an Oregon registered
professional engineer qualified to perform traffic engineering analysis;
      2.   If the proposed action shall cause a significant effect pursuant to
the Transportation Planning Rule, or other traffic hazard or negative impact to
a transportation facility, the Traffic Impact Analysis shall include mitigation
measures that meet the City's level-of-service and/or volume/capacity standards
and are satisfactory to the City Engineer, and ODOT when applicable; and
      3.   The proposed site design and traffic and circulation design and
facilities, for all transportation modes, including any mitigation measures,
are designed to:
         a.   Have the least negative impact on all applicable transportation
facilities;
         b.   Accommodate and encourage non-motor vehicular modes of
transportation to the extent practicable;
         c.   Make the most efficient use of land and public facilities as
practicable;
         d.   Provide the most direct, safe and convenient routes practicable
between on-site destinations, and between on-site and off-site destinations;
and
         e.   Otherwise comply with applicable requirements of this Code.
   E.   Conditions Of Approval: The City may deny, approve, or approve a
proposal with appropriate conditions.
      1.   Where the existing transportation system is shown to be impacted by
the proposed action, dedication of land for streets, transit facilities,
sidewalks, bikeways, paths, or accessways may be required to ensure that the
transportation system is adequate to handle the additional burden caused by the
proposed action.
      2.   Where the existing transportation system is shown to be impacted by
the proposed action, improvements such as paving, curbing, installation or
contribution to traffic signals, construction of sidewalks, bikeways,
accessways, paths, or streets that serve the proposed action may be required.
(Ord. 830, 8-7-2018)
10-11-11: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT SITE STANDARDS:
Accessory dwellings, where allowed, are subject to review and approval through
a type I procedure and shall conform to all of the following standards:
   A.   A maximum of one accessory dwelling is allowed per legal detached
single-family dwelling. The unit may be a detached building, in a portion of a
detached accessory building (e.g., above a garage or workshop), or a unit
attached or interior to the primary dwelling (e.g., an addition or the
conversion of an existing floor).
   B.   A detached accessory dwelling shall not exceed eight hundred (800)
square feet of floor area, or seventy five percent (75%) of the primary
dwelling's floor area, whichever is smaller.
   C.   An attached or interior accessory dwelling shall not exceed eight
hundred (800) square feet of floor area, or seventy five percent (75%) of the
primary dwelling's floor area, whichever is smaller. However, accessory
dwellings that result from the conversion of a level or floor (e.g., basement,
attic, or second story) of the primary dwelling may occupy the entire level or
floor, even if the floor area of the accessory dwelling would be more than
eight hundred (800) square feet.
   D.   A detached accessory dwelling shall be located in the rear yard of the
primary dwelling unless the accessory dwelling is located in a portion of a
detached accessory building.
   E.   All accessory dwellings shall provide one off-street parking space
subject to the standards in sections
10-9-1 through
10-9-6 of this title.
   F.   Accessory dwelling units are subject to the development standards of
the underlaying zone in which they are located. (Ord. 830, 8-7-2018)
10-11-12: MOBILE FOOD VENDORS:
A.   Mobile food vendors shall maintain all required licenses by the
appropriate State and/or local agency, including but not limited to a city
business license.
B.   Any vehicle utilized as a mobile food vendor shall be in full operational
condition. The vehicle shall have a valid state vehicle license from any state
and shall be capable of leaving a site at any time under its own power or that
of an available towing vehicle.
C.   Mobile food vendors shall not operate within any public right-of-way.
D.   Mobile food vendors shall maintain the area in and around the vehicle,
keep the area free from litter and waste, and shall supply a suitable container
for waste  collection. Mobile food vendors shall be responsible for the proper
collection and disposal of onsite litter and waste.
E.   Outdoor seating and equipment is permitted; provided that the placement of
any outdoor seating or equipment shall not be placed in a manner so as to
reduce the amount of available off-street parking spaces below the minimum off-
street parking required for the site. If outdoor seating is provided restroom
facilities including handwashing facilities shall be provide onsite or via
adjacent restroom facility access for customers (e.g. in an adjacent business
with owner permission). Required restrooms shall be available during operating
hours.
F.   Location And Use:
   1.   Mobile food vendors operating as an accessory off-street use shall meet
the following standards:
      a.   Mobile food vendors are allowed on legally established parking or
vehicle areas only.
      b.   Mobile food vendors operating as an accessory off-street use shall
not remain onsite for more than forty eight (48) consecutive hours during any
seven (7) day period.
   2.   Mobile food vendor pods shall meet the following standards:
      a.   Mobile food vendors shall be located on a hard surface with
concrete, asphaltic cement, or similar surface that is resistant to dust and
mud.
      b.   Mobile food vendors shall not create tripping hazards in pedestrian
and vehicular circulation areas with items including, but not limited to,
cords, hoses, pipes, cables, or similar materials.
      c.   Mobile food vendors shall not be located in the vision clearance
area described in section 10-11-4 of this title.
      d.   A minimum of one (1) off street parking space per food vendor space
shall be provided consistent with chapter 9 of this title.
   3.   Mobile food vendors may, with city's permission, operate as a
concessionaire on publicly owned and operated facilities.
G.   Utilities: All utilities shall be placed or otherwise screened, covered,
or hidden from view from the right of way as to minimize visual impacts and
prevent tripping hazards or other unsafe conditions.
   1.   Wastewater shall be addressed in one of the following two (2) ways:
      a.   Mobile food vendors may connect to the sanitary sewer consistent
with applicable state plumbing codes, and will include an approved grease
separator for disposal of fats, oils and grease. Indirect discharge or leakage
draining into the storm water system is prohibited.
      b.   Mobile food vendors may connect to an individual wastewater holding
tanks. The operator shall be responsible to comply applicable City, County and
State regulations and licensing requirements for use an individual holding tank
and disposal of wastewater.
   2.   Potable water shall be addressed in one of the following two (2)ways:
      a.   Mobile food vendors may connect to a permanent water source in
conformance with applicable state plumbing codes.
      b.   Mobile food vendors may be connected to a potable water tank
consistent with all applicable City, County and State rules, regulations and
licensing requirements.
   Mobile food vendors may connect to a permanent power source. Power
connections may not be connected by overhead wires to the individual food
vendors. Connections to a permanent power source shall be consistent with
applicable state electrical codes.  (Ord. 836, 6-4-2019)
10-11-13 TOWNHOUSE SITE STANDARDS:
A.   There shall be no setback for townhouse units where abutting a common
wall. The side yard setback on each end of a townhouse block shall be the same
as the underlaying zone.
B.   Each building shall contain not more than six (6) consecutively attached
dwelling units except in the Downtown Residential Zone. Building in the
Downtown Residential Zone shall contain not more than eight (8) consecutively
attached units.
C.   The primary entrance of each dwelling unit shall orient to a street or
interior courtyard that is not less than twenty feet (20’) in width.
D.   Each townhouse shall have a garage or carport.
E.   The maximum allowable driveway width facing the street is twelve feet
(12’) per dwelling unit. The maximum combined garage width per unit is fifty
percent (50%) of the total building width. For example, a twenty-four foot
(24’) wide unit may have one twelve-foot (12’) wide garage facing the street.
F.   The development standards of the underlaying zone and the residential site
design criteria and standards as contained in Section
10-13-2 of this title shall be met. (Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
CHAPTER 12
CONDITIONAL USES
SECTION:
10-12-1: Authorization To Grant Or Deny
10-12-2: Standards Governing Conditional Uses
10-12-3: Application Requirements
10-12-4: Conditional Uses Not Covered
10-12-1: AUTHORIZATION TO GRANT OR DENY:
A conditional use listed in this Title, may be permitted, denied, enlarged or
altered upon authorization of the Planning Commission in accordance with the
criteria and standards of this Chapter and Type III procedures in Chapter 14 of
this Title. Site review is required for conditional uses.
   A.   Approval Criteria: The applicant shall carry the burden of proof in
demonstrating that the following review criteria are satisfied, in addition to
any specific criteria and standards in this Chapter, other applicable chapters
of this Title, and this Code. If any of the following criteria and other
applicable standards cannot be satisfied by requiring conditions with the
approval, the use shall be denied:
      1.   Applicable Plans: The conditional use application complies with
applicable policies of the Umatilla City Comprehensive Plan.
      2.   Code Provisions: The proposal complies with all applicable
provisions of this Code, including, but not limited to, provisions of this
Chapter, the base district, and site review, as well as any other applicable
provisions of this Code.
      3.   Use Characteristics: If the proposed use is a community service,
application shall include evidence to demonstrate that the proposed use is
needed within the community to provide a social or technical benefit.
      4.   Site Characteristics: The site is appropriate for the proposed use,
considering, but not limited to, the following factors: neighboring land use,
adequacy of transportation facilities and access, site size and configuration,
adequacy of public facilities.
      5.   Impacts On The Neighborhood: Potential impacts on neighboring
properties shall be identified. Mitigating measures shall be identified for
unavoidable adverse impacts.
      6.   Impacts On The Community: Potential impacts on the community shall
be identified, including, but not limited to, public facilities, land supply
within the particular zoning district, impact on housing, etc. Potential
benefits of a proposed use may outweigh potential impacts, but such benefits
and impacts should be identified. Unavoidable adverse impacts should be
mitigated to the extent possible.
   B.   Conditions Of Approval: Conditions of approval for mitigating measures
shall be clearly related to the identified impact or impacts. If complex
conditions of approval are considered necessary, this is an indication that the
proposed use may not be appropriate for the proposed site. Conditions of
approval may include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Increasing the required lot size or yard dimension.
      2.   Limiting the height, size, or location of the building or use.
      3.   Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points.
      4.   Increasing the street width and requiring street improvements.
      5.   Increasing or decreasing the number of required off-street parking
spaces.
      6.   Limiting the number, size, location, and lighting of signs.
      7.   Requiring diking, fencing, screening, landscaping, or other
facilities designed to protect adjacent or nearby properties.
      8.   Designating sites for open space.
   C.   Existing Conditional Use: Any conditional use existing prior to the
effective date of this Title, and classified in this Title as a conditional
use, shall not be changed with respect to the use, site, or structure, unless
the change conforms with the current requirements for conditional use. (Ord.
688, 6-15-1999)
10-12-2: STANDARDS GOVERNING CONDITIONAL USES:
In addition to the standards of the district in which the conditional use is
located and the other standards of this Title, the following criteria and
standards shall apply to the specifically identified conditional use:
   A.   Natural Resources: The use of premises in any district for the
excavation, mining extraction, or removal of stone, sand, gravel, clay, or
other natural deposits may only be authorized by the Planning Commission in
accordance with this Title and subject to the following additional
requirements:
      1.   The applicant shall submit a site plan and vicinity map showing uses
within one thousand feet (1,000') of the site, and a topographic map(s) that
shows a cross section of the site as it currently exists and after the proposed
aggregate mining, in addition to any other submittal requirements of this
Chapter.
      2.   Required setbacks for any mining operation shall be no less than one
hundred feet (100') from any public right of way and no less than five hundred
feet (500') from any residence.
      3.   Screening consisting of vegetation, berming, or other measures shall
provide a visual screen along an abutting public right of way. Screening shall
also be provided around the site except when adjacent properties are designated
M-2.
      4.   The City shall review the proposed use for impacts on streets and
other existing or contemplated public improvements, upon all properties within
one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of such excavations, and on the
proposed use of the site following completion of mining and reclamation.
Identified impacts may be mitigated through clear and objective conditions of
approval.
      5.   The City may require that the applicant enter into an agreement with
the City for reclamation of such areas to suitable use after completion of
excavations, and that an adequate performance guarantee be furnished covering
the cost of restoration or other work.
      6.   The City shall coordinate its review with the State Department of
Geology and Mineral Industries (DOGAMI).
   B.   Schools: In considering a conditional use application for a public or
private school facility, the Planning Commission shall make findings that the
site location best serves the intended area, access to the site is adequate,
and impacts on surrounding properties and appropriate mitigating measures are
identified.
      1.   Day nurseries and kindergartens shall provide and maintain at least
one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor play area per child. A sight-obscuring
fence at least four feet (4') high, but not more than six feet (6') high, shall
separate the play area from abutting properties. The outdoor play area shall
not be located in front of the building.
      2.   Primary schools shall provide one acre of site area for each ninety
(90) pupils or one acre for every three (3) classrooms, whichever is greater.
      3.   Elementary schools shall provide one acre of site area for each
seventy five (75) pupils or one acre for every two and one-half (21/2)
classrooms, whichever is greater.
   C.   Buildings Intended For Religious Worship: The Planning Commission may
authorize a building for use for religious worship if the size of the site is
adequate for the intended use, but not less than fifteen thousand (15,000)
square feet in area, access to the site is adequate, and impacts on surrounding
property and appropriate mitigating measures are identified.
   D.   Utilities, Storage Tanks, And Towers For Transmission Of Radio Waves
For Cellular Communications And Similar Facilities: The Planning Commission
shall determine that the proposed site is located to best serve the intended
area and that impacts on surrounding properties and appropriate mitigating
measures are identified. Such facilities shall be located, designed, and
installed with regard for aesthetic values.
   E.   Automobile Service Stations: The following development standards and
requirements apply to new automobile service stations:
      1.   The minimum area for a service station site shall be fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet; the maximum area shall be thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet.
      2.   The maximum street frontage for a service station site on a corner
lot shall be one hundred twenty feet (120').
      3.   A service station shall not be constructed within six hundred forty
(640) lineal feet of any part of a building housing another service station.
      4.   Landscaping shall be installed and maintained on ten percent (10%)
of a service station site. Landscaping shall be located along the street
frontage and adjacent to the primary entrance for persons along the front of
any building.
   F.   Recreational Vehicle Parks: Recreational vehicle parks shall conform to
the following standards and requirements:
      1.   There shall be no long-term residential occupancy of a recreational
vehicle park space. The maximum time any individual or vehicle is permitted is
ninety (90) days within any one hundred eighty (180) day period. The applicant
or subsequent park operator shall make his occupancy records available to the
City to assure that this condition is met. Violation of the ninety (90) day
occupancy limitation shall be grounds for immediate revocation of a conditional
use permit.
      2.   The minimum area for a recreational vehicle park shall be three (3)
acres.
      3.   A site plan shall be submitted for the recreational vehicle park,
showing space locations, buildings and purpose of buildings, open space and
recreational facilities if any, street layout, and landscaping, as well as
locations for public water supply, sewage disposal, fire hydrants, and sanitary
facilities conforming to requirements of the State Health Division, the Oregon
Department of Environmental Quality, and the Uniform Building Codes Agency.
      4.   Domestic water and wastewater collection facilities shall be
approved by the appropriate State agency. Connections to the City system shall
be approved by the City Administrator.
      5.   A recreational vehicle space shall have an area of not less than
seven hundred (700) square feet, exclusive of driveways and common areas.
      6.   Park roadways shall have a minimum width of thirty feet (30') when
on-street parking is proposed and twenty four feet (24') where no on-street
parking is permitted. Roadways shall be designed and improved to City standards
for paving, curbs, and sidewalks, unless the applicant demonstrates that an
alternative construction standard and street design is more appropriate for the
site.
      7.   Each recreational vehicle space shall have at least one ten foot by
twenty foot (10' x 20') parking space off-street exclusive of the recreational
vehicle itself. Parking and driveway areas shall be paved.
      8.   Outdoor lighting shall be provided that is oriented to prevent
direct illumination onto adjacent or abutting properties.
      9.   The recreational vehicle park shall be screened on all sides by a
sight-obscuring planting, screening fence, or combination thereof that is at
least six feet (6') in height. The recreational vehicle park owner or operator
shall be responsible for the maintenance of such screening.
      10.   The park shall provide piped potable water to accommodate not less
than seventy five percent (75%) of the spaces available. One waste disposal
dump station for RVs shall be provided with each one hundred (100) sites or
fraction thereof. All water, sewer, and storm drain facilities both on- site
and off-site shall be approved by the City Administrator.
      11.   Sanitary facilities shall be provided in accordance with State
standards. Sanitary sewer shall be provided to not less than seventy five
percent (75%) of the spaces.
      12.   Trash receptacles shall be provided at the rate of thirty (30)
gallons of refuse capacity for each two (2) recreational vehicle spaces or
equivalent.
      13.   Each recreational vehicle space shall be provided with electrical
service.
      14.   All plumbing facilities shall be inspected and approved by the City
Administrator.
   G.   Manufactured Home Parks:
      1.   General Requirements:
         a.   State Requirements: All improvements included in the Oregon
Revised Statutes 446 and 814.28 shall be complied with by any person owning or
operating a manufactured home park and by any person placing a manufactured
home in a park.
         b.   Character Of The Land: Land which is subject to flooding, poor
drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations, or
topography, utility easements, or other features which will reasonably be
harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the future inhabitants of
the manufactured home park shall not be developed. Existing features that would
add value to the development or to the City as a whole, such as trees,
watercourses, historical and archaeological sites, and similar irreplaceable
assets, shall be preserved in the design.
         c.   Phasing: If the manufactured home park is to be built in phases,
each phase shall be built in accordance with these regulations and the
improvements required as each phase is constructed shall be determined based
upon the total number of manufactured home spaces which will exist after
completion of all phases.
      2.   Required Improvements: The following improvements shall be required
in manufactured home parks:
         a.   Driveways: No dwelling space shall have access to a public street
but shall be provided with a paved driveway with a minimum width of ten feet
(10') to an interior street.
         b.   Interior Streets: Minimum width of twenty feet (20'), paved with
a City standard or rolled curbs on both sides of interior streets and a
sidewalk at least four feet (4') wide, or as necessary to comply with ADA
requirements, on both sides of an interior street.
         c.   Street Signs: Appropriate street signs on interior streets and at
the intersection of interior streets with public streets.
         d.   Parking:
            (1)   Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each
manufactured home space.
            (2)   Parking spaces shall be provided on a hard surfaced area at
least ten feet by forty feet (10' x 40') or twenty feet by twenty feet (20' x
20').
            (3)   A carport or garage shall be provided for each manufactured
home space for at least one required parking space. The covered parking space
may be provided along a space boundary, so that one structure is located to
provide covered parking for two (2) adjacent spaces.
            (4)   Guest parking shall be provided at a rate of one per three
(3) dwellings in a parking lot or on the interior street if the street is at
least thirty feet (30') in width and the parking would not interfere with the
minimum twenty foot (20') access to all lots.
         e.   Water, Sewer Lines: Water lines and sewer lines with connections
for each space and fire hydrants.
         f.   Utilities: Underground utilities.
         g.   Drainage: Provisions for adequate drainage.
         h.   Perimeter Setback, Landscaping: A manufactured home park shall
have a perimeter setback of fifteen feet (15') in width from all property
lines, with a six foot (6') high sight- obscuring perimeter fence and perimeter
landscaping at least fifteen feet (15') in width, to include shade trees at one
per twenty (20) lineal feet and ground cover such as grass. The perimeter
landscaping shall be located between the street right of way and the fence for
the property line abutting a public street. A landscaping plan shall be
approved by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may modify the
width of the perimeter setback or fence height if it finds that unusual
circumstances justify the modification while maintaining a desired degree of
buffering for residents within, as well as adjacent to, the manufactured home
park.
         i.   Recreational Facilities: At least two hundred fifty (250) square
feet per unit shall be provided in a usable form and size, with a minimum of
two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet and a minimum dimension of thirty
feet (30'). The recreational space shall be landscaped and provided with
improvements such as benches, tables, playground equipment, or similar
features. The Planning Commission shall approve a plan for development of the
recreational space.
         j.   Patios, Storage Buildings: Each dwelling space shall have a patio
of at least one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area, with a minimum
dimension of eight feet (8') and an enclosed, secure storage building at least
one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area. All storage buildings within the
park shall be constructed of uniform materials and standard design.
      3.   Optional Improvements: The planning commission may require other
improvements, such as additional setbacks, pedestrian pathways, landscaping,
laundry, or other features, if it determines that such facilities or features
are necessary to mitigate impacts to or from adjacent properties or to provide
greater livability within the manufactured home park.
      4.   Deferral Or Waiver Of Required Improvements: The planning commission
may defer or waive the provision of one or more improvements listed in
subsection G2 of this section if, in its judgment, said improvements are not
required in the interests of the public health, safety and general welfare or
which are inappropriate. This section is not intended to substitute for the
variance process, but recognizes that unusual circumstances relating to a site
may justify a modification of requirements in the context of a specific
development.
      5.   Connection With Public Water And Sewage Systems: Manufactured home
park water and sewer lines shall be connected to city water and sewer lines.
The developer is required to pay for or perform the work or both to extend or
increase the capacity of city water or sewer lines or both to the site, should
this be required to provide services. If determined to be necessary by the city
administrator, the developer shall provide, as part of the application, an
analysis of public street, sewer, and water systems prepared by a licensed
engineer to include a determination of expected capacity needed by the
manufactured home park and system improvements, including off site
improvements, necessary to provide needed capacity for the proposed
development.
      6.   Manufactured Home Spaces: Each space for a manufactured home shall
contain not less than four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet exclusive
of space provided for the common use of tenants, such as roadways, general use
structures, guest parking, walkways and areas for recreation and landscaping
purposes.
      7.   Setback Requirements For Manufactured Homes Within Manufactured Home
Parks: No manufactured home in the park shall be located closer than fifteen
feet (15') from another manufactured home or from a general use building in the
park. The minimum side and rear yards shall be five feet (5'). The minimum
front yard and the minimum yard along any street shall be fifteen feet (15'). A
carport or garage serving adjacent spaces may occupy the required side setback.
      8.   Occupancy: No manufactured home park shall be occupied until all
conditions of approval, including any off site improvements required, have been
completed. The planning commission may specify that a financial guarantee may
be provided by the developer in lieu of completing required off site
improvements prior to receiving approval for occupancy. If approved in phases,
each phase with associated on and off site improvements shall be completed
before occupancy of the phase of the manufactured home park is approved. (Ord.
688, 6-15-1999)
   H.   General Commercial Uses In Downtown Transition District: General
commercial uses in the downtown transition district shall comply with the
following standards:
      1.   The proposal shall be consistent with the purpose of the downtown
transitional district.
      2.   The proposal must ensure a high quality pedestrian oriented
environment. A "high quality pedestrian oriented environment" is one that
includes features, such as:
         a.   Plazas or outdoor gathering areas;
         b.   Wide sidewalks;
         c.   Unusual or ornamental pavement materials or patterns;
         d.   Benches, street lighting, trash receptacles, bicycle racks,
drinking fountains, and other outdoor furnishings;
         e.   Street trees or building awnings that provide shelter from the
rain;
         f.   Fountains, ornamental pools, or ponds; and
         g.   Public art or interpretive exhibits.
      3.   Building entrances shall be oriented to the public street by
fronting directly on the public sidewalk or directly connected to the public
sidewalk by a concrete walkway. First floor building facades that front on
public streets and include more than fifty percent (50%) of the wall area as
windows.
      4.   Uses that occupy existing buildings may be exempted from compliance
with the standards of this subsection H through the site review process, when
compliance is not feasible due to the nature of the proposed use or the nature
of the existing building or site, or both. (Ord. 710, 5-7-2002)
10-12-3: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A conditional use permit is a type III procedure. An application shall be
submitted with maps and narrative as specified in chapter 14 of this title.
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-12-4: CONDITIONAL USES NOT COVERED:
Conditional use applications for which standards are not herein explicitly
shown shall be reviewed for acceptance or denial subject to the standards of
the zoning district in which the proposed use will be located and the approval
criteria set forth in section
10-12-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
CHAPTER 13
OTHER PERMITS AND ACTIONS
SECTION:
10-13-1: Variance And Adjustment
10-13-2: Site Review
10-13-3: Amendments To The Zoning Text Or Map
10-13-4: Annexation
10-13-1: VARIANCE AND ADJUSTMENT:
Variance and adjustment procedures are intended to allow modifications of
specific standards when the approval authority finds that approval criteria are
satisfied. A variance or adjustment shall not be granted if the effect is to
vary the uses permitted in the zoning district, definitions, or the residential
density.
   A.   Adjustment: An adjustment is a request for a ten percent (10%) increase
or decrease in a quantitative provision of this Title. The City Administrator
may grant an adjustment through a Type II procedure if all of the following
criteria are satisfied:
      1.   Granting the adjustment will equally or better meet the purpose of
the regulation to be modified.
      2.   If in a residential district, the proposal will not significantly
detract from the livability or appearance of the residential area. If in a
commercial or industrial district, the proposal will be consistent with the
desired character of the area.
      3.   If more than one adjustment is requested, the cumulative effect of
the adjustments will result in a project that is still consistent with the
overall purpose of the district.
      4.   Any impacts resulting from the adjustment are mitigated to the
extent practical.
      5.   Granting the adjustment is the minimum necessary to allow the use of
the site.
   B.   Variance: A variance is a request for more than a ten percent (10%)
modification of a quantitative standard or qualitative criteria in this Title.
The Planning Commission may grant an adjustment through a Type III procedure if
all the following criteria are satisfied:
      1.   The need for the adjustment is beyond the applicant's control.
      2.   To meet the need, the request is the minimum necessary variation
from the requirement.
      3.   There are development constraints associated with the property or
the present use or permitted use of the property which make development of a
permitted use impractical, or the variance is needed to allow the applicant to
enjoy a substantial property right possessed by a majority of property owners
in the same vicinity.
      4.   Either the circumstances that apply to the site or the present or a
permitted use of the site do not typically apply to other properties in the
same vicinity or district, and are unique or unusual; or it would be more
detrimental to the public safety or more injurious to the public welfare to
apply the requirement than to grant the proposed variance.
      5.   If more than one variance is requested, or a variance and
adjustment, the cumulative effect of the requests will result in a project that
is still consistent with the overall purpose of the district.
      6.   The variance does not circumvent the purpose of the requirement or
any provision of the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-13-2: SITE REVIEW:
The purpose of site review is to provide a process to review proposals to
verify compliance with requirements of this Title, including requirements of
this Section, and any other applicable provisions of this Code.
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   Applicability: Site review is required for multi-family residential,
commercial, and industrial developments as specified in each zoning district.
      2.   Procedure: Site review is a type II permit, unless incorporated into
a type III review such as a community services or conditional use permit.
      3.   Exemptions: The following developments are exempt from site review:
         a.   Single-family dwellings, manufactured homes on individual lots,
and duplexes.
         b.   A development that adds less than twenty five percent (25%) to
existing floor area or outdoor use area when the primary use on the site
remains unchanged and required parking does not increase.
         c.   An addition to an existing development when the primary use on
the site remains unchanged. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
   B.   Application:
      1.   Submission: The applicant shall submit at least six (6) copies of a
narrative, plans, and drawings that describe the proposed development. A
traffic impact analysis (TIA), as established in section
10-11-10 of this title, shall also be submitted pursuant to applicability
requirements in subsection
10-11-10B of this title. Information specified by chapter 14 of this title and
this section may be combined and provided in narrative form or on plans and
maps so long as required information is clear and understandable. Additional
copies of documents and plans will be required for a type III review.
      2.   Site Design Criteria And Standards For Residential Developments: The
following requirements are in addition to any requirements specified in the
applicable zoning district:
         a.   Landscaping shall be provided as specified in the zoning
district. Landscaped areas shall be provided with automatic irrigation unless a
qualified landscape professional certifies that plants will survive without
irrigation.
         b.   Front facades and points of entry shall generally be oriented to
the fronting street, not to a parking lot.
         c.   Front facades facing the street shall contain windows for primary
living areas.
         d.   Front facades of structures shall include horizontal offsets or
design features, such as porches, gables, columns, and similar architectural
features, at intervals of no less than one hundred feet (100') to visually
enhance long walls.
         e.   On site parking shall not be located between street frontage
dwellings and an abutting right of way. Required parking shall be located
beside or behind dwelling structures.
         f.   Attached garages shall be located at least four feet (4') behind
the front facade and at least eighteen feet (18') from a public right of way.
         g.   Private outdoor space shall be provided for all dwellings as
either a deck, porch, patio or similar space, at least eighty (80) square feet
in area and enclosed, screened, or otherwise designed to provide privacy.
Second floor residential uses in the downtown commercial district are exempt
from this requirement.
         h.   Exterior garbage collection areas shall be screened with a six
foot (6') high sight obscuring fence or wall or comparable vegetation.
         i.   Based on anticipated vehicle and pedestrian traffic and the
condition of adjacent streets and rights of way, the city may require right of
way improvements including, but not limited to, paving, curbs, sidewalks,
bikeways, lighting, turn lanes, and other facilities needed because of
anticipated vehicle and pedestrian traffic generation.
         j.   Outdoor storage facilities with an area of at least twenty four
(24) square feet, at least six feet (6') high, fully enclosed, and capable of
being locked, shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Residential uses in the
downtown commercial district are exempt from this requirement.
         k.   Private on site driveways shall be constructed with sufficient
width and suitable paving to support anticipated traffic volume and loads.
         l.   A continuous, on site pedestrian system shall be provided that
links the front doors of all dwellings with the abutting street, the parking
area, and any on site features such as a swimming pool, laundry, on site open
space, etc. Walkways shall maintain a clear width of at least five feet (5')
and shall be separated from vehicles by curbs, planter strips, or similar
barriers. Walkways through parking areas or crossing driveways shall be clearly
identified by a different material or pavement markings or both. Walkways shall
also provide direct and convenient connections to schools, parks, shopping
areas, or other destinations within the vicinity as possible. Walkways shall be
in clearly visible locations to promote safety. Walkways shall be hard
surfaced.
      3.   Site Design Criteria And Standards For Nonresidential Developments:
The following requirements are in addition to any requirements specified in the
applicable zoning district:
         a.   Landscaped areas shall be provided with automatic irrigation
unless a landscape architect certifies that plants will survive without
irrigation.
         b.   Landscaping shall be located along street frontages and building
fronts to enhance the street appearance of a development.
         c.   Outdoor storage and garbage collection areas shall be entirely
screened with vegetation, fence, or wall.
         d.   Based on anticipated vehicle and pedestrian traffic and the
condition of adjacent streets and rights of way, the city may require right of
way improvements including, but not limited to, paving, curbs, sidewalks,
bikeways, lighting, turn lanes, and other facilities needed because of
anticipated vehicle and pedestrian traffic generation. Minimum requirements
shall conform to the standards of subsection
11-4-2C of this code, minimum street standards and the public works standards.
         e.   Access shall generally be taken from the higher classification
street when a development fronts more than one street, except in the case of
developments along Highway 730, which shall take access from an alley or a side
street unless there is no alternative.
         f.   Developments shall provide an on site pedestrian circulation
system that connects building entrances, public sidewalks, bicycle and
automobile parking areas, and parts of the site or abutting properties that may
attract pedestrians. Walkways shall maintain a clear width of at least five
feet (5') and shall be separated from vehicles by curbs, raised bumpers,
planter strips, or similar barriers. Walkways through parking areas or crossing
driveways shall be clearly identified by a different material or pavement
markings or both. Walkways shall be in clearly visible locations to promote
safety. Walkways shall be hard surfaced.
         g.   The primary building and entry orientation shall be to the
fronting street rather than a parking lot.
         h.   All buildings shall incorporate ground floor windows along street
facades, with at least twenty percent (20%) of any wall within thirty feet
(30') of a street consisting of display areas, windows, or doorways.
         i.   Building facades facing a street shall include changes in relief
such as cornices, columns, gables, bay windows, recessed entries, or similar
architectural or decorative elements.
         j.   A drive-through use shall be oriented to the side or rear of a
building and shall be designed to minimize conflicts with pedestrians and
vehicles.
      4.   Access Standards For All Uses:
         a.   New Connections: New connections shall not be permitted within
the functional area of an intersection or interchange as defined by the
connection spacing standards of this title and public works standards 1 ,
unless no other reasonable access to the property is available.
         b.   Access Connections: Where no other alternative exists, the city
administrator may allow construction of an access connection along the property
line farthest from the intersection. In such cases, directional connections
(i.e., right in/out, right in only, or right out only) may be required.
         c.   Cross Access Drives, Pedestrian Access: Adjacent commercial or
office properties such as shopping plazas and office parks that are major
traffic generators shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to
allow circulation between sites.
         d.   Separation Distance: The city may reduce the required separation
distance of access points where they prove impractical, provided all of the
following requirements are met:
            (1)   Joint access driveways and cross access easements are
provided.
            (2)   The site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation
system.
            (3)   The property owner enters into a written agreement with the
city, recorded with the deed, that preexisting connections on the site will be
closed and eliminated after construction of each side of a joint use driveway.
            (4)   The city may modify or waive the requirements of this section
where the characteristics or layout of abutting properties would make a
development of a unified or shared access and circulation system impractical.
         e.   Driveway Standards: Driveways shall meet the following standards:
            (1)   If the driveway is one way in or out, the minimum width shall
be ten feet (10') and appropriate sign(s) designating the driveway as a one-way
connection shall be provided.
            (2)   For two-way access, each lane shall have a minimum width of
ten feet (10').
            (3)   The length of a driveway shall be designed in accordance with
the anticipated storage length of entering and exiting vehicles to prevent
vehicles from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing
unsafe conflicts with on site circulation.
         f.   Phased Developments: Development sites under the same ownership
or consolidated for the purpose of development and comprising more than one
building site, shall be reviewed as a single property for the purposes of
complying with access standards. The number of access points permitted shall be
the minimum number necessary to provide reasonable access to the site, not the
minimum for that frontage.
         g.   Nonconforming Access Features: Legal access connections in place
when this title was adopted that do not conform with the standards herein are
considered nonconforming features and shall be brought into compliance with
applicable standards when new access connection permits are requested or when
there is a change in use or enlargement or improvement that will increase trip
generation.
         h.   Reverse Frontage: Lots that front on more than one street shall
be required to locate motor vehicle accesses on the street with the lower
functional classification. This requirement may be waived or modified when a
commercial or industrial use would be required to take access from a street in
a residential neighborhood. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
         i.   Review By The Oregon State Department Of Transportation: Any
application that involves access to the state highway system shall be reviewed
by the Oregon department of transportation for conformance with state access
management standards. In the I-82/U.S. 730 interchange area management plan
(IAMP) management area, proposed access shall be consistent with the access
management plan in section 7 of the IAMP. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999; amd. Ord. 710,
5-7-2002; Ord. 766, 12-6-2011; Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 7-1-1 of this code.
10-13-3: AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING TEXT OR MAP:
   A.   Type IV Procedure: Amendments to the zoning title text or official map
are considered a type IV procedure. A map change may be legislative or quasi-
judicial, depending on the number of properties and area involved. A text
change is always a legislative decision.
   B.   Initiation Of Application: An application may be initiated by a
property owner or authorized agent, the planning commission, or the city
council. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
   C.   Narrative, Identification Required: An application shall include a
narrative that demonstrates compliance with the approval criteria and a site
and vicinity map identifying the property and adjacent properties. A traffic
impact analysis (TIA), pursuant to section
10-11-10 of this title, shall also be submitted with all plan and zoning
amendment applications.
   D.   Approval Criteria: An amendment to this title or official map shall
comply with the following criteria:
      1.   The proposed designation is consistent with and supports the
purposes of the portions of the city's comprehensive plan not proposed for
amendment, or circumstances have changed to justify a change in the
comprehensive plan.
      2.   The proposed change will not affect the land supply for the existing
zoning designation as related to projected need for the particular land use.
      3.   The proposed designation will not negatively impact existing or
planned public facilities and services. In particular, pursuant to the Oregon
transportation planning rule, proposed text and map amendments shall determine
whether the proposed change will significantly affect a collector or arterial
transportation facility and must comply with the requirements of Oregon
administrative rule (OAR) 660-012-0060 as applicable. In the I-82/U.S. 730
interchange area management plan (IAMP) management area, proposed access shall
be consistent with the access management plan in section 7 of the IAMP.
      4.   The site is suitable for the proposed use, considering the
topography, adjacent streets, access, size of the site, availability of public
facilities, and any other pertinent physical features.
      5.   Other sites in the city or the vicinity are unsuitable for the
proposed use. In other words, ownership and desire to develop a particular use
in themselves provide insufficient rationale for changing a zoning designation
that does not support the interests of the city as a whole. (Ord. 766, 12-6-
2011)
10-13-4: ANNEXATION:
   A.   Initiation; Type IV Procedure: An annexation may be initiated by the
city or a property owner or owners, and is a quasi-judicial decision considered
as a type IV procedure.
   B.   Zoning Designation: Territory proposed to be annexed shall be assigned
a zoning designation that most closely corresponds to the comprehensive plan
designation unless an amendment to the zoning map is proposed and considered as
set forth in section 10-13-3 of this chapter.
   C.   Approval Criteria: A decision on an annexation proposal shall be based
on whether:
      1.   The site is within the urban growth boundary for the city.
      2.   It is economically and technically feasible to provide services to
the area.
      3.   The proposal is consistent with the comprehensive plan or
substantial changes in conditions have occurred which render the plan
inapplicable to the annexation. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
CHAPTER 14
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-14-1: Purpose
10-14-2: Summary Of The City's Decision Making Processes
10-14-3: Preapplication Conference
10-14-4: Application
10-14-5: Completeness Review
10-14-6: Public Notices
10-14-7: Quasi-Judicial Hearing Process
10-14-8: Notice Of Decision And Conditions Of Approval
10-14-9: Performance Guarantees
10-14-10: Covenant With The City
10-14-11: Ex Parte Contact, Conflict Of Interest, And Bias
10-14-12: Legislative Hearing Process
10-14-13: Objections To Procedure
10-14-14: Appeals
10-14-15: Expiration Of An Approval
10-14-16: Extension Of An Approval
10-14-17: Reapplication Limited
10-14-18: Interpretation
10-14-19: Conformity Of Permits
10-14-20: Authorization Of Similar Uses
10-14-21: Reconsideration Of A Final Decision
10-14-22: Revocation Of A Previously Approved Permit
10-14-23: Transfer Of Approval Rights
10-14-24: Fees
10-14-25: Wetlands Notification Provisions
10-14-26: Abatement
10-14-27: Penalty
10-14-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter provides the procedures by which the city shall review and decide
upon applications for all permits relating to the use of land authorized by
Oregon Revised Statutes chapters 197 and 227. Any applicant may elect to
consolidate applications for two (2) or more related permits required for a
single development project. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-2: SUMMARY OF THE CITY'S DECISION MAKING PROCESSES:
   A.   Type I decisions do not require interpretation or the exercise of
policy or legal judgment in evaluating approval criteria and include zoning
approval for single-family dwellings and final subdivision and planned unit
development plans generally in conformance with approved preliminary plans. The
city administrator issues a type I decision. Type I decisions are not
conditional use or limited land use decisions. There is no right to approval of
a type I decision.
   B.   Type II decisions involve the exercise of limited interpretation and
discretion in evaluating approval criteria. Applications evaluated through this
process are assumed to be allowed in the underlying district. The review
focuses on what form the use will take or how it will look. Notice of
application and an invitation to comment is mailed to the applicant and
property owners within one hundred feet (100'). When the application pertains
to a parcel or parcels in the I-82/U.S. 730 interchange area management plan
(IAMP) management area, the city shall provide written notification to ODOT
when the application is deemed complete. The city administrator accepts
comments for fourteen (14) days and renders a decision. The city
administrator's decision may be appealed to the planning commission by any
party with standing (i.e., the applicant and any party who submitted comments
in writing during the 14 day period). The planning commission's decision is the
city's final decision and may be appealed to the land use board of appeals
within twenty one (21) days of becoming final. The city administrator issues a
type II decision.
   C.   Type III decisions involve the greatest amount of discretion and
evaluation of subjective approval standards. Applications evaluated through
this process include conditional use permits, preliminary planned unit
development plans, variances, code interpretations, and similar determinations
(the process for these land use decisions is controlled by Oregon Revised
Statutes 197.763). Notice of the application and the planning commission
hearing is published in the newspaper of record and mailed to the applicant,
property owners within one hundred feet (100'), and interested agencies. When
the application pertains to a parcel or parcels in the I-82/U.S. 730
interchange area management plan (IAMP) management area, the city shall provide
written notification to ODOT when the application is deemed complete. Notice
must be issued at least twenty (20) days before the hearing and the staff
report must be available at least seven (7) days before the hearing. At the
hearing held before the planning commission, all issues must be addressed. The
planning commission's decision may be appealed to the city council. The city
council's decision is the city's final decision and may be appealed to the land
use board of appeals.
   D.   Type IV decisions include only annexations and both legislative and
quasi-judicial amendments to the comprehensive plan text and map or to the
zoning ordinance text and map. These applications involve the greatest amount
of discretion and evaluation of subjective approval criteria. The process for
these land use decisions is controlled by Oregon Revised Statutes 197.763.
Notice of the application and planning commission hearing is published and
mailed to the applicant, property owners within one hundred feet (100'), and
interested agencies. When the application pertains to a parcel or parcels in
the I-82/U.S. 730 interchange area management plan (IAMP) management area, the
city shall provide written notification to ODOT when the application is deemed
complete. Notice must be issued at least twenty (20) days before the hearing
and the staff report must be available at least seven (7) days before the
hearing. The planning commission's decision is a recommendation to the city
council. Notice is given for the city council hearing as for the planning
commission hearing. The city council's decision is the final decision and may
be appealed to the land use board of appeals.
      SUMMARY OF THE APPROVAL PROCESS
 
Permit Type I II III IV
Site review1                                                        X   
Review of a single-family dwelling or duplex for zoning compliance X    
Conditional use permit                                               X  
Planned unit development                                             X  
Adjustment                                                          X   
Variance                                                             X  
Subdivision (see title 11 of this code)                              X  
Final plat for subdivision or planned development                  X    
Code interpretation or use determination                             X  
Comprehensive plan amendment or zone change                           X
Annexation                                                            X
Verification of nonconforming status                                X   
Revocation of permit                                                X   
Appeal of a type II design                                           X  
Appeal of a type III quasi-judicial decision                          X
 
   Note:
       1.    Site review may be included with a type III review for conditional
use permit, planned unit development, or other permit.
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999; amd. Ord. 766, 12-6-2011; Ord. 840, 9-3-2019)
10-14-3: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
   A.   Recommendation: Prior to submitting an application for a permit, the
city recommends that an applicant schedule and attend a preapplication
conference with the staff to discuss the proposal. The city administrator may
waive this requirement if the scale of the project does not warrant a meeting.
   B.   Requirement: Preapplication conferences are required for applications
for which a traffic impact analysis (TIA) is required, pursuant to section
10-11-10 of this title. (Ord. 766, 12-6-2011)
   C.   Scheduling And Request For Comments: An applicant shall submit an
application and pay the appropriate fee to schedule a preapplication
conference. The application shall include sufficient information in the form of
narrative and plans for the city and any interested agencies to review the
proposal. The city will review the project and request comments from other
interested agencies to provide the applicant with information on the likely
requirements, approval standards, fees, and any other information that may
affect the proposal. The city administrator will provide the applicant with a
written summary of the conference within ten (10) working days of the meeting.
   D.   Caveat: Notwithstanding any representations by the city at a
preapplication conference, the city is not authorized to waive any requirements
of this code and any omission or failure by the staff to recite to an applicant
all relevant applicable land use requirements shall not constitute a waiver by
the city of any standard or requirement. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999; amd. Ord. 766,
12-6-2011)
10-14-4: APPLICATION:
A permit application may only be initiated by the record property owner or
contract purchaser, the city council, or the planning commission. The city will
not accept an application without the signed authorization from all record
owners. (Ord. 766, 12-6-2011)
   A.   All permit applications shall be submitted on a form provided by the
city, along with all necessary supporting documentation and information
sufficient to demonstrate compliance with all applicable approval criteria and
standards, and the appropriate fee. The applicant has the burden of
demonstrating, with evidence, that all approval criteria and standards are, or
can be, met. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
   B.   A complete application includes all the materials listed in this
section and any specific information requested for a particular permit. The
city administrator may waive the submission of any of the materials if not
deemed to be applicable to the specific review sought. Likewise, within thirty
(30) days of submission of the application, the city administrator may require
additional information beyond that listed in this subsection, such as a traffic
impact analysis (TIA) pursuant to requirements in section
10-11-10 of this title or other study prepared by an appropriate expert. The
applicant is responsible for the completeness and accuracy of the application
and all supporting documentation. (Ord. 766, 12-6-2011)
      1.   A completed city application form that includes:
         a.   An accurate legal description, tax account number(s), map number,
and street location of all properties that are the subject of the application.
         b.   Name, address, telephone number, and authorized signature(s) of
all record property owners or contract owners, and the name, address, and
telephone number of the applicant, if different from the property owner(s).
      2.   A complete list of all city permit approvals sought by the applicant
in this application.
      3.   A complete and detailed narrative describing the proposed
development, existing site conditions, public facilities and services, natural
features including wetlands and steep slopes, a discussion of the approval
criteria and standards for all permits explaining how the criteria and
standards are, or can be, met, and any other information indicated by the city
at the preapplication conference as being required. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
      4.   A site plan or plans and a vicinity map, drawn to scale. The site
plan shall include at least the following features, along with any other
information necessary to understand the proposal: (Ord. 766, 12-6-2011)
         a.   Dimensions of the site and all structures, existing and proposed.
         b.   Existing conditions, including topography and any other physical
features such as vegetation, wetlands, watercourses, slopes, etc. (Ord. 688, 6-
15-1999)
         c.   Rights of way abutting the site, whether public or private, and
access to the site. In the I-82/U.S. 730 interchange area management plan
(IAMP) management area, proposed access shall be consistent with the access
management plan in the IAMP (section 7). (Ord. 766, 12-6-2011)
         d.   Locations and sizes of all public utilities, existing and
proposed, on and in the vicinity of the site.
         e.   Locations, dimensions, and purposes of all recorded easements.
         f.   Size of areas (in square feet) and percentages of the total site
area devoted to structures, parking, landscaping, open space, dedication of
right of way, and any other proposed feature.
         g.   Proposed landscaping plan, including size, species, and location
of plants or other elements.
         h.   Parking plan.
         i.   Detail of screening and fencing.
         j.   Exterior lighting, including location, type, height, and areas of
illumination.
         k.   Service areas for trash collection, mail delivery, etc.
      5.   The applicant shall provide the city with up to twenty (20) copies
of all reports, plans, site plans, and other documents required by this
section. The number of copies will be determined at the preapplication
conference. One copy of all plans and maps reduced to eight and one-half inches
by eleven inches (81/2" x 11") or eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x
17"), and suitable for reproduction.
      6.   All required application fees. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-5: COMPLETENESS REVIEW:
   A.   The City Administrator shall accept an application and verify that all
appropriate fees have been paid. The City Administrator will review the
application and all information submitted with it and evaluate whether the
application is complete enough to process. Within thirty (30) days of receipt
of the application, the City Administrator shall complete this initial review
and issue a written statement to the applicant indicating whether the
application is complete or, if not, what information must be submitted to make
the application complete.
   B.   The applicant has one hundred eighty (180) days from the date the
application was submitted to provide any required additional information or the
application shall be rejected and all materials and any unused portion of the
application fee shall be returned to the applicant. If the applicant submits
the requested information within the one hundred eighty (180) day period, the
City Administrator shall again verify whether the application, as augmented, is
complete.
   C.   When the City Administrator determines the application is complete or
the applicant refuses to submit any more information, the City Administrator
shall declare the application complete and take final action on the application
within one hundred twenty (120) days of that date unless the applicant waives
or extends the one hundred twenty (120) day period. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-6: PUBLIC NOTICES:
   A.   Notice Of Type I Applications: Notice of the decision is provided only
to the applicant. No other notice is required because a Type I application does
not involve a land use decision.
   B.   Notice Of Type II Applications: The City shall prepare and send notice
of an application by first class mail to all record owners of property within
one hundred feet (100') of the subject property and to any interested agency,
including Umatilla County, the Oregon Department of Transportation, and other
agencies that might have a facility or jurisdiction affected by the proposal.
The notice shall include the following information:
      1.   The City's assigned file number.
      2.   Street address or other easily understood location of the subject
property.
      3.   A description of the proposal, along with citations of the approval
criteria and standards that the City will use to evaluate the proposal.
      4.   A statement that any interested party may submit to the City written
comments on the application during a fourteen (14) day comment period prior to
the City's deciding on the application. Instructions on where to send comments
and the deadline for the comment period will be clearly stated.
      5.   A statement that any issue that is intended to provide a basis for
an appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA) must be raised in writing
during the fourteen (14) day comment period with sufficient specificity to
enable the City to respond to the issue.
      6.   A statement that the application and all supporting materials may be
inspected, and copied at cost, at City Hall during normal business hours.
      7.   The name and telephone number of the City staff person assigned to
the application who is able to answer questions about the application.
   C.   Notice Of Type III And Type IV Quasi-Judicial Applications: At least
twenty (20) days prior to the hearing, the City shall prepare, and send by
first class mail, notice of the hearing to all record owners of property within
one hundred feet (100') of the subject property. The City shall also publish a
notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the City at least ten (10)
days prior to the hearing. Notice of the application shall include the
following information:
      1.   The City's assigned file number and title of the proposal.
      2.   The time, date, and location of the public hearing.
      3.   The street address or other easily understood location of the site.
      4.   A description of the proposal in sufficient detail for people to
determine the nature of the proposal, including a description of the area or
location of the land that will be affected by the proposal.
      5.   A list of the approval criteria and standards that the City will use
to evaluate the proposal.
      6.   A statement that any interested party may testify at the hearing or
submit written comments on the proposal at or prior to the hearing.
      7.   The name and telephone number of the City staff person assigned to
the application who is able to answer questions about the application.
      8.   A statement that failure of any person entitled to notice under this
Section to receive notice shall not invalidate the action, provided that the
City can demonstrate by a certificate of mailing that such notice was sent.
      9.   A statement that the application and all supporting materials may be
inspected, and copied at cost, at City Hall during normal business hours. (Ord.
688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-7: QUASI-JUDICIAL HEARING PROCESS:
All public hearings pertaining to quasi-judicial permits, whether before the
Planning Commission or City Council, shall comply with the procedures of this
Section. In addition, all public hearings held pursuant to this Chapter shall
comply with the Oregon Public Meetings Laws, the applicable provisions of
Oregon Revised Statutes 197.763, and any other applicable law.
   A.   Hearing Scheduled: When the City Administrator determines that an
application for a Type III or IV quasi-judicial decision is complete or when an
appeal of a City Administrator's decision on a Type II application has been
filed, a hearing shall be scheduled before the Planning Commission or City
Council.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing: Notice of the hearing shall be issued at least
twenty (20) days prior to the hearing in accordance with Section 10-14-6 of
this Chapter.
   C.   Comments From Interested Agencies: The City Administrator shall request
comments from interested agencies which may have facilities or jurisdiction
affected by the proposal, including, but not limited to, the State Department
of Transportation, Umatilla County, the irrigation district, and any other
public or private utility or agency.
   D.   Report: The City Administrator shall prepare a staff report on the
application that lists the applicable approval criteria and standards,
describes the application and the development proposal, summarizes all relevant
City department, agency, and public comments, describes all other pertinent
facts as they relate to the application and the approval criteria and
standards, and makes a recommendation as to whether each of the approval
criteria and standards are met.
   E.   Announcement: At the beginning of the initial public hearing for any
quasi-judicial application or appeal, the following statement shall be
announced to those in attendance:
      1.   That the hearing will proceed in the following general order: staff
report, applicant's presentation, testimony in favor of the application,
testimony in opposition to the application, rebuttal, record closes, commission
deliberation, and decision.
      2.   That all testimony and evidence submitted, orally or in writing,
must be directed toward the applicable approval criteria and standards. If any
person believes that other criteria or standards apply in addition to those
addressed in the staff report, those criteria must be listed and discussed on
the record. The decision maker may reasonably limit oral presentations in
length or content depending upon time constraints. Any party may submit written
materials of any length while the public record is open.
      3.   Failure to raise an issue on the record, with sufficient specificity
and accompanied by statements or evidence sufficient to afford the City and all
parties to respond to the issue, will preclude appeal on that issue to LUBA.
      4.   Any party wishing a continuance or to keep the record open must make
that request while the record is still open.
      5.   That the Commission or Council chair shall call for any ex parte
contacts, conflicts of interest, or bias before the beginning of each hearing
item.
   F.   Requests For Continuances And To Keep The Record Open: The Planning
Commission or City Council may continue the hearing from time to time to allow
the submission of additional information or for deliberation without additional
information. New notice of a continued hearing need not be given so long as a
time certain and location for the continued hearing is established. Similarly,
the hearing may be closed, but the record left open for the submission of
additional written material or other documents and exhibits. The factual and
legal issues that may be addressed in any continued hearing or open-record
period may be limited.
   G.   Decision: The Planning Commission or City Council shall identify the
basis for its decision in findings of fact and conclusions of law. The findings
of fact and conclusions of law may be the staff's report, may be prepared by
the applicant, or may be prepared by any other party. When Planning Commission
or City Council reaches a tentative decision on any matter, it shall direct the
staff or other party to prepare appropriate findings and conclusions, then it
shall review the tentative decision before the decision is issued as a final
decision. The Planning Commission or City Council may reconvene in public
hearing to resolve any questions before the decision becomes final and is
signed by the Planning Commission or Council chair. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-8: NOTICE OF DECISION AND CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
   A.   Authority: All City decision makers have the authority to impose
reasonable conditions of approval designed to ensure that all applicable
approval criteria and standards are, or can be, met.
   B.   Revocation, Code Enforcement Proceedings: Failure to comply with any
condition of approval shall be grounds for revocation of the permit(s) and
grounds for instituting Code enforcement proceedings.
   C.   Notice Of Decision: The City shall send, by first class mail, a notice
of all decisions rendered under this Chapter to all persons with standing,
i.e., the applicant, all others who participated either orally or in writing
before the close of the public record, and those who specifically requested
notice of the decision. The notice of decision shall include the following
information:
      1.   The file number and date of decision.
      2.   The name of the applicant, owner, and appellant (if different).
      3.   The street address or other easily understood location of the
subject property.
      4.   A brief summary of the decision, and if an approval, a description
of the permit approved.
      5.   A statement that the decision is final unless appealed and a
description of the requirements for filing an appeal.
      6.   A statement that a copy of the final decision may be inspected or
copies obtained at City Hall, with an address and telephone number.
   D.   Modification Of Conditions: Any request to modify a condition of permit
approval shall be processed in the same manner, and shall be subject to the
same standards, as was the original application. However, the decision maker
may at its sole discretion, consider a notification request and limit its
review of the approval criteria and standards to those issues or aspects of the
application that are proposed to be changed from what was originally proposed.
A request to modify a decision already signed and final will not affect the
finality or enforceability of that decision. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-9: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES:
When conditions of permit approval require the applicant to construct certain
improvements, the City may allow the applicant to submit a financial guarantee
in lieu of actual construction of the improvement. Financial guarantees are
covered by this Section.
   A.   Form Of Guarantees: Guarantees shall be in a form approved by the City
Attorney, and may include an irrevocable standby letter of credit issued by a
recognized lending institution to the benefit of the City, a certified check,
dedicated bank account, or allocation of a construction loan held in reserve by
the lending institution for the benefit of the City. The guarantee shall be
filed with the City Administrator.
   B.   Amount Of Guarantee: The amount of the performance guarantee shall be
equal to at least one hundred ten percent (110%) of that estimated cost of
constructing the improvement in question. The amount of the performance
guarantee may be larger than one hundred ten percent (110%) if deemed necessary
by the City Administrator. The cost estimate substantiating the amount of the
guarantee must be provided by the applicant and supported by either an
engineer's or architect's estimate or written estimates by three (3)
contractors with their names and addresses. The estimates shall separately
itemize all materials, labor, and other costs.
   C.   Duration Of The Guarantee: The guarantee shall remain in effect until
the improvement is actually constructed and accepted by the City. Once the City
has inspected and accepted the improvement, the City shall release the
guarantee to the applicant. If the improvement is not completed to the City's
satisfaction within the time limits specified in the permit approval or the
guarantee, the City Administrator may, at his discretion, draw upon the
guarantee and use the proceeds to construct or complete construction of the
improvement and for any related administrative and legal costs incurred by the
City. Once constructed and approved by the City, any remaining funds shall be
refunded to the applicant.
   D.   Deferral: The City may allow an applicant to defer construction of
improvements, if the applicant provides a financial guarantee. The applicant
shall agree to construct those improvements upon written notification by the
City, or at some other mutually agreed-to time. If the applicant fails to
commence construction of the required improvements within six (6) months of
being instructed to do so, the City may, without further notice, undertake the
construction of the improvements and draw upon the applicant's performance
guarantee to pay those costs as provided in subsection C of this Section. (Ord.
688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-10: COVENANT WITH THE CITY:
   A.   Imposition; Elements: The City may impose as a condition of final
approval of a quasi-judicial permit, the requirement that the applicant execute
a covenant with the City agreeing to comply with all conditions of approval.
Any such covenant shall include the following elements:
      1.   An agreement that the applicant will comply with all applicable Code
requirements, conditions of approval, and any representations made to the City
by the applicant or the applicant's agents during the application review
process, either orally or in writing. This commitment shall be binding on the
applicant and all of the applicant's successors, heirs, and assigns.
      2.   If the owner fails to perform under the covenant, the City may
immediately institute revocation of the approval or any other enforcement
action available under State law or this Code. The covenant may also provide
for payment of attorney fees and other costs associated with any such
enforcement action.
      3.   Where the development rights of one site are dependent on the
performance of conditions by the owner of another property (such as joint
access), the covenants shall be judicially enforceable by the owner of one site
against the owner of another.
   B.   Adopting The Covenant: The form of all covenants shall be approved by
the City Attorney. The covenant shall run with the land and shall be placed in
the County deed records prior to the issuance of any permits or development
activity pursuant to the approval. Proof of recording shall be made prior to
the issuance of any permits and filed with the City. Recording shall be at the
applicant's expense. Any covenant required under this Section shall be properly
signed and executed within thirty (30) days after permit approval with
conditions; provided however, that the City Administrator may grant reasonable
extensions, not to exceed an additional thirty (30) days, in cases of practical
difficulty. Failure to sign and record the covenant within the prescribed
period shall render the approval null and void. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-11: EX PARTE CONTACT, CONFLICT OF INTEREST, AND BIAS:
The following rules shall govern any challenges to a decision maker's
participation in a quasi-judicial or legislative action:
   A.   Ex Parte Contacts: Any factual information obtained about a land use
application by a decision maker outside the context of a quasi-judicial hearing
shall be deemed an ex parte contact. Prior to the close of the record in any
particular matter, any decision maker that has obtained any material factual
information through an ex parte contact shall declare the content of that
contact and allow any interested party to rebut the substance of that contact.
This rule does not apply to legislative proceedings.
   B.   Conflict Of Interest: Whenever a decision maker, or any member of a
decision maker's immediate family or household, has a financial interest in the
outcome of a particular quasi-judicial or legislative matter, that decision
maker shall not participate in the deliberation or decision on that matter.
   C.   Bias: All decisions in quasi-judicial matters shall be fair, impartial,
and based on the applicable approval standards and the evidence in the record.
Any decision maker who is unable to render a decision on this basis in any
particular matter shall refrain from participating in the deliberation or
decision on that matter. This rule does not apply to legislative proceedings.
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-12: LEGISLATIVE HEARING PROCESS:
   A.   Purpose: Legislative actions involve the adoption or amendment of the
City's land use regulations, Comprehensive Plan, maps, inventories, and other
policy documents that affect the entire City or large portions of the City.
Legislative actions which affect land use must begin with a public hearing
before the Planning Commission.
      1.   Hearing Required: The Planning Commission shall hold at least one
public hearing before recommending action on a legislative proposal. Any
interested person may appear and provide written or oral testimony on the
proposal at or prior to the hearing. The City Administrator shall notify the
Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD) as required by
the post acknowledgment procedures of Oregon Revised Statutes 197.610 to
197.625, as applicable.
      2.   City Administrator's Report: The City Administrator shall prepare
and make available a report on the legislative proposal at least seven (7) days
prior to the hearing.
      3.   Planning Commission Recommendation: At the conclusion of the
hearing, the Planning Commission shall adopt a recommendation on the proposal
to the City Council. If the Planning Commission has initiated the action and
decides that no action is appropriate, the matter is terminated and the
decision is terminated and may not be appealed unless otherwise provided by
law. If the City Council initiated the legislative proposal, the Planning
Commission shall submit to the City Council a report and recommendation on the
proposal.
   B.   City Council Review:
      1.   City Council Action: Upon a recommendation from the Planning
Commission on a legislative action, the City Council shall hold at least one
public hearing on the proposal. Any interested person may provide written or
oral testimony on the proposal at or prior to the hearing. At the conclusion of
the hearing, the City Council may adopt, modify, or reject the legislative
proposal, or it may remand the matter to the Planning Commission for further
consideration. If the decision is to adopt at least some form of the proposal
and thereby amend the City's land use regulations, Comprehensive Plan, Official
Zoning Maps, or some component of these documents, the City Council's decision
shall be enacted as an ordinance.
      2.   Notice Of Final Decision: Not later than five (5) days following the
City Council's final decision, the City Administrator shall mail notice of the
decision to DLCD in accordance with Oregon Revised Statutes 197.615(2) and to
any party who participated, either orally or in writing, before the Planning
Commission or City Council. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-13: OBJECTIONS TO PROCEDURE:
Any party who objects to the procedure followed in any particular matter,
including bias, conflict of interest, and undisclosed ex parte contacts, must
make a procedural objection prior to the City's rendering a final decision.
Procedural objections may be raised at any time prior to a final decision,
after which they are deemed waived. In making a procedural objection, the
objecting party must identify the procedural requirement that was not properly
followed and identify how the alleged procedural error harmed that person's
substantial rights. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-14: APPEALS:
Appeals of any nonfinal decisions by the City must comply with the requirements
of this Section.
   A.   Decisions Appealed: Type I decisions by the City Administrator are not
appealable to any other decision maker within the City. Type II decisions by
the City Administrator may be appealed to the Planning Commission. Type III
decisions of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council, which
is the final City decision on any matter. Type IV decisions by the Planning
Commission are recommendations only and are forwarded automatically to the City
Council. Type IV decisions do not become final until acted upon by the City
Council.
   B.   Notice Of Appeal: A notice of appeal of a Type II decision by the City
Administrator and any Type III decision by the Planning Commission must be
received in writing by the City Administrator within ten (10) calendar days
from the date notice of the challenged decision is provided to those entitled
to notice.
   C.   Information Required: The following must be included in a notice of
appeal:
      1.   The City's file number and date the decision to be appealed was
rendered. The name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number for each
appellant.
      2.   A statement of how each appellant has an interest in the matter and
standing to appeal.
      3.   A statement of the specific grounds for the appeal.
      4.   The appropriate appeal fee. Failure to include the appeal fee with
the notice of appeal is deemed to be a jurisdictional defect and will result in
the automatic rejection of any appeal so filed.
   D.   Standing To Appeal: The following rules prescribe who has standing to
appeal:
      1.   For Type II decisions, only the applicant and those persons who
submitted written comments within the fourteen (14) day comment period have
standing to appeal a City Administrator's decision. For persons other than the
applicant, grounds for appeal are limited to those issues raised in writing
during the fourteen (14) day comment period.
      2.   For Type III decisions, only the applicant and those who
participated either orally or in writing have standing to appeal a Planning
Commission decision. For persons other than the applicant, grounds for appeal
are limited to those issues raised either orally or in writing before the close
of the public record.
   E.   Notice Of The Appeal Hearing: The City shall issue notice of the appeal
hearing to all parties who participated either orally or in writing before the
close of the public record. Notice of the appeal hearing shall contain the
following information:
      1.   The file number and date of the decision being appealed.
      2.   The time, date, and location of the public hearing.
      3.   The name of the applicant, owner, and appellant (if different).
      4.   The street address or other easily understood location of the
subject property.
      5.   A description of the permit requested and the applicant's
development proposal.
      6.   A brief summary of the decision being appealed and the grounds for
appeal listed in the notice of appeal.
      7.   A statement that the appeal hearing is confined to the issues raised
in the notice of appeal.
      8.   A general explanation of the requirements for participation and the
City's hearing procedures.
   F.   Appeal Hearing, Scope Of Review: Appeal hearings shall comply with the
procedural requirements of Section 10-14-7 of this Chapter. Appeal hearings
conducted by the Planning Commission shall be de novo, but the issues under
consideration shall be limited to those listed in the notice of appeal. Appeal
hearings conducted by the City Council shall be on the record and the issues
under consideration shall be limited to those listed in the notice of appeal.
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-15: EXPIRATION OF AN APPROVAL:
   A.   Automatic Expiration: All quasi-judicial permit approvals, except for
Zoning Map or Comprehensive Plan Map amendments, automatically become void if
any of the following events occur:
      1.   If, within one year of the date of the final decision, a building
permit has not been issued, or
      2.   If, within one year of the date of the final decision, the activity
approved in the permit has not commenced or, in situations involving only the
creation of lots, the final plat of a land division has not been approved by
the City and recorded.
   B.   New Application Required: Expiration of an approval shall require a new
application for any use on the subject property that is not otherwise allowed
outright.
   C.   Deferral Of Expiration Period Due To Appeals: If a permit decision is
appealed beyond the jurisdiction of the City, the expiration period shall not
begin until review before LUBA and the appellate courts has been completed, and
any remand proceedings before the City. The expiration period provided for in
this Section will begin to run on the date of final disposition of the case
(the date when an appeal may no longer be filed). (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-16: EXTENSION OF AN APPROVAL:
   A.   The City may extend any approved permit prior to its expiration for a
period of six (6) months through a Type II procedure. No more than two (2) such
extensions may be approved and only if there has been substantial
implementation of the permit. Any request for an extension shall be reviewed
and decided upon by the City in the same manner as the original approval.
   B.   Substantial implementation of a permit shall require at a minimum, for
each six (6) month extension, demonstrable evidence in a written application
showing:
      1.   The permit holder has applied for all necessary additional approvals
or permits required as a condition of the land use or limited land use permit.
      2.   The request for an extension is not sought for purposes of avoiding
any responsibility imposed by this Code or the permit or any condition
thereunder.
      3.   There have been no changes in circumstances or the law that would
require significant modifications of the original approval or which would
preclude approval. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-17: REAPPLICATION LIMITED:
If an application is denied, no reapplication for the same or substantially
similar proposal may be made for one year following the date of final decision
denying the application. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-18: INTERPRETATION:
Where a provision of the Comprehensive Plan, this Title or Title 11 of this
Code conflicts with another City ordinance or requirement, the provision or
requirement that is more restrictive or specific shall control. (Ord. 688, 6-
15-1999)
10-14-19: CONFORMITY OF PERMITS:
The City shall not accept any application for a permit, certificate, or other
approval, including building permit applications, for any property that is not
in full compliance with all applicable provisions of the Comprehensive Plan,
this Title and Title 11 of this Code, and with any permit approvals previously
issued by the City, unless the application proposes returning the property or
structure to full compliance. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-20: AUTHORIZATION OF SIMILAR USES:
The Planning Commission may decide, through a Type III process, that a use not
specifically listed in the allowed uses of a zoning district may nonetheless be
allowed if it is deemed to be similar in nature and impact to the uses allowed
in the applicable district. Any similar use so authorized must be similar to,
or of the same type as, the uses allowed in the underlying district. However,
this Section does not allow the authorization of a use which is allowed in some
other district. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-21: RECONSIDERATION OF A FINAL DECISION:
Under this Section, parties with standing may seek reconsideration of a final
decision rendered pursuant to a Type II, III, or IV process. Reconsideration is
warranted where the City's decision indicates that the decision maker failed to
understand or consider certain relevant facts or misinterpreted the application
or legal standards in some material way. Any request for reconsideration must
be received by the City within ten (10) days of when the decision in question
was rendered and must specifically describe the alleged misunderstanding or
misinterpretation. A request for reconsideration shall not stay the
effectiveness of the City's final decision, nor shall it affect any applicable
appeal deadlines to LUBA. If the request is granted, the City Administrator
shall notify all affected parties that the decision will be reconsidered. If
the reconsideration is based upon new evidence or information, all parties with
standing shall have the opportunity to review and comment on the new evidence
or information. Any request for reconsideration by the applicant shall be
deemed a waiver of the one hundred twenty (120) day deadline under subsection
10-14-5C of this Chapter. The City's decision on a request for reconsideration
is not a land use decision and is not appealable. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-22: REVOCATION OF A PREVIOUSLY APPROVED PERMIT:
In the event an applicant or applicant's successor in interest fails to comply
with all conditions of permit approval or otherwise does not comply fully with
the City's approval, the City may institute a revocation or modification
proceeding under this Section.
   A.   Situations When Permit Approvals May Be Revoked Or Modified: All quasi-
judicial permits may be revoked or modified if the Planning Commission
determines a substantial likelihood that any of the following situations
exists:
      1.   One or more conditions of the approval have not been implemented or
have been violated.
      2.   The activities of the use, or the use itself, are substantially
different from what was approved.
      3.   The use is subject to the nonconforming use regulations, the owner
or operator has not obtained approval, and has substantially altered the nature
or extent of the use since the time the use became nonconforming.
   B.   Process For Revocation And Modification: Revocation or modification
shall be processed as a Type III decision. The City or any private complaining
party shall have the burden of proving, based on substantial evidence in the
whole record, that the applicant or the applicant's successor has in some way
violated the City's approval.
   C.   Possible Actions At The Revocation Hearing: Depending on the situation,
the Planning Commission may take any of the actions described in this Section.
The Planning Commission may not approve the new use or a use that is more
intense than originally approved unless the possibility of this change has been
stated in the public notice. Uses or development which are alleged to have not
fulfilled conditions, violated conditions, or when the use is not consistent
with the City's approval may be subject to the following actions:
      1.   The Planning Commission may find that the use or development is
complying with the conditions of the approval. In this case, the use or
development shall be allowed to continue.
      2.   The Planning Commission may modify the approval if it finds that the
use or development does not fully comply with the conditions of approval, that
the violations are not substantial enough to warrant revocation, and that the
use can comply with the original approval criteria if certain conditions are
met. In this case, the Planning Commission may modify the existing conditions,
add new conditions to ensure compliance with the approval criteria and
standards, or refer the case to the Code Compliance Officer for enforcement of
the existing conditions.
      3.   The Planning Commission may revoke the approval if it finds there
are substantial violations of conditions or failure to implement conditions of
prior land use decisions, such that the original approval criteria for the use
or development are not being met.
   D.   Effect Of Revocation: In the event that the permit approval is revoked
or the use is declared to be illegal, the use or development shall be
terminated within thirty (30) days of the date of the Planning Commission's
final order, unless the decision provides otherwise. In the event the decision
on a revocation request is appealed, the revocation action shall be stayed
pending a final, unappealed decision. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-23: TRANSFER OF APPROVAL RIGHTS:
Unless otherwise stated in the City's permit decision, any approval granted
under this Title runs with the land and is transferred with the ownership of
the land. Any conditions, time limits, or other restrictions imposed with a
permit approval shall bind all subsequent owners of the property for which the
permit was granted. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-24: FEES:
The City may adopt by resolution, and revise from time to time, a schedule of
fees for applications and appeals. Fees shall be based upon the City's actual
or average cost of processing the application or conducting the appeal process.
The only exception shall be the appeal fee for a Type II decision shall be
limited by Oregon Revised Statutes 227.175(10)(b). The requirements of this
Section shall govern the payment, refund, and reimbursement of fees.
   A.   Payment: All fees shall be due and payable at the time the application
or appeal is submitted. No application or appeal shall be accepted or processed
without the proper fee being paid.
   B.   Refunds: Fees will only be refunded as provided in this subsection:
      1.   Fee Not Required: When a fee is paid for an application which is
later found to not be required, the City shall refund the fee.
      2.   Errors: When an error is made in calculating a fee, overpayments
will be refunded.
      3.   Refund Upon Withdrawal Of An Application: In the event an applicant
withdraws an application, the City shall refund the unused portion of the fee,
if any. In this case, the City will deduct from the fee the City's actual costs
incurred in processing the application prior to withdrawal.
   C.   Fee Waivers: The City Administrator may waive all or any portion of an
application or appeal fee if, in the opinion of the City Administrator, an
application must be resubmitted because of an error made by the City. (Ord.
688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-25: WETLANDS NOTIFICATION PROVISIONS:
Notwithstanding any other notice required in this Title, written notice shall
be provided to the Oregon Division of State Lands of applications which involve
lands that are wholly or partially within areas that are identified as wetlands
on the State-Wide Wetlands Inventory. Wetland boundaries shall be verified in
the field by a qualified professional before any application for development in
or adjacent to a wetland is accepted as complete.
   A.   Notice shall be sent within five (5) working days of the acceptance of
a complete application for a subdivision, building permit for new structure,
planned development, or any other development permit or approval that allows
physical alteration of the land involving excavation, grading, fill, or
construction on the land, and any development in a flood plain or floodway.
   B.   Notice shall be sent if the City receives information that there is a
possible wetland on the subject property following acceptance of the
application. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-26: ABATEMENT:
In case a building or other structure is or is proposed to be located,
constructed, maintained, repaired, altered or used, or land is or is proposed
to be used, in violation of this Title, the building or land thus in violation
shall constitute a nuisance. The City may, as an alternative to other remedies
that are legally available for enforcing this Title, institute injunction,
mandamus, abatement or other appropriate proceedings to prevent, enjoin
temporarily or permanently, abate or remove the unlawful location,
construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or use. Costs incurred as a
result of entering into any such action shall be borne by the property owner
and may become a lien against the property. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
10-14-27: PENALTY:
A person who violates a provision of this Title shall, upon conviction, be
punished by the imposition of a Class B civil fine as set forth in
Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code. A violation of this Title shall be considered
a separate offense for each day the violation continues. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
TITLE 11
LAND DIVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Purpose, Modifications
11-1-2: Definitions
11-1-1: PURPOSE, MODIFICATIONS:
   A.   Established: This Title establishes standards and procedures for the
adjusting of lot lines and dividing land within the City. These regulations
ensure that land is divided in accordance with the City's Comprehensive Plan,
applicable zoning requirements, and public works standards. Moreover, these
regulations set forth uniform design standards for land divisions and
transportation systems, and ensure that adequate public facilities are
provided.
   B.   Modifications: The approval authority may modify standards and criteria
of this Title following the procedure and criteria for variances in
Title 10, Chapter 14 of this Code as part of the land division review. (Ord.
673, 6-16-1998)
11-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, when used in this Title, shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this Section:
   ACCESS OR ACCESSWAY: The place, means, or way by which pedestrians,
vehicles, or both, shall have safe and usable ingress and egress to a property
or use. A private access is an access not in public ownership or control by
means of deed, dedication, or easement.
   BLOCK: A parcel of land bounded by streets, railroad rights of way, parks,
unsubdivided acreage, or a combination thereof.
   EASEMENT: A grant of the right to use land for specific purposes.
   FRONTAGE: The portion of a property which abuts a public street.
   IMPROVEMENTS: Construction work within a land division for the purpose of
building sewer lines, water lines, storm drainage lines and facilities, streets
with curbs and sidewalks, and any other utility or facility. Improvements may
be either public or private.
   LOT: A unit of land legally created in accordance with the City of Umatilla
land division requirements and which, for purposes of these requirements, shall
include the term parcel.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more public
streets.
   LOT DEPTH: The distance measured along a straight line from the midpoint of
the front lot line to the midpoint of the opposite, usually the rear, lot line.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot with street frontage along two (2) opposite
boundaries.
   LOT, FLAG: A lot with a narrow street frontage and private accessway,
leading to an area meeting the minimum dimensions for the zoning district.
   LOT, INTERIOR: A lot with frontage on only one street; not a corner lot.
   LOT LINE: Any property line bounding a lot.
   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT: The relocation of a common lot line between two (2)
properties where no additional lots are created.
   LOT LINE, FRONT: For an interior lot, the lot line abutting a street; for a
corner lot, a lot line abutting either street. In the case of a double frontage
lot, each street frontage shall be considered the front unless an access
control strip has been required along one street, in which case that line shall
be considered the rear lot line.
   LOT LINE, REAR: A lot line which is opposite to and most distant from the
front lot line. In the case of an irregular or triangular shaped lot, an
imaginary lot line ten feet (10') in length shall be drawn within the lot
parallel to and at maximum distance from the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line.
   LOT WIDTH: The distance of a straight line measured between the midpoints of
the two (2) principal opposite side lot lines, approximately at right angles to
the lot depth.
   PARCEL: A unit of land that is created by the partitioning of land.
   PARTITION: A land division that creates three (3) or less parcels within a
calendar year.
   PLAT: A final map containing all the descriptions, locations,
specifications, dedications, provisions, and information required for filing
with the County.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT OR PLAN: A drawing of the proposed layout of lots and other
elements of a lot line adjustment or land division; sometimes called a
tentative plan.
   RIGHT OF WAY: The area between boundary lines of a street or other dedicated
area, including the area of an easement.
   SIDEWALK: A pedestrian walkway, usually located parallel to a public street,
with permanent surfacing as specified by City standards.
   SITE: An area of real property in common ownership, notwithstanding that a
particular application for land division may be for development of a portion of
the property.
   STREET: A public or private way that is created to provide ingress or egress
for persons to one or more lots, parcels, areas, or tracts of land. This term
shall include the words road, avenue, highway, lane, and way.
   STREET, ALLEY: A narrow street through the middle of a block that provides
vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting
on another street.
   STREET, ARTERIAL: A primary traffic thoroughfare.
   STREET, COLLECTOR: A street providing connections between neighborhoods or
areas.
   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A street that has one intersection with another street
and terminates with a vehicle turnaround.
   STREET, LOCAL: A street providing access to lots and parcels, designed for
low volume traffic within a neighborhood.
   SUBDIVIDE LAND: A land division which creates four (4) or more lots within a
calendar year.
   TRACT: A unit of land created within a land division that is not a lot or
parcel and which usually is created for a designated purpose such as an
accessway or open space. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
CHAPTER 2
PRELIMINARY LAND DIVISION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
11-2-1: Land Division Requirements
11-2-2: Preapplication Meeting
11-2-3: Application Requirements For Land Divisions
11-2-4: Review Procedures
11-2-5: Lot Line Adjustment Review Standards
11-2-6: Land Division Approval Criteria
11-2-7: Master Planning
11-2-8: Approval Of Master Development Plan
11-2-9: Conditions Of Approval
11-2-10: Development Following Approval
11-2-1: LAND DIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
All land divisions and lot line adjustments, including partitions (3 or fewer
lots in a calendar year), subdivisions (4 or more lots in a calendar year), and
the creation of streets or ways that result in land divisions shall comply with
the following:
   A.   All land divisions and lot line adjustments shall be approved by the
city in accordance with the requirements of this title, title 9, title 10, and
the public works standards 1  of this code.
   B.   Any land division application shall comply with requirements of Oregon
Revised Statutes chapter 92 for tentative plans and final plats.
   C.   No lot or parcel shall be created or submitted for recording with the
Umatilla County clerk nor have any validity unless it has been approved as
required by this code.
   D.   Recordation of a final plat for a subdivision or partition is required
before the sale or conveyance of any interest in any lot or parcel. In
negotiating to sell or convey interest in a lot or parcel in a subdivision or
partition, a person may use the approved tentative plan for such subdivision or
partition.
   E.   No building permit or permit for the connection to a water or sewage
disposal system shall be issued for any structure on a lot or parcel in a
subdivision or partition for which the tentative plan or plat has not been
approved and recorded in the manner prescribed in this title.
   F.   The city will withhold all public improvements, including maintenance
of streets and roads, from a subdivision or partition which has not been
approved and recorded in the manner prescribed in this title. (Ord. 673, 6-16-
1998)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 7, chapter 1 of this code.
11-2-2: PREAPPLICATION MEETING:
Before submitting an application for review of a subdivision or partition with
future street plan, a land divider shall file a request for preapplication
conference with the city administrator, along with a plan or plans of the
proposed development. The city administrator shall arrange an informal meeting
with the land divider and other persons or agencies who, in the opinion of the
city administrator, administer regulations or provide services that would
affect the proposal. The city administrator shall provide the land divider with
information regarding procedures, requirements, plans, policies, and any other
information that bears upon the proposal. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-2-3: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR LAND DIVISIONS:
Applications for land division or lot line adjustment shall be submitted on
forms provided by the city, accompanied by a tentative plan showing the design
of the proposed land division and supporting documents, with the prescribed
fee. (Ord. 766, 12-6-2011)
   A.   Tentative Plan: Tentative plans shall be prepared by a licensed land
surveyor. Fifteen (15) copies of the tentative plan, improvement plans, and
supplementary information shall be submitted to the city administrator. The
tentative plan shall be drawn on a sheet eighteen by twenty four inches (18 x
24") at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), or some other
multiple of ten (10), as approved by the city administrator. (Ord. 673, 6-16-
1998)
   B.   Information Requirements: The following information shall be included
on the tentative plan or on supplemental materials submitted with the tentative
plan:
      1.   The plan shall show the location, width, names, approximate grades
of all streets within and adjacent to the proposed land division. The plan
shall include any streets shown on any plan adopted by the city or relevant
parts of any adopted future street plan to assure adequate traffic circulation.
If no future street plan has been adopted for the land division site, such a
plan shall be submitted with the application that shows potential street
extensions and lotting patterns for a distance of at least six hundred feet
(600') from the land division boundaries. In the I-82/U.S. 730 interchange area
management plan (IAMP) management area, proposed access shall be consistent
with the access management plan in section 7 of the IAMP. (Ord. 766, 12-6-2011)
      2.   The location, width, and purpose of existing and proposed easements.
      3.   The location and approximate dimensions of parcels or lots and the
proposed parcel or lot and block numbers.
      4.   Proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or
resemble the name of any other subdivision in the county.
      5.   Date, north point, and scale of drawing.
      6.   Identification of the map as a tentative plan.
      7.   A vicinity map that shows the location of the partition or
subdivision sufficient to define the location and boundaries of the site,
including such information as section lines, corners, city boundary lines,
monuments, and so on.
      8.   Names and addresses of the owner, land divider, and engineer or
surveyor.
      9.   Zoning designations on and adjacent to the property proposed for
land division.
      10.   The location of at least one temporary bench mark within the
tentative plan boundaries.
      11.   Contour lines at a minimum of two feet (2'). The elevations of all
control points which are used to determine the contours shall be indicated and
must be the United States geodetic survey.
      12.   The location and direction of watercourses and the location of
areas subject to flooding, with the 100-year floodplain boundary if identified.
      13.   Natural features such as rock outcroppings, landslide hazard areas,
wetlands, wooded areas, and other unique features.
      14.   Known historical sites or structures and provisions for recognition
or protection thereof.
      15.   Existing uses of the property, including the location of all
existing structures to remain on the property after platting and existing
structures to be removed.
      16.   Proposed deed restrictions, if any.
      17.   The location of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, drainpipes,
and electric, natural gas, and telephone lines within and adjacent to the site,
along with plans for the extension of such facilities to serve the site and
adjacent properties.
      18.   All persons offering for filing an approved plan, plat or replat of
subdivisions or partitions for a parcel of land outside the boundaries of an
irrigation district, drainage district, water control district, or district
improvement company must file a statement of water rights. If a water right is
appurtenant to the lands of the subdivision or partition the statement of water
rights and a copy of the plan, plat, or replat must be submitted to the Oregon
water resources department. A copy of the acknowledgment from the water
resources department must be submitted with the plan, plat, or replat to the
Umatilla County clerk.
      19.   Proposed street designations (e.g., arterial, local, etc.) and
approximate centerline profiles with extensions for a reasonable distance
beyond the limits of the proposed land division, showing the approximate grade
of streets and the nature and extent of street construction.
      20.   A plan for domestic water supply, including the source and plans
for water lines for the site and provisions for extensions to adjacent
properties.
      21.   A plan for the sewage disposal system, including provisions for
extensions to adjacent properties.
      22.   A plan for stormwater drainage and flood control, including
profiles of proposed drainageways.
      23.   A plan for other public utilities, including, but not limited to,
television cable service, telephone, electric, and gas utilities.
      24.   Present and future service capability of the school district. (Ord.
673, 6-16-1998)
      25.   A future street plan, when required.
      26.   A traffic impact analysis (TIA), pursuant to requirements in
section
10-11-10 of this code.
      27.   Additional information may be required by the city to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this title, title 9, and title 10 of this
code. (Ord. 766, 12-6-2011)
   C.   Partial Development: All contiguous land under the same ownership shall
be identified. Land that is not proposed for development shall be shown as a
separate tract. A concept plan showing how this land could develop in the
future, consistent with the requirements of the city, shall be submitted with
the application. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-2-4: REVIEW PROCEDURES:
The approval authority may approve, deny, modify, or approve with conditions
any application. Decisions by the city administrator may be appealed to the
planning commission. Decisions by the planning commission may be appealed to
the city council. Notice will be provided for public hearings as required by
state law. (Ord. 766, 12-6-2011)
   A.   Lot Line Adjustments: Lot line adjustments shall be reviewed by the
city administrator as a ministerial action.
   B.   Tentative Plans For Land Divisions:
      1.   Partitions: Partitions shall be reviewed by the city administrator,
unless a public street is created or a future street plan is required to
demonstrate that provisions are made for access to adjacent properties and that
public streets can and will be extended to continue the public street system.
Partitions that create a public street or require consideration of a future
street plan shall be reviewed as subdivisions.
      2.   Subdivisions: Subdivisions and partitions that create a public
street or require consideration of a future street plan shall be reviewed by
the planning commission.
      3.   Future Street Plan: A future street plan is required as part of a
master plan and for land division applications when necessary to show that
adjacent lands are provided with access to public streets that continue or
connect to existing public streets to enable full development as allowed by the
city's codes and requirements or when modification of a future street plan is
proposed. A future street plan shall satisfy submission and approval
requirements of section
11-2-7 of this chapter and section 11-4-2 of this title. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
      4.   Agency Notice: The city administrator shall furnish copies of an
application for tentative plan, along with any supplementary information, to
county, state, or federal agencies that may have an interest in the proposal.
When the application pertains to a parcel or parcels in the I-82/U.S. 730
interchange area management plan (IAMP) management area, the city shall provide
written notification to ODOT when the application is deemed complete. These
officials shall have fourteen (14) days to review the application and to
suggest any revisions or requirements that are in the public interest. Comments
shall be provided to the city in writing. (Ord. 766, 12-6-2011)
   C.   Final Plats: Final plats for land divisions and lot line adjustments
shall be reviewed by the city administrator to determine that the requirements
of the preliminary plan approval have been satisfied. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-2-5: LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT REVIEW STANDARDS:
The city administrator shall approve lot line adjustments to legally created
lots or parcels if the following standards are met:
   A.   No new lot or parcel is created.
   B.   The adjustment does not reduce a lot or parcel below the minimum size
allowed for the zoning district in which the lot or parcel is located.
   C.   Each adjusted lot or parcel shall have street frontage in compliance
with zoning standards or other approved access to a public street.
   D.   Each adjusted lot or parcel conforms with all other applicable
requirements of this code.
   E.   Each adjusted boundary is surveyed and filed with the county surveyor
and recorded with the county clerk. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-2-6: LAND DIVISION APPROVAL CRITERIA:
No plat for a subdivision or partition may be considered for approval until the
city has approved a tentative plan. Approval of the tentative plan shall be
binding upon the city and the applicant for the purposes of preparing the
subdivision or partition plat. In each case, the applicant bears the burden of
proof to demonstrate that the proposal satisfies applicable criteria and
standards.
   A.   Approval Criteria: Land division tentative plans shall only be approved
if found to comply with the following criteria:
      1.   The proposal shall comply with the city's comprehensive plan.
      2.   The proposal shall comply with the I-82/U.S. 730 interchange area
management plan (IAMP) and the access management plan in the IAMP (section 7)
as applicable.
      3.   The proposal shall comply with the city's zoning requirements.
      4.   The proposal shall comply with the city's public works standards.
      5.   The proposal shall comply with applicable state and federal
regulations, including, but not limited to, Oregon Revised Statutes 92, 197,
227, and wetland regulations.
      6.   The proposal shall conserve inventoried natural resource areas and
floodplains, including, but not limited to, mapped rivers, creeks, sloughs, and
wetlands.
      7.   The proposal shall minimize disruption of natural features of the
site, including steep slopes or other features, while providing for safe and
efficient vehicle, pedestrian, and bicycle access.
      8.   The proposal shall provide adjacent lands with access to public
facilities and streets to allow its full development as allowed by the city's
codes and requirements.
      9.   The proposal shall be designed with streets that continue or connect
to existing and planned land division plats on adjoining properties. All
proposed streets shall comply with standards of this title and the public works
standards.
      10.   The city's decision on a land division application shall include
written findings for each required dedication or improvement that identify the
legitimate governmental purpose, the relationship between the purpose and the
exaction, and the rough proportionality in nature and extent, between the
requirement and the projected impacts of the proposed development. (Ord. 766,
12-6-2011)
   B.   City Action Noted: The action of the city approval authority shall be
conveyed to the applicant by a notice of decision. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-2-7: MASTER PLANNING:
A master development plan shall be submitted when a phased subdivision is
proposed or when only a portion of a large property under one ownership is
proposed for development. A master development plan shall include all land
under the same ownership, whether or not immediate development is proposed. In
addition to any other maps and information required to be submitted with an
application for a land division, the master development plan shall include
narrative and maps or plans that show the following elements:
   A.   Required Information:
      1.   An overall development plan, including the phase or unit sequence
and anticipated development schedule, not to exceed five (5) years. Portions of
a property not proposed for development shall be labeled "future development"
and lot and street patterns need to be shown only to the extent necessary to
satisfy the requirements for a future street plan.
      2.   Demonstration of compliance with the comprehensive plan and
implementing land use standards and criteria.
      3.   Proposed schedule of public and private improvements, both on and
off site, with anticipated dates for initiation and completion.
      4.   Development plans and timing for any common elements or facilities.
      5.   A future street plan for adjoining properties within six hundred
feet (600') of the site proposed for development. The future street plan is a
conceptual plan, which shall demonstrate that public streets within the
development can be extended in accordance with city standards for street grades
and widths to provide access to adjacent properties; that the street
arrangement is orderly and efficient, providing convenient and direct access to
adjacent properties; and that adjacent properties can be divided in accordance
with the standards and criteria of the applicable zoning district.
      6.   Any other information the planning commission considers necessary to
the review of an application, including, but not limited to, a traffic impact
analysis and reports on the geology, soils, or other environmental conditions
found on a site or in the vicinity of a site which may be affected by a
proposed development. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-2-8: APPROVAL OF MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
The planning commission shall review an application for a master development
plan and the tentative plan for the first phase of a proposed subdivision or
may review an application for a master development plan before any preliminary
subdivision plan is submitted. The planning commission may approve, modify, or
deny an application for a master development plan based on the following
criteria:
   A.   The master development plan promotes the goals, policies, and
objectives of the comprehensive plan, the zoning code, and other city
requirements.
   B.   The site is suitable for the proposed use and the schedule for the
various subdivision phases promotes a reasonable and orderly development.
   C.   The future street plan provides access to adjacent properties that
allows efficient and reasonable future land divisions and promotes orderly and
efficient circulation pattern for the city.
   D.   The proposed on and off site public improvements are sufficient to meet
the needs anticipated to be generated by the proposed development. The schedule
of improvements assures that needed facilities will be available prior to and
coordinated with anticipated impacts.
   E.   The schedule for phasing and improvements shall not exceed five (5)
years. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-2-9: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
The planning commission may identify conditions of approval to secure the
objectives of the comprehensive plan and the subdivision and zoning
regulations. Conditions of approval may specify a schedule for completing
public facility system improvements and other conditions determined to be
necessary. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-2-10: DEVELOPMENT FOLLOWING APPROVAL:
A master development plan shall be effective for a period of five (5) years, if
platting of phases generally follows the approved schedule. Each phase of the
phased subdivision shall be submitted to the city for review according to the
requirements for submitting a final plat. The city shall review each
subdivision phase and may make modifications to the approved plan if there have
been changes in circumstances. "Changes in circumstances" shall mean unforeseen
changes that have more than a minor impact upon the project and may involve
changes to the site, development regulations, or the city's ability to provide
public services. Approval of the master development plan shall not guarantee
utility service availability. Any changes to the master development plan,
whether initiated by the city or the applicant, shall be subject to review and
approval in the same manner as the original approval, except that minor changes
that do not affect the overall design, layout, or timing of the project may be
approved by the city administrator. A change in the order of phases usually
will not be considered a modification of the approval unless there is an effect
upon the provision or availability of public services. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
CHAPTER 3
FINAL LAND DIVISION PROCEDURES
SECTION:
11-3-1: Final Plats
11-3-2: Submission Of Final Plat
11-3-3: Recordation Requirements
11-3-4: Amendments To Recorded Land Division Plats
11-3-1: FINAL PLATS:
   A.   Time Limit: Within twelve (12) months after approval of the tentative
plan and upon completion of or bonding for improvements, the land divider shall
prepare a final plat in conformance with the approved tentative plan.
   B.   Preparation: The plat shall be prepared as required by Oregon Revised
Statutes 92.
   C.   Final Plat Requirements: The final plat shall conform to surveying
requirements of Oregon Revised Statutes 92. The following information shall be
shown on the final plat, in addition to any specific statutory requirements:
      1.   The date, scale, north point, basis of bearing, legend, controlling
topography such as bluffs, creeks or other bodies of water, steep slopes, and
existing features such as highways, railroads, irrigation canals, etc.
      2.   Legal description of the tract boundaries.
      3.   Names of the owner, land divider, and surveyor.
      4.   The exact location and width of streets and easements intersecting
the boundary of the site.
      5.   The width of street rights of way. Curve data shall be based on the
street center line and the radius and central angle shall be indicated.
      6.   Lot numbers shall begin with the number "1" and shall be numbered
consecutively in each block. Blocks shall be identified with letters, beginning
with the letter "A" and continuing consecutively without omission or
duplication throughout the subdivision.
      7.   The area of each lot shall be shown.
      8.   Land to be dedicated for any purpose, public or private, shall be
distinguished from lots or parcels intended for sale.
      9.   Building setback lines, if any are part of the land division
restrictions or approval.
      10.   The following certificates, which may be combined where
appropriate:
         a.   A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any
recorded title interest in the land partitioned or subdivided, consenting to
the preparation and recording of the plat.
         b.   A certificate signed and acknowledged as above, dedicating all
rights of way and any other tracts of land shown on the final map intended for
any public use. Streets and roads for public use are dedicated without any
reservation or restriction other than reversionary rights upon vacation.
         c.   An affidavit with the seal of and signed by the registered
surveyor responsible for the land survey and final map per Oregon Revised
Statutes 92.070.
         d.   Other certifications now or hereafter required by law.
      11.   The following data shall accompany the final plat:
         a.   Addresses of the owner, land divider, and engineer or surveyor.
         b.   A preliminary title report issued by a title insurance company in
the name of the owner of the land, showing all parties whose consent is
necessary and their interests in the premises.
         c.   A copy of any deed restrictions applicable to the land division.
         d.   A copy of any dedication requiring separate documents.
         e.   Certification that domestic water and sewage disposal systems are
available to the lot line of each and every lot or parcel in a land division
and assurance by the land divider that the systems will be installed.
Alternative systems may be considered only if unusual circumstances affect the
property and the City determines that it is impractical or infeasible to
provide public water and sewage disposal facilities.
         f.   A certificate by the City that the land divider has complied with
one of the following:
            (1)   All improvements have been installed in accordance with the
requirements of these regulations and with the approved tentative plan, or
            (2)   An agreement has been executed to assure completion of
required improvements. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-3-2: SUBMISSION OF FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Submission Of Final Plat: The land divider shall submit the final plat
for City approval in the form of six (6) paper copies for review, along with
any supplementary information necessary to demonstrate substantial conformity
to the approved tentative plan.
   B.   Final Plat Review: The City Administrator shall review the final plat
and documents to determine the following:
      1.   The final plat generally conforms to the preliminary plat, including
any conditions of approval.
      2.   Public and private streets conform to the tentative plan.
      3.   The land division plat conforms with any applicable City zoning
provisions and regulations, provisions of Oregon Revised Statutes pertaining to
land divisions, and other provisions of this Code.
      4.   Dedication and explanation of public and private improvements are
recorded and referenced on the plat.
   C.   Approval Of The Final Plat: If the City Administrator determines that
the final plat conforms fully with all applicable regulations and standards,
the land divider shall be notified in writing and shall provide no less than
two (2) reproducible copies of the final plat to the City. The Mayor shall be
so advised that the final plat is approved and shall sign the final plat to
indicate the City's approval. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-3-3: RECORDATION REQUIREMENTS:
The final plat shall be submitted for recording with Umatilla County and shall
satisfy all requirements of the County and State for recording of a plat,
including payment of any taxes or fees. Approval of the final plat shall be
null and void if the plat is not recorded within thirty (30) days after the
date the last required signature has been obtained or within ninety (90) days
after City approval. One copy of the plat with all signatures shall be returned
to the City to be maintained in a file of approved final plats. (Ord. 673, 6-
16-1998)
11-3-4: AMENDMENTS TO RECORDED LAND DIVISION PLATS:
   A.   Any recorded land plat may be amended by an affidavit of correction as
provided by Oregon Revised Statutes 92.
   B.   Any recorded plat may be replatted as provided by Oregon Revised
Statutes 92 and in compliance with the requirements of this Title. (Ord. 673,
6-16-1998)
CHAPTER 4
DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Design Standards
11-4-2: Streets
11-4-3: Blocks
11-4-4: Easements
11-4-5: Lots
11-4-6: Utilities
11-4-1: DESIGN STANDARDS:
Land divisions, street dedications, public improvements, and lot line
adjustments shall conform to the City's Comprehensive Plan, zoning
requirements, Public Works Standards, and State law. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-4-2: STREETS:
The location, width, and grade of streets shall be considered in their relation
to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public
utilities, services, convenience, and safety, and to the proposed use of the
land to be served by the streets. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
   A.   Street Arrangement: The arrangement of streets in and serving land
divisions shall:
      1.   Maximize public safety, access, and minimize out of direction travel
by utilizing a grid system or comparable design.
      2.   Avoid cul-de-sacs, except where there is no other practical
alternative to serve a portion of the land area to be divided, due to
topographical conditions, existing development, or similar circumstances.
      3.   Provide for the continuation of existing streets in surrounding
areas.
      4.   Conform to any future street plan, neighborhood plan, or other
street plan adopted by the City.
   B.   Street Layout And Design:
      1.   All streets, alleys, bicycle, and pedestrian pathways shall connect
to other streets within the land division and to existing and planned streets
outside the land division. Streets shall terminate at other streets or at
parks, schools, or other public uses within a neighborhood.
      2.   Local streets shall align and connect with other streets when
crossing streets with higher level classifications.
      3.   Cul-de-sacs and flag lots shall only be permitted when the following
conditions are demonstrated:
         a.   Existing conditions, such as topographic features, water
features, an irrigation canal, a railroad, a freeway, or other condition, that
cannot be bridged or crossed prevents the extension of a street.
         b.   The existing development pattern on adjacent properties prevents
a street connection.
         c.   An accessway is provided consistent with the standards for
accessways. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
         d.   A minor street is not a suitable alternative to multiple flag
lots (more than 2 adjacent flags) due to size of the site, topographic
features, or other physical constraint. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
      4.   Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed four hundred feet (400') in length.
      5.   Where a land division includes or is adjacent to land that can be
divided and developed in the future, streets, bicycle paths, and pedestrianways
shall continue through the full length of the land division to provide
connections for the adjacent land.
      6.   Where proposed lots or parcels in a proposed land division exceed
double the minimum lot size and can be redivided, the location of lot and
parcel lines and other layout details shall be such that future land divisions
may readily occur without interfering with the orderly extension of adjacent
streets, bicycle paths, or pedestrianways. Any building restrictions within
future transportation locations, such as future street rights of way or future
street setbacks, shall be made a matter of record for the purpose of future
land divisions.
      7.   Where there is a reasonable relationship between the impacts of the
proposed development and the public need for accessways, such as direct
connections to public schools or parks, the land divider shall be required to
publicly dedicate accessways to:
         a.   Connect to cul-de-sacs;
         b.   Pass through oddly shaped or unusually long blocks; or
         c.   Provide for networks of public pedestrian and bicycle paths; or
         d.   Provide access to other transportation routes, businesses,
residential, or public uses.
      8.   New construction or reconstruction of collector and arterial streets
shall include bicycle facilities and pedestrian sidewalks as required by
applicable city plans.
      9.   Sidewalks shall be installed along the street frontage of arterial
and collector streets and for any street within a multi-family, commercial, or
industrial land division by the land divider. Sidewalks on local streets within
a subdivision for single-family residential lots shall be provided with the
construction of a structure on the lot and shall be completed prior to
occupancy of the structure.
      10.   An easement may be required to provide for all or part of sidewalks
along one or both sides of a public right of way which lacks width to include
sidewalks within the public right of way.
      11.   When a sidewalk in good repair does not exist, all applicants for
building permits for a new structure or remodeling of more than a minor nature
of an existing structure shall, in conjunction with the issuance of a building
permit, obtain a permit to construct a sidewalk for the full frontage of the
site. No final inspection or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the
building permit until a sidewalk has been constructed in accordance with the
permit requirements.
      12.   Off site pedestrian improvements may be required concurrent with a
land division to ensure access between the land division and an existing
developed facility such as a commercial center, school, park, or trail system.
The approval authority must show a reasonable relationship between the impacts
of the land division and the required improvement.
      13.   Structures are not allowed in any dedicated sidewalk areas which
will obstruct movements on the sidewalk. The minimum widths of sidewalks shall
conform to ADA standards.
      14.   Sidewalks generally shall be parallel to adjacent streets in line
and grade, except where existing features or topographical conditions warrant
an alternative design.
      15.   All sidewalks shall be adjacent to the curb as specified in the
public works standards, unless impractical due to special circumstances of the
site or adjacent street.
      16.   Street trees are required along both sides of new public streets,
at a minimum of thirty feet (30') on center, with at least one tree for each
new lot or parcel. Street tree locations shall be shown on construction plans
and shall generally be located at the edge of the right of way. Street trees
shall be required with building permits for structures on approved lots and
shall be installed prior to approval of occupancy. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
   C.   Right Of Way And Roadway Widths: Generally, right of way and roadway
widths for state highways and county roads shall be determined by these
entities. Unless otherwise determined by the city administrator based on the
recommendation of the city engineer and public works director, the widths of
streets and roadways shall meet the following standards and, in addition, all
street construction shall conform to the public works standards: (Ord. 710, 5-
7-2002)
 
   CURB RETURNS
   Intersection                       Radius
Local with local or neighborhood      20 feet, not exceeding 25 feet
collector or collector
                                      30 feet; streets serving primarily
Neighborhood collector, collector, or commercial and industrial properties may
arterial with neighborhood collector, be required to install greater curb radii
collector, or arterial                as necessary to accommodate the movement
                                      of large vehicles
 
(Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
 
MINIMUM STREET STANDARDS
Type Of Street1 Minimum Right Of Minimum Widths Minimum Pavement Bicycle Lane
                Way              For Sidewalks2 Width
Major arterial   State or county   6' both sides 40'         6' both sides
street           standards or 60'
Minor arterial   State or county   5' both sides 40'         6' both sides
street           standards or 60'
Collector street 60' or county     5' both sides 40'         5' both sides
                 standard
Neighborhood     60' or county     5' both sides 40'         5' both sides
collector street standard
Local streets:
commercial or    60' minimum       5' both sides 36'            n/a
industrial
Cul-de-sacs:
commercial or    55' radius        5' around     45' radius     n/a
industrial
Local streets:   34'               5' both sides 24'            n/a
residential2,3
Cul-de-sacs:     50' radius        5' around     40' radius     n/a
residential
Pedestrian                                                   6' wide in
connections      20' minimum       6' walkway    n/a         addition to
                                                             walkway
                 24' commercial or
Alleys           industrial; 20'      n/a     20' minimum    n/a
                 residential
1.   Standards for streets within the downtown plan area shall conform to
design standards of the "Downtown Revitalization And Circulation Study, June
29, 2001", figures 5-9 and 5-13, or other applicable street standards of the
downtown plan.
2.   The typical local residential street is expected to have a 60 foot
right of way with 36 feet of pavement. Local residential streets may have
reduced rights of way and pavement widths when anticipated traffic volume is
less than 500 vehicle trips per day for low density developments in the R-
1 and R-2 zones.
3.   A local residential "minor street" may be approved with a minimum right
of way of 34 feet and pavement width of 24 feet when the proposed street
serves 5 or fewer dwellings; is not a through street and does not exceed 150
feet in length. A minor street may be terminated with a hammerhead type
turnaround. A minor street may be public or privately owned. If private,
"right of way" shall become required easement width and provisions for
maintenance shall be recorded with the deeds of properties served by the
street.
 
(Ord. 723, 6-17-2003)
      1.   The city administrator may modify the width of a planter strip to
accommodate drainage and public utilities.
      2.   Curbside sidewalks shall be required. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
      3.   Bike lanes and shoulder bikeways along arterial and collector
streets shall be five feet (5') wide and shall be provided for each direction
of travel allowed on the street. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998; amd. Ord. 723, 6-17-
2003)
      4.   Sidewalk and bicycle path lighting shall be provided in conjunction
with new road construction and new development.
      5.   Wheelchair ramps and other facilities shall be provided as required
by the Americans with disabilities act (ADA).
      6.   Bikeways shall be designed and constructed consistent with the
design standards in the Oregon bicycle plan, 1992, and ASSHTO's "Guide For The
Development Of Bicycle Facilities, 1991".
   D.   Reserve Strips: Public reserve strips or street plugs controlling
access to streets may be approved where necessary for the protection of the
public welfare or of substantial property rights.
   E.   Alignment: Streets other than minor streets shall be in alignment with
existing streets by continuations of the centerlines. Staggered street
alignment resulting in "T" intersections shall be avoided and in no case shall
the distance between centerlines of off set streets be less than two hundred
feet (200').
   F.   Future Extension Of Streets: Streets shall be extended to the boundary
of the land division. A temporary turnaround may be required for emergency
vehicle access if a dead end street results.
   G.   Intersection Angles: Streets shall be laid out to intersect at right
angles as nearly as practical. In no case shall the intersection angle be less
than seventy five degrees (75°). The intersection of arterial or collector
streets with other arterial or collector streets shall have at least one
hundred feet (100') of tangent adjacent to the intersection. Other streets,
except alleys, shall have at least sixty feet (60') of tangent adjacent to the
intersection.
   H.   Existing Streets: When existing streets adjacent to or within a site
have widths less than city standards, additional right of way shall be provided
with the land division.
   I.   Partial Street Dedication And Improvements: Half streets shall be
avoided wherever possible. A partial street dedication may be permitted when a
land division abuts undeveloped property which is likely to dedicate the
remainder of the street. At minimum, two-thirds (2/3) of the street dedication
and improvement shall be required for any partial street to accommodate two (2)
travel lanes, one parking lane, and sidewalk on one side. Reserve strips and
street plugs may be required to preserve the objectives of the partial street.
   J.   Street Names: Except for extensions of existing streets, no street name
shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the name of existing
streets. Street names and numbers shall conform to the established pattern in
the city, applicable requirements, and shall be approved by the city.
   K.   Grades And Curves: Centerline radii of curves shall not be less than
three hundred feet (300') on arterial streets, two hundred feet (200') on
collector streets, or one hundred feet (100') on local streets. Grades shall
not exceed six percent (6%) on arterials, ten percent (10%) on collector
streets, or twelve percent (12%) on any other street.
   L.   Streets Adjacent To Railroad Rights Of Way: Wherever the proposed land
division includes or is adjacent to a railroad right of way, provisions may be
required for a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right
of way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the land between the
streets and the railroad. The distance shall be determined with due
consideration at cross streets of the minimum distance required for approach
grades to a future grade separation and to provide sufficient depth to allow
vegetative or other screening to be placed along the railroad right of way.
   M.   Marginal Access Streets: Where a land division abuts or contains an
existing or proposed arterial street, the city may require marginal access
streets, reverse frontage lots with additional depth, screen planting or other
screening contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear or side property
line, or other treatment necessary for adequate protection of residential
properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. Alleys are
acceptable as a means of providing access to lots or parcels fronting state
highways or county roads.
   N.   Alleys:
      1.   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts,
unless other permanent provisions for access to off street parking and loading
facilities are approved by the city.
      2.   Alleys are encouraged to serve residential development that front
along state highways or county roads to minimize congestion and traffic
hazards.
      3.   The corners of alley intersections shall have a radius of not less
than two feet (2'). (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-4-3: BLOCKS:
The length, width, and shape of blocks shall take into account the need for
adequate lot size and street width. No block shall be more than eight hundred
feet (800') in length between street corner lines, unless it is adjacent to an
arterial street or unless justified by the location of adjoining streets. The
recommended minimum length of blocks along an arterial street is one thousand
six hundred feet (1,600'). Any block over eight hundred feet (800') in length
may be required to provide pedestrian connections through the block and
crosswalks dedicated and improved to city standards. (Ord. 688, 6-15-1999)
11-4-4: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Utility Lines: Utility lines shall generally be located within public
rights of way unless other provisions are required to meet the specific needs
of a particular utility provider. A ten foot (10') wide easement for public and
private utilities shall be provided along property frontages (measured from the
right of way line) and a six foot (6') wide easement for public and private
utilities shall be provided along side and rear lot lines, except as otherwise
approved by the city administrator.
   B.   Watercourses: If a land division is crossed by or adjacent to a natural
water body, an easement conforming to the riparian area shall be provided to
protect the watercourse. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-4-5: LOTS:
Lot and parcel size, shape, and orientation shall be consistent with the
applicable zoning district and for the type of use contemplated. No lot or
parcel dimension shall include the adjacent public right of way.
   A.   Through lots with public streets on both front and rear or both sides
shall be avoided except when essential to provide separation of residential
development from adjacent arterial or collector streets. An easement at least
five feet (5') in width shall be located adjacent to the right of way and there
shall be no right of access to the major street. A permanent barrier may be
required along the right of way, within the easement.
   B.   Lot and parcel side lot lines shall be at right angles to fronting
streets or radius to curved streets to the extent practical, in order to create
lots and parcels with building sites which are nearly rectangular.
   C.   Lots shall have a width to depth ratio not to exceed 2.5.
   D.   All lots and parcels shall have a minimum street frontage on a public
street of fifty feet (50'), except that lots or parcels fronting a cul-de-sac
or curved street may have a minimum street frontage of forty feet (40'), so
long as the minimum lot width required by the zoning district is provided at a
distance equivalent to the required front yard setback.
   E.   Flag lots shall not be acceptable for land divisions, but may be
approved if the following circumstances apply:
      1.   For one or two (2) lot land divisions when it is not practical to
create or extend a public street or partial public street due to the nature of
surrounding development.
      2.   When topographic conditions or other physical constraints make it
impractical or infeasible to create or extend a public street.
      3.   When the size and shape of the site limit the possible arrangement
of new lots or parcels and prevent the creation or extension of a public
street.
      4.   When allowed, the flag portion of a new lot shall have a minimum
width of fifteen feet (15') to accommodate a driveway a minimum of twelve feet
(12') wide. Two (2) adjacent flag lots may reduce the street frontage and pole
width to twelve feet (12') wide, if joint access easements are created and a
driveway is provided with a minimum width of twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 673, 6-
16-1998)
11-4-6: UTILITIES:
In general, all new public utility lines shall be installed underground,
including, but not limited to, electrical power lines, cable television lines,
natural gas lines, sanitary sewer and storm drainage lines, water lines, and
any other public utility facility installations. Exceptions to this requirement
may be made for reasons of practicality and feasibility, such as when the size
of the electrical power line is impractical to install underground, and shall
be authorized by the City only when sufficient technical justification is
provided. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
CHAPTER 5
COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Agreement For Improvements
11-5-2: Financial Assurance
11-5-3: Failure To Perform
11-5-4: Procedures
11-5-5: Specifications
11-5-6: Requirements
11-5-7: Substantial Completion
11-5-1: AGREEMENT FOR IMPROVEMENTS:
Before approval of the final plat, the land divider shall either install
required improvements, or shall execute and file with the City an agreement
with the City specifying the period within which required improvements shall be
completed. The agreement shall provide that if the work is not completed within
the period specified, that the City may complete the work and recover the full
cost and expense thereof from the land divider. The agreement may provide for
the construction of the improvements in units, and for an extension of time
under specified conditions. Minimum units will be one block of street frontage.
(Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-5-2: FINANCIAL ASSURANCE:
The land divider shall file with the agreement, to assure full and faithful
performance thereof, a surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to
transact business in the State of Oregon in a form approved by the City
Attorney, cash, an irrevocable letter of credit, a reserve fund on a bank loan,
or other such assurance of full and faithful performance. The amount of the
assurance shall be determined by the City and shall be at least one hundred
twenty five percent (125%) of the estimated cost to cover the cost of the
improvements and repairs, including related City expenses. The City shall
provide written acceptance of improvements upon completion. At that time, the
land divider shall provide a maintenance bond. The maintenance bond shall
guarantee the improvements to be free of defects for two (2) years after
written acceptance by the City. The amount of the maintenance bond shall be no
less than ten percent (10%) of the actual construction costs of the
improvements or an amount set by the City Administrator not to exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the actual construction costs if the additional amount is
warranted due to the scope or nature of the improvements. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-5-3: FAILURE TO PERFORM:
If the land divider fails to carry out provisions of the agreement within the
time required and the City has unreimbursed costs or expenses resulting from
such failure, the City shall call on the bond, savings account, or cash deposit
for reimbursement. If the amount of the bond, savings account, or cash deposit
exceeds the cost and expense incurred by the City, the City shall release the
remainder. If the amount of the bond, savings account, or cash deposit is less
than the cost and expense incurred by the City, the land divider shall be
liable to the City for the difference. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-5-4: PROCEDURES:
In addition to other requirements, improvements shall conform to the
requirements of this Code, City public works standards, and other improvement
standards or specifications adopted by the City. Improvements shall be
installed in accordance with the following procedure:
   A.   Work shall not begin until plans have been reviewed and approved by the
City. To the extent necessary for evaluation of the land division, preliminary
plans may be required before approval of the tentative plan or final plat. All
plans shall be prepared on reproducible material in accordance with the
requirements of the City. Construction plans shall be submitted to the City
accompanied by a deposit of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The land divider
shall reimburse the City for actual costs of review of the plans.
   B.   Work shall not be commenced until forty eight (48) hours after the City
has been notified in writing. Moreover, if work has been discontinued for any
reason, it shall not be resumed until the City has been notified.
   C.   Required improvements shall be inspected by and constructed to the
satisfaction of the City. Prior to approval of construction plans, the land
divider shall submit an inspection deposit equivalent of two percent (2%) of
the estimated construction costs, either as estimated by the City's Engineer or
based on the average of two (2) actual construction bids submitted by the land
divider. The land divider shall reimburse the City for actual costs of
inspections.
   D.   The City may require changes in typical sections and details if unusual
conditions arising during construction warrant such changes in the public
interest.
   E.   Underground utilities, sanitary sewers, and storm drains installed in
streets by the land divider shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of the
streets. Stubs for service connections for underground utilities and sanitary
sewers shall be placed to avoid the need to disturb street improvements when
service connections are made. All stubs will be marked and identified with
concrete curbs or other means approved by the City.
   F.   One reproducible copy and two (2) paper copies of "as- built" plans for
all public improvements shall be filed with the City upon completion of the
improvements. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-5-5: SPECIFICATIONS:
The City may maintain a document entitled "Public Works Standards" to
supplement the standards of this Code, based on engineering standards
appropriate for the improvements concerned. Such specifications may address,
but not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Streets, including related improvements such as curbs, shoulders,
median strips and sidewalks, with suitable provisions necessary for slope
easements;
   B.   Drainage facilities;
   C.   Sidewalks and pedestrianways;
   D.   Street lighting;
   E.   Street trees;
   F.   Sanitary sewers and sewage disposal facilities;
   G.   Public water supplies and water distribution systems;
   H.   Utility standards. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-5-6: REQUIREMENTS:
The following improvements shall be installed at the expense of the land
divider:
   A.   Water Supply: Lots within a land division shall be served by a public
domestic water supply system conforming to the City's specifications and
applicable State law.
   B.   Sanitary Sewage Disposal: Lots within a land division shall be served
by a sewage disposal system conforming to City specifications.
   C.   Storm Drainage: Grading shall be performed and drainage facilities
installed as determined necessary by the City to provide proper drainage within
the land division in order to assure healthful, convenient conditions for the
residents of the land division and for the general public. Drainage facilities
within the land division shall be connected to drainageways or storm sewers
outside the land division. Dikes and pumping systems shall be installed if
necessary to protect the land division against flooding or other inundation.
   D.   Streets, Sidewalks, Pedestrian Connections And Street Trees: The land
divider shall improve streets in the land division and the extension of such
streets to the paving line of existing streets with which such streets
intersect in accordance with this Code and City public works standards. Such
improvements shall include appropriate base, curbs, and pavement. Street and
sidewalk improvements shall be required on an existing street which abuts the
land, to the extent that the land division proposes or is required to take
access from such a street.
   E.   Pedestrian Or Bicycleways: A twenty foot (20') wide way shall be
required to connect cul-de-sacs or blocks when required by this Code.
   F.   Monuments: Upon completion of street improvements, monuments shall be
reestablished in monument boxes at every street intersection and points of
curvature or as required by the City.
   G.   No parcel or lot shall be sold on any given block until all of the
above improvements have been installed and approved by the City in the street
right of way that the parcels or lots front upon. All blocks in which parcels
or lots are to be offered for sale shall adjoin previously improved street
rights of way.
   H.   All public utilities including electricity, telephone, and television
cable services and mains shall be installed underground to City specifications,
unless an exception is approved pursuant to Section
11-4-6 of this Title.
   I.   The land divider shall install street and pedestrianway lights to City
specifications. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
11-5-7: SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION:
The land division plat shall be recorded before any building permits are
issued. Connection to the sewer, water and storm drain systems shall not be
permitted until those systems are complete and approved by the City
Administrator.
The City Administrator may approve issuance of up to fifty percent (50%) of the
building permits after the public improvements are substantially complete.
Substantial completion shall mean:
   A.   Sewer and water facilities are complete and operational, constructed to
City standards and ready for acceptance following the completion of corrections
identified as necessary by the final inspection.
   B.   Storm drain facilities are complete and operational, constructed to
City standards and ready for acceptance following the completion of corrections
identified as necessary by the final inspection.
   C.   Streets are curbed and at least one loft (2-inch minimum section) of
asphalt is installed. Streetlight installations shall be completed and ready
for energizing.
   D.   As-built drawings of the sewer and water systems are submitted and
accepted.
   E.   In a residential land division, building permits for model homes may be
approved prior to the fifty percent (50%) of permit release, subject to the
following conditions:
      1.   One model home shall be allowed per land division unless there are
more than twenty (20) lots, in which case one additional model home may be
permitted.
      2.   The final plat shall be recorded before any model home building
permit is issued.
      3.   The City Administrator shall approve the lots selected for the model
home or homes.
      4.   Emergency access and acceptable fire coverage shall be provided for
the model home or homes.
      5.   A model home shall not be granted a final certificate of occupancy
until the public improvements within the land division have been approved and
accepted by the City Administrator. (Ord. 673, 6-16-1998)
CHAPTER 6
SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE
SECTION:
11-6-1: Title
11-6-2: Purpose
11-6-3: Scope
11-6-4: Definitions
11-6-5: Charge Established
11-6-6: Methodology
11-6-7: Authorized Expenditures
11-6-8: Expenditure Restrictions
11-6-9: Improvement Plan
11-6-10: Collection Of Charge
11-6-11: Exemptions
11-6-12: Credits
11-6-13: Notice
11-6-14: Segregation And Use Of Revenue
11-6-15: Appeal Procedure
11-6-16: Prohibited Connection
11-6-17: Penalty
11-6-18: Classification
11-6-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as THE SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE OF THE CITY OF
UMATILLA. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1999)
11-6-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the system development charge is to impose a portion of the cost
of capital improvements for water, wastewater treatment, drainage, streets,
flood control, and parks upon those developments that create the need for or
increase the demands on capital improvements. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1999)
11-6-3: SCOPE:
The system development charge imposed by this Chapter is separate from and in
addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge or fee otherwise provided by
law or imposed as a condition of development. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1999)
11-6-4: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them:
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS: Facilities or assets used for:
   A.   Water supply, treatment and distribution;
   B.   Wastewater collection, transmission, treatment and disposal;
   C.   Drainage and flood control;
   D.   Transportation; or
   E.   Parks and recreation.
   DEVELOPMENT: Conducting a building or mining operation, making a physical
change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, dividing land into two
(2) or more parcels (including partitions and subdivisions), and creating or
terminating a right of access.
   IMPROVEMENT FEES: A fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be
constructed after the date the fee is adopted.
   LAND AREA: The area of the parcel of land as measured by projection of the
parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane with the exception of a portion of
the parcel within a recorded right of way or easement subject to a servitude
for a public street or scenic or preservation purpose.
   OWNER: The owner or owners of record title or the purchaser or purchasers
under a recorded sales agreement, and other persons having an interest or
record in the described real property.
   PARCEL OF LAND: A lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that is occupied
or may be occupied by a structure or structures or other use, and that includes
the yards and other open spaces required under the Zoning, Subdivision or other
development ordinances.
   PERMITTEE: The person to whom a building permit, development permit, a
permit or plan approval to connect to the sewer or water system, or right-of-
way access permit is issued.
   QUALIFIED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS: A capital improvement that is:
   A.   Required as a condition of residential development approval;
   B.   Identified in the plan adopted pursuant to Section
11-6-9 of this Chapter; and either:
   C.   Not located on or contiguous to a parcel of land that is the subject of
the development approval; or
   D.   Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the
subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater
capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the
improvement fee is related.
   E.   For purposes of this definition, "contiguous" means in a public way
which abuts the parcel.
   REIMBURSEMENT FEE: A fee for costs associated with capital improvements
constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to
Section
11-6-5 of this Chapter.
   SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE: A reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a
combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage or a
capital improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit or
building permit, or at the time of connection to the capital improvement.
"System development charge" includes that portion of a sewer or water system
connection charge that is greater than the amount necessary to reimburse the
City for its average cost of inspecting and installing connections with water
and sewer facilities. "System development charge" does not include fees
assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in
lieu of a local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with
requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision. (Ord. 691, 7-20-
1999)
11-6-5: CHARGE ESTABLISHED:
   A.   System development charges shall be established and may be revised by
resolution of the Council. The resolution shall set the amount of the charge,
the type of permit to which the charge applies, and, if the charge applies to a
geographic area smaller than the entire City, the geographic area subject to
the charge.
   B.   Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this Chapter or other
local or State law, a system development charge is hereby imposed upon all
development within the City, upon the act of making a connection to the City
water or sewer system within the City, and upon all development outside the
boundary of the City that connects to or otherwise uses the sewer facilities,
storm sewers or water facilities of the City. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1999)
11-6-6: METHODOLOGY:
   A.   The methodology used to establish the reimbursement fee shall consider
the cost of then-existing facilities, prior contributions by then-existing
users, the value of unused capacity, ratemaking principals employed to finance
publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by
the Council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future systems
users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then-
existing facilities.
   B.   The methodology used to establish the reimbursement fee shall consider
the cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of
the system to which the fee is related.
   C.   The methodology used to establish the improvement fee or the
reimbursement fee, or both, shall be contained in a resolution adopted by the
Council. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1999)
11-6-7: AUTHORIZED EXPENDITURES:
   A.   Reimbursement Fees: Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital
improvements associated with the systems for which the fees are assessed,
including expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness.
   B.   Improvement Fees:
      1.   Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity increasing capital
improvements, including expenditures relating to repayment of future debt for
the improvements. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital
improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing
facilities or provides new facilities. The portion of the capital improvements
funded by improvement fees must be related to demands created by current or
projected development.
      2.   A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues
derived from the improvement fee shall be included in the plan adopted by the
City pursuant to Section
11-6-9 of this Chapter.
   C.   Revenues: Notwithstanding subsections A and B of this Section, system
development charge revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying
with the provisions of this Chapter, including the costs of developing system
development charge methodologies and providing an annual accounting of system
development charge expenditures. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1999)
11-6-8: EXPENDITURE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated
with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an
incidental part of other capital improvements.
   B.   System development charges shall not be expended for costs of the
operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1999)
11-6-9: IMPROVEMENT PLAN:
   A.   Lists the capital improvements that may be funded with improvement fee
revenues;
   B.   Lists the estimated cost and time of construction of each improvement;
and
   C.   Describes the process for modifying the plan.
In adopting this plan, the Council may incorporate by reference all or a
portion of any public facilities plan, master plan, capital improvements plan
or similar plan that contains the information required by this Section. (Ord.
691, 7-20-1999)
11-6-10: COLLECTION OF CHARGE:
   A.   The system development charge is payable upon issuance of:
      1.   A building permit;
      2.   A development permit;
      3.   A development permit for development not requiring the issuance of a
building permit;
      4.   A permit or approval to connect to the water system;
      5.   A permit or approval to connect to the sewer system; or
      6.   A right-of-way access permit.
   B.   If no building, development or connection permit is required, the
system development charge is payable at the time the usage of the capital
improvement is increased.
   C.   If development is commenced or connection is made to the water or sewer
systems without an appropriate permit, the system development charge is
immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required.
   D.   The City Treasurer shall collect the applicable system development
charge from the permittee when a permit that allows building or development of
a parcel is issued or when a connection to the water or sewer system of the
City is made.
   E.   The City Treasurer shall not issue such permit or allow such connection
until the charge has been paid in full, or until provision for installment
payments has been made pursuant to Section
11-6-11 of this Chapter, or unless an exemption is granted pursuant to section
11-6-11 of this Chapter. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1999)
11-6-11: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Structures and uses established and existing on or before the effective
date hereof are exempt from a system development charge, except water and sewer
charges, to the extent of the structure or use then existing and to the extent
of the parcel of land as it is constituted on that date. Structures and uses
affected by this subsection shall pay the water or sewer charges pursuant to
the terms of this Chapter upon the receipt of a permit to connect to the water
or sewer system.
   B.   Additions to single-family dwellings that do not constitute the
addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the State Uniform Building Code, are
exempt from all portions of the system development charge.
   C.   An alteration, addition, replacement or change in use that does not
increase the parcel or structure's use of the public improvement facility are
exempt from all portions of the system development charge. (Ord. 691, 7-20-
1999)
11-6-12: CREDITS:
   A.   When development occurs that is subject to a system development charge,
the system development charge for existing use, if applicable, shall be
calculated and if it is less than the system development charge for the use
that will result from the development, the difference between the system
development charge for the existing use and the system development charge for
the proposed use shall be the system development charge. If the change in the
use results in the system development charge for the proposed use being less
than the system development charge for the existing use, no system development
charge shall be required. No refund or credit shall be given unless provided
for by another subsection of this Section.
   B.   A credit shall be given to the permittee for the cost of a qualified
public improvement upon acceptance by the City of the public improvement. The
credit shall not exceed the improvement fee even if the cost of the capital
improvement exceeds the applicable improvement fee and shall only be for the
improvement fee charged for the type of improvement being constructed.
   C.   If a qualified public improvement is located in whole or in part or
contiguous to the property that is the subject of development approval and is
required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the
particular development project a credit shall be given for the cost of the
portion of the improvement that exceeds the City's minimum standard facility
size or capacity needed to serve the particular development project or
property. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that a
particular improvement qualifies for credit under this subsection. The request
for credit shall be filed in writing no later than sixty (60) days after
acceptance of the improvement by the City.
   D.   When the construction of a qualified public improvement located in
whole or in part or contiguous to the property that is the subject of
development approval gives rise to a credit amount greater than the improvement
fee that would otherwise be levied against the project, the credit in excess of
the improvement fee for the original development project may be applied against
improvement fees that accrue in subsequent phases of the original development
project.
   E.   Notwithstanding Sections
11-6-5 and
11-6-6 of this Chapter, when establishing a methodology for a system
development charge, the City may provide for a credit against the improvement
fee, the reimbursement fee, or both, for capital improvements constructed as
part of the development which reduce the development charge, the City may
provide for a credit against the improvement fee, the reimbursement fee, or
both, for capital improvements constructed as part of the development which
reduce the development's demand upon existing capital improvements and/or the
need for future capital improvements, or a credit based upon any other
rationale the Council finds reasonable.
   F.   Credits shall not be transferable from one development to another.
   G.   Credits shall not be transferable from type of system development
charge to another.
   H.   Credits shall be used within ten (10) years from the date the credit is
given. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1999)
11-6-13: NOTICE:
   A.   The City shall maintain a list of persons who have made a written
request for notification prior to adoption or amendment of a methodology for
any system development charge. Written notice shall be mailed to persons on the
list at least forty five (45) days prior to the first hearing to adopt or amend
a system development charge. The methodology supporting the adoption or
amendment shall be available at least thirty (30) days prior to the first
hearing to adopt or amend a system development charge. The failure of a person
on the list to receive a notice that was mailed shall not invalidate the action
of the City.
   B.   The City may periodically delete names from the list, but at least
thirty (30) days prior to removing a name from the list, the City must notify
the person whose name is to be deleted that a new written request for
notification is required if the person wishes to remain on the notification
list. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1999)
11-6-14: SEGREGATION AND USE OF REVENUE:
   A.   All funds derived from a particular type of system development charge
are to be segregated by accounting practices from all other funds of the City.
That portion of the system development charge calculated and collected on
account of a specific facility system shall be used for no purpose other than
those set forth in Section 11-6-7 of this Chapter.
   B.   The City Treasurer shall provide the City Council with an annual
accounting, based on the City's fiscal year, for system development charges
showing the total amount of system development charge revenues collected for
each type of facility and the projects funded from each account. (Ord. 691, 7-
20-1999)
11-6-15: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   A person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of system
development charge revenues may appeal the decision or the expenditure to the
City Council by filing a written request with the City describing with
particularity the decision of the City Treasurer and the expenditure from which
the person appeals. An appeal of an expenditure must be filed within two (2)
years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure.
   B.   Appeals of any other decision required or permitted to be made by the
City Treasurer under this Chapter must be filed within fourteen (14) days of
the date of the decision.
   C.   After providing notice to the appellant, the Council shall determine
whether the City Treasurer's decision or the expenditure is in accordance with
this Chapter and the provisions of Oregon Revised Statutes 223.297 to 223.314
and may affirm, modify or overrule the decisions. If the Council determines
that there has been an improper expenditure of system development charge
revenues, the Council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount be
deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it
was spent. The decision of the Council shall be reviewed only as provided in
Oregon Revised Statutes 34.010 to 34.100, and not otherwise.
   D.   A legal action challenging the methodology adopted by the Council
pursuant to Section 11-6-6 of this Chapter shall not be filed later than sixty
(60) days after the adoption. A person shall contest the methodology used for
calculating a system development charge only as provided in Oregon Revised
Statutes 34.010 to 34.100, and not otherwise. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1999)
11-6-16: PROHIBITED CONNECTION:
No person may connect to the water or sewer systems of the City unless the
appropriate system development charge has been paid or the lien or installment
payment method has been applied for and approved. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1999)
11-6-17: PENALTY:
Violation of this Chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00). A violation of this Chapter shall be considered a
separate offense for each day the violation continues. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1999)
11-6-18: CLASSIFICATION:
The City Council determines that any fee, rates or charges imposed by this
Chapter are not a tax subject to the property tax limitations of article XI,
section 11(b) of the Oregon constitution. (Ord. 691, 7-20-1999)
TITLE 12
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD CONTROL
SECTION:
12-1-1: Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact, Purpose, And Objectives
12-1-2: Definitions
12-1-3: General Provisions
12-1-4: Administration
12-1-5: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
12-1-6: Variance And Appeal Procedures
12-1-7: Penalties For Violation
12-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, AND OBJECTIVES:
   A.   Statutory Authority: The state of Oregon has delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.
Therefore, the city of Umatilla does ordain as follows.
   B.   Findings Of Fact:
      1.   The flood hazard areas of the city of Umatilla are subject to
periodic inundation that results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
      2.   These flood losses are caused by structures in flood hazard areas,
which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from
flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains
causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
      3.   The city of Umatilla has the primary responsibility for planning,
adoption and enforcement of land use regulations to accomplish proper
floodplain management.
   C.   Statement Of Purpose: The objectives of this chapter are to:
      1.   Protect human life, health and property;
      2.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
      3.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas;
      4.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      5.   Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      6.   Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public
service during times of flood;
      7.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard;
      8.   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions; and
      9.   Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, stream channels and
shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial
functions of the floodplain.
   D.   Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses:
      1.   In order to accomplish its purpose, this chapter includes methods
and provisions to:
         a.   Require that development that is vulnerable to floods, including
structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety and welfare
of citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
         b.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights,
velocities, or erosion;
         c.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase flood damage or erosion;
         d.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or that may increase flood hazards to other
lands;
         e.   Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which carry and store floodwaters; and
         f.   Coordinate with and supplement provisions of Oregon building
codes. (Ord. 760, 8-17-2010)
12-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted according to the meaning they have in common
usage.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure on the same or adjacent parcel as a
principal structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate to the
principal structure. A separate insurable building should not be classified as
an accessory or appurtenant structure.
   ALTERATION OF A WATERCOURSE: Includes, but is not limited to, any dam,
culvert, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment,
channelization, or change in cross sectional area or capacity, which may alter,
impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of
water during conditions of the base flood.
   APPEAL: A request for review of the floodplain administrator's
interpretation of provisions of this chapter or request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet (3'),
and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be
evident.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Zone designations on FIRMs include the letters A or V. Also known as the
special flood hazard area (SFHA).
   BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The water surface elevation during the base
flood in relation to a specified datum. The base flood elevation (BFE) is
depicted on the FIRM to the nearest foot and in the FIS to the nearest 0.1
foot.
   BASEMENT: The portion of a structure with its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BELOW GRADE CRAWL SPACE: An enclosed area below the base flood elevation in
which the interior grade is not more than two feet (2') below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade and the height, measured from the interior grade of the
crawl space to the top of the crawl space foundation, does not exceed four feet
(4') at any point.
   BUILDING: A building or structure subject to building codes.
   BUILDING CODES: The combined specialty codes adopted under Oregon Revised
Statutes 446.062, 446.185, 447.020(2), 455.020(2), 455.496, 455.610, 455.680,
460.085, 460.360, 479.730(1) or 480.545, but does not include regulations
adopted by the state fire marshal pursuant to Oregon Revised Statutes chapter
476 or 479.015 to 479.200 and 479.210 to 479.220.
   COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA: An area of special flood hazard extending from
offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and
any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic
sources. The area designated on the FIRM always includes the letter "V".
   CRITICAL FACILITY: A facility that is critical for the health and welfare of
the population and is especially important following hazard events. Critical
facilities include essential and occupancy structures, special occupancy
structures, essential facilities, transportation systems, lifeline utility
systems, high potential loss facilities and hazardous material storage
facilities.
   DATUM: The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points)
from which all elevations are determined. Historically, that common set of
points has been the national geodetic vertical datum of 1929 (NGVD29). The
vertical datum currently adopted by the federal government as a basis for
measuring heights is the North American vertical datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
   DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.
Development does not include:
   A.   Signs, markers, aids, etc., placed by a public agency to serve the
public;
   B.   Driveways, parking lots, or other open space use areas where no
alteration of topography occurs;
   C.   Minor repairs or improvements to existing structures provided that the
alterations do not increase the size or intensity of use, and do not constitute
repair of "substantial damage", or "substantial improvement" as defined in this
section;
   D.   Customary dredging associated with routine channel maintenance
consistent with state or federal laws and permits;
   E.   Replacement of utility facilities necessary to serve established and
permitted uses;
   F.   Accessory residential or noncommercial structures less than two hundred
(200) square feet in area;
   G.   Storage of equipment and material associated with residential uses.
   DIGITAL FIRM (DFIRM): Digital flood insurance rate map. It depicts flood
risk and zones and flood risk information. The DFIRM presents the flood risk
information in a format suitable for electronic mapping applications.
   ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated
floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, post, piers,
pilings, or columns.
   ENCROACHMENT: The advancement or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, permanent structures or other development into a floodway which may
impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   ESSENTIAL FACILITY: A. Hospitals and other medical facilities having surgery
and emergency treatment areas;
   B.   Fire and police stations;
   C.   Tanks or other structures containing, housing or supporting water or
fire suppression materials or equipment required for the protection of
essential or hazardous facilities or special occupancy structures;
   D.   Emergency vehicle shelters and garages;
   E.   Structures and equipment in emergency preparedness centers;
   F.   Standby power generating equipment for essential facilities; and
   G.   Structures and equipment in government communication centers and other
facilities required for emergency response.
   EXISTING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A structure for which the "start of
construction" commenced before September 24, 1984.
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA): The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the national flood insurance program.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, issued by
the federal insurance administration, delineating the areas of special flood
hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): The official report by the federal insurance
administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles, floodway
boundaries and water surface elevations of the base flood.
   FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
   FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse
and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to
discharge and store the floodwater or flood flows associated with the
regulatory flood.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG): The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure.
Refer to the elevation certificate, FEMA form 81-31, for HAG for more
information.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE: A structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. department of the interior) or preliminarily
determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or to a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the secretary of the interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either:
  1. By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior, or
  2. Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
   LATERAL ADDITION: An addition that requires a foundation to be built outside
of the foundation footprint of the existing building.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC): An official FEMA determination, by letter, to
amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps and flood insurance
studies. LOMCs are issued in the following categories:
  Conditional Letter Of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment by
FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum national flood
insurance program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does not amend or
revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps,
or flood insurance studies.
  Letter Of Map Amendment (LOMA): A revision based on technical data showing
that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard
area. An LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and
establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard
area.
  Letter Of Map Revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data showing
that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood
elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One
common type of LOMR, an LOMR-F, is a determination that a structure or parcel
has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is excluded from
the special flood hazard area.
   LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is
not considered a structure's lowest floor provided that the enclosed area is
built and maintained in accordance with the applicable design requirements of
the state building code.
   MANUFACTURED DWELLING: A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured dwelling" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
   MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
North American vertical datum of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a community's FIRM are referenced.
   NATURAL ELEVATION: The elevation of natural grade, or the grade in existence
before September 3, 2010.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION: A structure for which the "start of construction"
commenced after September 3, 2010, and includes subsequent substantial
improvements to the structure.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   SPECIAL OCCUPANCY STRUCTURE: A. Covered structures whose primary occupancy
is public assembly with a capacity greater than three hundred (300) persons;
   B.   Buildings with a capacity greater than two hundred fifty (250)
individuals for every public, private or parochial school through secondary
level or childcare centers;
   C.   Buildings for colleges or adult education schools with a capacity
greater than five hundred (500) persons;
   D.   Medical facilities with fifty (50) or more resident, incapacitated
patients not included in subsections A to C of this definition;
   E.   Jails and detention facilities; and
   F.   All structures and occupancies with a capacity greater than five
thousand (5,000) persons.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days
of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
   STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, a manufactured dwelling, a modular
or temporary building, or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally
aboveground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed fifty percent (50%) of its market value before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction"
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
market value of the structure should be:
   A.   The appraised real market value of the structure prior to the start of
the initial repair or improvement, or
   B.   In the case of damage, the appraised real market value of the structure
prior to the damage occurring. The term does not include either:
        1.   A project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications,
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
        2.   Alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
   VARIANCE: A grant of relief by the governing body from a requirement of this
chapter.
   VERTICAL ADDITION: The addition of a room or rooms on top of an existing
building.
   WATER DEPENDENT USE: A facility that cannot be used for its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The term does not include
long term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to a specific datum, of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
   WATERCOURSE: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other
topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least
periodically. (Ord. 760, 8-17-2010)
12-1-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lands To Which This Chapter Applies:
      1.   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within
the jurisdiction of the city of Umatilla. Nothing in this chapter is intended
to allow uses or structures that are otherwise prohibited by the zoning
ordinance or building codes.
   B.   Basis For Area Of Special Flood Hazard:
      1.   The area of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency
management agency in its flood insurance study (FIS) for Umatilla County,
Oregon, and incorporated areas, dated September 3, 2010, with accompanying
flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) or digital flood insurance rate maps (DFIRM),
and other supporting data, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this
chapter. The FIS and the FIRM are on file at the office of the city of
Umatilla, 700 6th Street, PO Box 130, Umatilla, OR 97882.
   C.   Coordination With Building Codes:
      1.   Pursuant to the requirement established in state statute that the
city of Umatilla administers and enforces the state building codes, the council
of the city of Umatilla does hereby acknowledge that the state building codes
contain certain provisions that apply to the design and construction of
buildings and structures located in areas of special flood hazard. Therefore,
this chapter is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with
the state building codes.
   D.   Establishment Of Floodplain Development Permit:
      1.   A floodplain development permit shall be required prior to
initiating development activities in any areas of special flood hazard
established in subsection B of this section.
      2.   Any floodplain development permit that requires an engineering
certification or engineering analysis, calculations or modeling to process
shall be considered a land use action requiring a quasi-judicial land use
hearing.
   E.   Interpretation:
      1.   In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions
shall be:
         a.   Considered as minimum requirements;
         b.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
         c.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes, including state building codes.
   F.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability:
      1.   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may
be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that
land outside areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the city of Umatilla or by any officer or employee
thereof for flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or an
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 760, 8-17-2010)
12-1-4: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Designation Of Floodplain Ordinance Administrator:
      1.   The city manager is hereby appointed as the floodplain administrator
who is responsible for administering and implementing the provisions of this
chapter.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities Of The Administrator:
      1.   Duties of the floodplain administrator shall include, but shall not
be limited to:
         a.   Review all development permit applications to determine whether
proposed new development will be located in areas of special flood hazard;
         b.   Review applications for modifications of any existing development
in areas of special flood hazard for compliance with the requirements of this
chapter;
         c.   Interpret flood hazard area boundaries, provide available flood
hazard information, and provide base flood elevations, where they exist;
         d.   Review proposed development to assure that necessary permits have
been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by
federal or state law, including, but not limited to, section 404 of the federal
water pollution control act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334; the endangered
species act of 1973, 16 USC 1531-1544; and state of Oregon removal-fill
permits. Copies of such permits shall be maintained on file;
         e.   Review all development permit applications to determine if the
proposed development is located in the floodway, and if so, ensure that the
encroachment standards of subsection 12-1-5B of this chapter are met;
         f.   When base flood elevation data or floodway data are not
available, then the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other authoritative source in order to administer the
provisions of this chapter;
         g.   When base flood elevations or other engineering data are not
available from an authoritative source, the floodplain administrator shall take
into account the flood hazards, to the extent they are known, to determine
whether a proposed building site or subdivision will be reasonably safe from
flooding;
         h.   Where interpretation is needed of the exact location of
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard including regulatory floodway
(for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the
interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
subsection 12-1-6D of this chapter;
         i.   Issue floodplain development permits when the provisions of this
chapter have been met, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance;
         j.   Coordinate with the building official to assure that applications
for building permits comply with the requirements of this chapter;
         k.   Obtain, verify and record the actual elevation in relation to the
vertical datum used on the effective FIRM, or highest adjacent grade where no
BFE is available, of the lowest floor level, including basement, of all new
construction or substantially improved buildings and structures;
         l.   Obtain, verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to
the vertical datum used on the effective FIRM, or highest adjacent grade where
no BFE is available, to which any new or substantially improved buildings or
structures have been floodproofed. When floodproofing is utilized for a
structure, the floodplain administrator shall obtain certification of design
criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect;
         m.   Ensure that all records pertaining to the provisions of this
chapter are permanently maintained in the office of the city/county clerk or
his/her designee and shall be open for public inspection;
         n.   Make inspections in areas of special flood hazard to determine
whether development has been undertaken without issuance of a floodplain
development permit, ensure that development is undertaken in accordance with
the floodplain development permit and this chapter, and verify that existing
buildings and structures maintain compliance with this chapter;
         o.   Coordinate with the building official to inspect areas where
buildings and structures in flood hazard areas have been damaged, regardless of
the cause of damage, and notify owners that permits may be required prior to
repair, rehabilitation, demolition, relocation, or reconstruction of the
building or structure;
         p.   Make substantial improvement or substantial damage determinations
based on criteria set forth in subsection D of this section.
   C.   Permit Procedures:
      1.   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the
floodplain administrator on forms furnished by the administrator or the
administrator's designee prior to starting development activities.
Specifically, the following information is required:
         a.   Application Stage:
            (1)   Plans in duplicate drawn to scale with elevations of the
project area and the nature, location, dimensions of existing and proposed
structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment and
drainage facilities;
            (2)   Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries
including base flood elevations, or flood depth in AO zones, where available;
            (3)   For all proposed structures, elevation in relation to the
highest adjacent grade and the base flood elevation, or flood depth in AO
zones, of the:
               (A) Lowest enclosed area, including crawl space or basement
floor;
               (B) Bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member in coastal
high hazard areas (V zones);
               (C) Top of the proposed garage slab, if any; and
               (D) Next highest floor.
            (4)   Locations and sizes of all flood openings in any proposed
building;
            (5)   Elevation to which any nonresidential structure will be
floodproofed;
            (6)   Certification from a registered professional engineer or
architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria of the NFIP and building codes;
            (7)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development.
         b.   Construction Stage:
            (1)   For all new construction and substantial improvements, the
permit holder shall provide to the floodplain administrator an as built
certification of the floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after
the lowest floor or floodproofing is placed and prior to further vertical
construction;
            (2)   Any deficiencies identified by the floodplain administrator
shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to work
proceeding. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections
shall be cause for the floodplain administrator to issue a stop work order for
the project.
         c.   Certificate Of Occupancy:
            (1)   In addition to the requirements of the building codes
pertaining to certificate of occupancy, prior to the final inspection the owner
or authorized agent shall submit the following documentation that has been
prepared and sealed by a registered surveyor or engineer:
               (A) For elevated buildings and structures in noncoastal areas of
special flood hazard (A zones), the as built elevation of the lowest floor,
including basement or where no base flood elevation is available the height
above highest adjacent grade of the lowest floor;
               (B) For buildings and structures in coastal areas of special
flood hazard (V zones), the elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structural member supporting the lowest floor; and
               (C) For buildings and structures that have been floodproofed,
the elevation to which the building or structure was floodproofed.
            (2)   Failure to submit certification or failure to correct
violations shall be cause for the floodplain administrator to withhold a
certificate of occupancy until such deficiencies are corrected.
         d.   Expiration Of Floodplain Development Permit:
            (1)   A floodplain development permit shall expire one hundred
eighty (180) days after issuance unless the permitted activity has been
substantially begun and thereafter is pursued to completion.
            (2)   Commencement of work includes start of construction, when the
permitted work requires a building permit.
   D.   Substantial Damage And Substantial Improvement Determination:
      1.   For applications for permits to improve buildings and structures,
including additions, repairs, renovations, and alterations, the floodplain
administrator, shall:
         a.   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain a
professional appraisal of the market value, of the building or structure before
the proposed work is performed; when repair of damage is proposed, the market
value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage
occurred;
         b.   Compare the cost of improvement, the cost to repair the damaged
building to its predamaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and
repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure;
            (1)   Except as indicated in subsections D1b(2) through D1b(4) of
this section, all costs to repair substantial damage, including emergency
repairs, including the costs of complying with any county, state, federal or
other regulation must be included;
            (2)   The costs associated with the correction of preexisting
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
that were identified by the building official, the director of environmental
health, or any other local code enforcement official prior to the improvement
or repair and that are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions
shall not be included;
            (3)   Costs associated with the following items are not included:
               (A) The preparation and approval of all required plans,
calculations, certifications, and specifications;
               (B) The performance of surveys or other geotechnical or
engineering studies and resulting reports;
               (C) Permit and review fees; and
               (D) The construction, demolition, repair, or modification of
outdoor improvements, including landscaping, fences, swimming pools, detached
garages and sheds, etc.;
            (4)   Proposed alterations of a designated historic building or
structure is not to be considered substantial improvement unless the alteration
causes a loss of said designation.
      2.   The city manager shall make the final determination of whether the
proposed improvement and/or repair constitutes a substantial improvement or
substantial damage.
      3.   The city manager shall notify the applicant of the results of the
determination by letter.
      4.   Applicant has the right to appeal the determination pursuant to
subsection
12-1-6D of this chapter. (Ord. 760, 8-17-2010)
12-1-5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   Site Improvements And Subdivisions:
      1.   All proposed new development and subdivisions shall be consistent
with the need to minimize flood damage and ensure that building sites will be
reasonably safe from flooding.
      2.   Building lots shall have adequate buildable area outside of
floodways.
      3.   New development proposals and subdivision development plans shall
include the mapped flood hazard zones from the effective FIRM, if available.
      4.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated and/or provided for
subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five
(5) acres, whichever is less.
      5.   New development and subdivisions shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electric and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
      6.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid functional impairment, or contamination from them, during flooding.
      7.   Subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards. In AO and AH zones, drainage paths shall be provided
to guide floodwater around and away from all proposed and existing structures.
   B.   Development In Floodways:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection B4 of this section, encroachments,
including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other
development are prohibited unless certification by a registered professional
civil engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that such
encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      2.   Any fill allowed to be placed in the floodway shall be designed to
be stable under conditions of flooding, including rapid rise and rapid drawdown
of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and flood related erosion and scour.
      3.   Applicants shall obtain a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR)
from FEMA before an encroachment, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvement, and other development, into the floodway is permitted that will
cause any increase in the base flood elevation.
      4.   Projects for stream habitat restoration may be permitted in the
floodway provided:
         a.   The project qualifies for a department of the army, Portland
district regional general permit for stream habitat restoration (NWP-2007-
1023); and
         b.   A qualified professional (a registered professional engineer; or
staff of NRCS; the county; or fisheries, natural resources, or water resources
agencies) has provided a feasibility analysis and certification that the
project was designed to keep any rise in 100-year flood levels as close to zero
as practically possible given the goals of the project; and
         c.   No structures would be impacted by a potential rise in flood
elevation; and
         d.   An agreement to monitor the project, correct problems, and ensure
that flood carrying capacity remains unchanged is included as part of the local
approval.
      5.   Fences shall not cause any rise in base flood elevation and are
subject to the no rise and CLOMR provisions of subsections B1 and B3 of this
section.
   C.   Zones With Base Flood Elevations But No Floodway: In areas within zones
A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM with a base flood elevation, or where a
base flood elevation is developed according to subsection E of this section,
but where no regulatory floodway has been designated, new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be
prohibited, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
      1.   Applicants of proposed projects that increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot (1') should obtain from FEMA a conditional letter
of map revision (CLOMR) before the project may be permitted.
   D.   Zones Without Base Flood Elevations:
      1.   The following standards apply in riverine areas of special flood
hazard where no base flood elevation data have been provided (approximate A
zones):
         a.   When base flood elevation or floodway data have not been
identified by FEMA in a flood insurance study and/or flood insurance rate maps,
the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state, or other source, in order to administer this chapter. If base
flood elevations are not available, subsection D1b of this section shall apply.
         b.   Where the floodplain administrator has obtained base flood
elevation data, subsections C and E through M of this section shall apply.
         c.   In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data:
            (1)   No encroachments, including structures or fill, shall be
located in an area of special flood hazard within an area equal to the width of
the stream or fifty feet (50'), whichever is greater, measured from the
ordinary high water mark, unless a base flood elevation is developed by a
licensed professional engineer,
            (2)   The lowest floor of any insurable building or structure,
including manufactured dwellings, shall be elevated a minimum of three feet
(3') above highest adjacent grade. Below grade crawl spaces are not allowed.
   E.   Building Design And Construction:
      1.   Buildings and structures, including manufactured dwellings, within
the scope of the building codes, including repair of substantial damage and
substantial improvement of such existing buildings and structures, shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the flood resistant construction
provisions of these codes, including, but not limited to, section R324 of the
residential specialty code and section 1612 of the structural specialty code.
   F.   Manufactured Dwellings:
      1.   New and replacement manufactured dwellings are within the scope of
the building codes; and
      2.   All new manufactured dwellings and replacement manufactured
dwellings shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood
damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring
include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
   G.   Below Grade Crawl Spaces:
      1.   Below grade crawl space foundations are allowed, unless no base
flood elevations are available, provided that they conform to guidelines in
FEMA TB 11-01, crawl space construction for structures located in special flood
hazard areas and building codes.
   H.   Accessory Structures: Relief from the elevation or dry floodproofing
standards may be granted for an accessory structure containing no more than two
hundred (200) square feet. Such a structure must meet the following standards:
      1.   It shall not be subject to building codes;
      2.   The accessory structure shall be located on a property, or an
adjacent property with same owner, as a dwelling;
      3.   It shall not be used for human habitation and may be used solely for
parking of vehicles or storage of items having low damage potential when
submerged;
      4.   Toxic material, oil or gasoline, or any priority persistent
pollutant identified by the Oregon department of environmental quality shall
not be stored below BFE, or where no BFE is available lower than three feet
(3') above grade, unless confined in a tank installed in compliance with this
chapter;
      5.   It shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
      6.   It shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      7.   It shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
      8.   Services such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated
or floodproofed to or above the base flood elevation; and
      9.   It shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
Designs for complying with this requirement must be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or architect or:
         a.   Provide a minimum of two (2) openings with a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above the higher of the exterior or interior grade or floor immediately below
the opening;
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in
both directions without manual intervention.
   I.   Recreational Vehicles:
      1.   In all areas of special flood hazard, recreational vehicles that are
an allowed use or structure under the zoning ordinance must either:
         a.   Be placed on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days;
         b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or
jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and have no permanently attached structures or addition;
or
         c.   Meet all the requirements of subsection F, "Manufactured
Dwellings", of this section including the anchoring and elevation requirements.
   J.   Critical Facilities:
      1.   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent
possible, located outside the limits of the area of special flood hazard.
Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the area of
special flood hazard if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical
facilities constructed within the areas of special flood hazard shall have the
lowest floor elevated three feet (3') above BFE (or depth number in AO zones)
or to the height of the 0.2 percent (500-year) flood, whichever is higher.
Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height
utilized above. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that
toxic substances or priority organic pollutants as defined by the Oregon
department of environmental quality will not be displaced by or released into
floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood
elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
   K.   Tanks:
      1.   Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty, during conditions
of the design flood.
      2.   Aboveground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be:
         a.   Attached to and elevated to or above the base flood elevation (or
depth number in AO zones) on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood;
or
         b.   Anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is
empty, during conditions of the design flood.
      3.   Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:
         a.   A minimum of two feet (2') above BFE or fitted with covers
designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the
tank during conditions of the design flood; and
         b.   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of
the design flood.
   L.   On Site Sewage Systems:
      1.   Soil absorption systems shall be located outside of flood hazard
areas. Where suitable soil absorption sites outside of the flood hazard area
are not available, the soil absorption site is permitted to be located within
the flood hazard area provided it is located to minimize the effects of
inundation under conditions of the base flood.
      2.   Mound systems in flood hazard areas shall be prohibited.
   M.   Fences And Walls:
      1.   New fencing shall be designed to collapse under conditions of the
base flood or to allow the passage of water by having flaps or openings in the
areas at or below the base flood elevation sufficient to allow floodwater and
associated debris to pass freely.
   N.   Other Development In Noncoastal High Hazard Areas:
      1.   All development in noncoastal high hazard areas (A zones) for which
specific provisions are not specified in this chapter or building codes, shall:
         a.   Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
         b.   Be designed so as not to impede flow of floodwaters under base
flood conditions;
         c.   If located in a floodway, meet the limitations of subsection C of
this section;
         d.   Be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral movement resulting
from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of
the design flood;
         e.   Be constructed of flood damage resistant materials; and
         f.   Have electric service and/or mechanical equipment elevated above
the base flood elevation (or depth number in AO zones), except for minimum
electric service required to address life safety and electric code
requirements.
   O.   Temporary Structures, Storage, And Bridges:
      1.   A floodplain development permit is required for construction or
placement of temporary structures, temporary storage associated with
nonresidential uses, and temporary bridges located in areas of special flood
hazard.
      2.   Temporary structures, not including bridges, shall be limited as to
time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than ninety (90) days. The
floodplain administrator is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated
cause; such cause shall reaffirm the temporary nature of the structure.
Temporary structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
      3.   Temporary storage of five (5) cubic yards or more shall be limited
as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than ninety (90)
days. The floodplain administrator is authorized to grant extensions for
demonstrated cause; such cause shall reaffirm the temporary nature of the
storage. Stored material shall be anchored or contained to prevent flotation or
release outside the assigned storage area. Hazardous materials priority
persistent pollutants identified by the Oregon department of environmental
quality shall not be stored in the floodway.
      4.   Temporary encroachments in the floodway for the purposes of capital
improvement projects (including bridges) require a floodplain development
permit. No CLOMR/LOMR is required.
   P.   Requirement To Submit New Technical Data:
      1.   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data
prepared in a format required for a conditional letter of map revision or
letter of map revision and to submit such data to FEMA on the appropriate
application forms. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall
be the responsibility of the applicant.
      2.   Applicants shall be responsible for all costs associated with
obtaining a conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMR) or letter of map
revision from FEMA.
      3.   The city of Umatilla shall be under no obligation to sign the
community acknowledgement form, which is part of the CLOMR/LOMR application.
      4.   Within six (6) months of project completion, an applicant who
obtains an approved CLOMR from FEMA, or whose development modifies floodplain
boundaries or base flood elevations shall obtain from FEMA a letter of map
revision (LOMR) reflecting the as built changes to the FIRM.
   Q.   Watercourse Alterations:
      1.   A watercourse is considered altered when any change occurs within
its banks, including installation of new culverts and bridges, or size
modifications to existing culverts and bridges (as shown on effective FIRM).
      2.   The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development and submit certification by a registered professional
engineer that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not
be diminished.
      3.   Adjacent communities, the U.S. army corps of engineers, Oregon
department of state lands, and Oregon department of land conservation and
development must be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse. Evidence of notification must be submitted to the floodplain
administrator and to the federal emergency management agency.
      4.   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the
flood carrying capacity will not be diminished.
      5.   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data
in subsection P of this section when an alteration of a watercourse, including
the placement of culverts, results in the relocation or elimination of the
special flood hazard area.
   R.   Nonconversion Of Enclosed Areas Below The Lowest Floor:
      1.   To ensure that the areas below the BFE continue to be used solely
for parking vehicles, limited storage, or access to the building and not be
finished for use as human habitation without first becoming fully compliant
with the floodplain management ordinance in effect at the time of conversion,
the floodplain administrator shall:
         a.   Determine which applicants for new construction and/or
substantial improvements have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are five feet (5') or higher;
         b.   Enter into a "nonconversion agreement for construction within
flood hazard areas" or equivalent with the city of Umatilla. The agreement
shall be recorded with the Umatilla County as a deed restriction. The
nonconversion agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the floodplain
administrator and county counsel; and
         c.   Have the authority to inspect any area of a structure below the
base flood elevation to ensure compliance upon prior notice of at least seventy
two (72) hours.
   S.   Periodic Floodplain Inspections And Enforcement Actions:
      1.   The floodplain administrator or designee shall make periodic
inspections of floodplain areas to establish that development activities within
the floodplain are being performed in compliance with an approved floodplain
development permit. The floodplain administrator or designee shall prepare a
field report listing noncomplying conditions to be delivered to the Umatilla
code enforcement officer. Upon receipt of the report, the Umatilla code
enforcement officer or designee shall proceed with enforcement actions
including, but not limited to: the issuance of a stop work order; the issuance
of a citation; and the commencement of civil legal proceedings.
      2.   Within thirty (30) days of discovery of a violation of this chapter,
the floodplain administrator shall submit a report to the city council which
shall include all information available to the floodplain administrator which
is pertinent to said violation. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of this
report, the city council shall:
         a.   Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of such
violation; or
         b.   Issue a variance to this chapter in accordance with the
provisions of section
12-1-6, "Variance And Appeal Procedures", of this chapter; or
         c.   Order the owner of the property upon which the violation exists
to provide whatever additional information may be required for their
determination. Such information must be provided to the city manager within
thirty (30) days of such order, and he shall submit an amended report to the
floodplain board within twenty (20) days. At their next regularly scheduled
public meeting, the governing body shall either order the abatement of said
violation or they shall grant a variance in accordance with the provisions of
section
12-1-6, "Variance And Appeal Procedures", of this chapter.
If a variance cannot be granted according to section
12-1-6 of this chapter, submit to the administrator of federal insurance
administration a declaration for denial of insurance, stating that the property
is in violation of a cited statute or local law, regulation or ordinance,
pursuant to section 1316 of the national flood insurance act of 1968 as
amended. (Ord. 760, 8-17-2010)
12-1-6: VARIANCE AND APPEAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Variance:
      1.   An application for a variance must be submitted to the city recorder
on the form provided by the city of Umatilla and include, at a minimum, the
same information required for a development permit and an explanation for the
basis for the variance request.
      2.   Upon receipt of a completed application for a variance, the variance
request will be set for public hearing at the next planning commission meeting
in which time is available for the matter to be heard.
      3.   Prior to the public hearing, notice of the hearing will be published
in the official newspaper of the city of Umatilla at least fifteen (15) days
prior to the hearing. In addition to the newspaper publication, written notice
shall be provided to all adjoining property owners.
      4.   The burden to show that the variance is warranted and meets the
criteria set out herein is on the applicant.
      5.   In passing upon such applications, the planning commission shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other sections of this chapter, and the:
         a.   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
         b.   Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
         c.   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         d.   Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
         e.   Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         f.   Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         g.   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
         h.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         i.   Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
         j.   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
         k.   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
      6.   Upon consideration of the factors of subsection A5 of this section
and the purposes of this chapter, the planning commission may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
      7.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a permanent record of
all variances and report any variances to the federal emergency management
agency upon request.
   B.   Criteria For Variances:
      1.   Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      2.   Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the
elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing subsections A5a through A5k of this section
have been fully considered. As the lot size increases the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      3.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      4.   Variances shall only be issued upon a:
         a.   Showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         c.   Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
as identified in subsection A5 of this section, or conflict with existing local
laws or ordinances.
      5.   Variances may be issued for a water dependent use provided that the:
         a.   Criteria of subsections A1 through A4 of this section are met;
and
         b.   Structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety.
      6.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or
restoration of structures listed on the national register of historic places or
the statewide inventory of historic properties, without regard to the
procedures set forth in this section.
      7.   Variances as interpreted in the national flood insurance program are
based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece
of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the
structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily
address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such,
variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.
      8.   Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited
circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry
floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage
potential, complies with all other variance criteria and otherwise complies
with building codes.
   C.   Variance Decision: The decision to either grant or deny a variance
shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for such approval and
denial. If the variance is granted, the property owner shall be put on notice
along with the written decision that the permitted building will have its
lowest floor below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance likely will be commensurate with the increased flood damage risk.
   D.   Appeals: The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals from the
interpretations of the administrator.
      1.   An appeal must be filed with the planning commission clerk within
ten (10) days of the date of any permit denial or interpretation of the
administrator. Failure to timely file an appeal shall be considered a failure
to exhaust the administrative remedies. The appeal must set out the
interpretation of the administrator and a narrative setting forth the facts
relied upon by the appellant and the appellant's claim regarding the error in
the interpretation.
      2.   Upon receipt of a completed appeal, the appeal will be scheduled for
the next available planning commission meeting to be heard. The planning
commission shall consider criteria set forth in subsection B of this section in
evaluating the appeal.
   E.   Decision: The planning commission decision on appeal shall be in
writing and set out the facts, technical information and the legal basis for
the decision. (Ord. 760, 8-17-2010)
12-1-7: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
   A.   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or
altered unless in full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
      1.   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply
with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this code
shall be punished by a fine or sentence pursuant to the following schedule
established in Oregon Revised Statutes 161.635.
         a.   Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and/or one year in
prison for a class A misdemeanor.
         b.   One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or six (6) months in prison
for a class B misdemeanor.
         c.   Five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or thirty (30) days in prison
for a class C misdemeanor.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city of Umatilla from taking such
other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord.
760, 8-17-2010)
 
