


CHARTER

Chapters:

I    NAMES AND BOUNDARIES

II    POWERS

III    FORM OF GOVERNMENT

IV    COUNCIL

V    POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS

VI    ELECTIONS

VII    ORDINANCES

VIII    PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

IX    MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS


CHAPTER I       NAME AND BOUNDARIES


SECTION 1. NAME OF CHARTER

This charter may be referred to as the City of Veneta Charter of 1999.


SECTION 2. NAME OF CITY

The City of Veneta, Oregon, continues under this charter to be a municipal corporation with the name, City of "Veneta".


SECTION 3. BOUNDARIES

The city includes all territory within its boundaries as they now exist or hereafter are modified pursuant to state law. The custodian of the city's records shall keep an accurate, current description of the boundaries and make a copy of it available for public inspection in the city during regular city office hours.


CHAPTER II       POWERS


SECTION 4. POWERS OF THE CITY.

The city has all powers which the constitution, statutes, and common law of the United States and of this state now or hereafter expressly or impliedly grant or allow municipalities, as fully as though this charter specifically enumerated each of those powers.


SECTION 5. CONSTRUCTION OF POWERS

In this charter, no specification of a power is exclusive or restricts authority that the city would have if the power were not specified. This charter shall be liberally construed, so that the city may exercise fully all its powers possible under this charter and under United States and Oregon Law. All powers are continuing unless a specific grant of power clearly indicates the contrary.


SECTION 6. DISTRIBUTION OF POWERS

Except as this charter prescribes otherwise and as the Oregon Constitution reserves municipal legislative power to the voters of the city, all powers of the city are vested in the council.


CHAPTER III       FORM OF GOVERNMENT


SECTION 7. COUNCIL

The council consists of a mayor and four councilors nominated and elected from the city at large or, in the case of one or more vacancies in the council, the council members whose offices are not vacant.


SECTION 8. COUNCILORS

The term of office of a councilor in office when this charter is adopted is the term of office for which the councilor has been elected before adoption of the charter. At each biennial general election after the adoption, two council positions shall be voted upon, each for a four-year term.


SECTION 9. MAYOR

The term of office of the mayor in office when this charter is adopted continues until the elected successor to the office assumes the office. Beginning with the biennial general election in the year 2000, and every four years thereafter, a mayor shall be elected for a term of four years.


SECTION 10. TERMS OF OFFICE

The term of office of an elective officer who is elected at a general election begins at the first council meeting of the year immediately after the election and continues until the successor to the office assumes the office.


SECTION 11. QUALIFICATIONS OF ELECTED OFFICERS

(1) No person is eligible for an elective office of the city unless at the time of election the person is a qualified elector within the meaning of the state constitution and has resided in the city one year (365 days) immediately preceding the election. In this subsection "city" means area inside the city limits at the time of the election or appointment. The council is the final judge of the qualifications and election of its own members.

(2) No person shall be a candidate at a single election for more than one elective city office.

(3) An elective officer may be employed in a city position that is substantially volunteer in nature. Whether the position is substantially volunteer may be decided by the municipal court or in some other manner, whichever the council prescribes or authorizes. No paid employee nor person holding a paid appointive position of the city may hold office as mayor or city council member of the city.


SECTION 12. OTHER OFFICERS

Additional officers of the city shall be a municipal judge, city administrator and such other officers the council deems necessary. Each of these officers shall be appointed and may be removed by the mayor with the consent of the majority of the council. The council may combine any two or more appointive city offices. The council may designate any appointive officer to supervise any other appointive officer; except the municipal judge, who shall be supervised by the Mayor, except in the exercise of the judicial functions.


SECTION 13. COMPENSATION

The compensation for the services of city officers and employees shall be in such amounts as is fixed by the council.


SECTION 14. OATH

Before assuming city office, an officer shall take an oath or shall affirm that he or she will faithfully perform the duties of the office and support the constitution and laws of the United States and of the state of Oregon.


CHAPTER IV       COUNCIL


SECTION 15. RULES

The council shall, by ordinance, prescribe rules to govern its meetings and proceedings.


SECTION 16. MEETINGS

The council shall meet in the city regularly at least once a month at a time and place designated by council rules, and may meet at other times in accordance with the rules.


SECTION 17. QUORUM

A majority of the council constitutes a quorum for its business, but a smaller number of the council may meet and compel the attendance of absent councilors as prescribed by council rules.


SECTION 18. RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

A record of council proceedings shall be kept and authenticated in a manner prescribed by the council.


SECTION 19. MAYOR'S FUNCTIONS  AT COUNCIL MEETINGS

(1) When present at council meetings the mayor shall:

(a) Preside over deliberations of the council,

(b) Preserve order,

(c) Enforce council rules, and

(d) Determine the order of business under the rules.

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, the mayor may temporarily cease to chair a council meeting and delegate the functions described in subsection (1) to another council member.

(3) The mayor is a voting member of the council.

(4) For purposes of determining a quorum and other requirements, as they relate to a majority of votes, the mayor shall, in all respects, be considered a council member.


SECTION 20. VOTE REQUIRED

Except as this charter otherwise provides, the concurrence of a majority of the members of the council present at a council meeting shall be necessary to decide any question before the council.


SECTION 21. PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL

(1) At its first meeting after this charter takes effect and at its first meeting of each odd-numbered year, the council shall appoint a president from its councilors.

(2) Except when voting on questions before the council, the president shall function as mayor when the mayor is:

(a) Absent from a council meeting, or

(b) Unable to function as mayor.


SECTION 22. VACANCIES – OCCURRENCE

The office of a member of the council becomes vacant:

(1) Upon the incumbent's:

(a) Death,

(b) Adjudicated incompetence, or

(c) Recall from the office;

(2) Upon declaration by the council of the vacancy in case of the incumbent's:

(a) Failure, following election or appointment to the office, to qualify for the office within fifteen days after the time for his or her term of office to begin,

(b) Absence from the city for 30 days without the council's consent or from all meetings of the council within a 60-day period,

(c) Ceasing to reside in the city,

(d) Ceasing to be a qualified elector under state law,

(e) Conviction of a public offense punishable by loss of liberty, or

(f) Resignation from the office.


SECTION 23. VACANCIES – FILLING

A vacancy in the council shall be filled by appointment by a majority of the council. The appointee's term of office runs from the time of his or her qualifying for the office after the appointment and until expiration of the term of the predecessor who has left the office vacant. During a council member's inability to serve on the council or during a mayor's absence from the city, a majority of the other council members may by appointment fill the vacancy pro tem.


CHAPTER V       POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS


SECTION 24. MAYOR

The mayor shall appoint:

(1) Members of committees established by council rules,

(2) Other persons required by the council to be so appointed, and

(3) Shall have no veto power and shall sign all ordinances passed by the council within 3 days after their passing.


SECTION 25. MUNICIPAL COURT AND JUDGE

(1) If the council creates the office of municipal judge and fills it by appointment, the appointee shall hold, within the city at a place and times that the council specifies, a court known as the Municipal Court for the City of Veneta, Lane County, Oregon.

(2) Except as this charter or city ordinance prescribes to the contrary, proceedings of the court shall conform to general laws of this state governing justices of the peace and justice courts.

(3) All area within the city and, to the extent provided by state law, area outside the city is within the territorial jurisdiction of the court.

(4) The municipal court has original jurisdiction over every offense that an ordinance of the city makes punishable. The court may enforce forfeitures and other penalties that such ordinances prescribe.

(5) The municipal judge may:

(a) Render judgments and, to enforce them, impose sanctions on persons and property within the court's territorial jurisdiction;

(b) Order the arrest of anyone accused of an offense against the city;

(c) Commit to jail or admit to bail anyone accused of such an offense;

(d) Issue and compel obedience to subpoenas;

(e) Compel witnesses to appear and testify and jurors to serve in the trial of matters before the court;

(f) Penalize contempt of court;

(g) Issue process necessary to effectuate judgments and orders of the court;

(h) Issue search warrants; and

(i) Perform other judicial and quasi-judicial functions prescribed by ordinance.

(6) The council may authorize the municipal judge to appoint municipal judges pro tem, for terms of office set by the judge or the council.

(7) Notwithstanding this section, the council may transfer some or all of the functions of the municipal court to an appropriate state court.


SECTION 26. CITY ADMINISTRATOR

(1) The city administrator is the administrative head of the city government.

(2) A majority of the council shall appoint and may remove the administrator. The appointment shall be without regard to political considerations and solely on the basis of administrative qualifications.

(3) Upon accepting the appointment, the administrator shall furnish the city with a bond in an amount and with a surety approved by the council. The city shall pay the bond premium.

(4) The administrator shall be appointed for a definite or an indefinite term and all personnel policies established by the council shall apply to the administrator unless specifically excluded in the policy or by contract.

(5) The administrator shall:

(a) Attend all council meetings unless excused by the council or mayor;

(b) Keep the council advised of the affairs and needs of the city;

(c) See that the provisions of all ordinances are administered to the satisfaction of the council;

(d) See that all terms of franchises, leases, contracts, permits, and privileges granted by the city are fulfilled;

(e) Appoint, discipline and remove appointive personnel, except appointees of the mayor or council;

(f) Supervise and control the administrator's appointees in their service to the city;

(g) Organize and reorganize the departmental structure of city government, as directed by the council;

(h) Prepare and transmit to the council an annual city budget;

(i) Supervise city contracts;

(j) Supervise operation of all city-owned public utilities and property; and

(k) Perform other duties as the council prescribes consistent with this charter.

(6) The administrator shall not control:

(a) The council;

(b) The municipal judge in the judge's judicial functions; or,

(c) Except as the council authorizes, appointive personnel of the city whom the administrator does not appoint.

(7) The administrator and other personnel whom the council designates may sit with the council but may not vote on questions before it. The administrator may take part in all council discussions.

(8) When the administrator is unable to perform the duties as administrator, or when the office of administrator becomes vacant, the council shall appoint an administrator pro tem, who has the powers and duties of administrator, except that the administrator pro tem may appoint or remove personnel only with approval of the council. No person may be administrator pro tem more than twelve consecutive months.


CHAPTER VI       ELECTIONS


SECTION 27. STATE LAW

Except as this charter or a city ordinance prescribes to the contrary, a city election shall conform to state law applicable to the election.


SECTION 28. NOMINATIONS

A person may be nominated in a manner prescribed by general ordinance to run for an elective office of the city.


CHAPTER VII       ORDINANCES


SECTION 29. ORDAINING CLAUSE

The ordaining clause of all ordinances shall be, "The City of Veneta Ordains as Follows:".


SECTION 30. ADOPTION BY COUNCIL

(1) Except as subsection (2) of this section allows adopting at a single meeting and subsection (3) of this section allows reading by title only, an ordinance shall be fully and distinctly read in open council meetings on two different days before being adopted by the council.

(2) Except as subsection (3) of this section allows reading by title only, the council may adopt an ordinance at a single meeting by the express unanimous vote of all council members present, provided the ordinance is read first in full and then by title.

(3) A reading of an ordinance may be by title only if:

(a) No council member present at the reading requests that the ordinance be read in full or;

(b) At least one week before the reading:

(i) A copy of the ordinance is provided for each council member,

(ii) Three copies of the ordinance are available for public inspection in the office of the custodian of city records, and

(iii) Notice of their availability is given by written notice posted at the city hall and two other public places in the city, or advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.

(4) An ordinance read by title only has no legal effect if it differs substantially from its terms as it was filed prior to the reading unless each section so differing is read fully and distinctly in open council meeting before the council adopts the ordinance.

(5) Upon the adoption of an ordinance, the ayes and nays of the respective council members shall be entered in the record of council proceedings.

(6) Upon the adoption of an ordinance, the custodian of city records shall endorse it with its date of adoption and the endorser's name and title of office.


SECTION 31. EFFECTIVE DATE

A non-emergency ordinance takes effect on the thirtieth day after its adoption or on a later day the ordinance prescribes. An ordinance adopted to meet an emergency may take effect as soon as adopted.


CHAPTER VIII       PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS


SECTION 32. PROCEDURE

(1) The procedure for making, altering, vacating, or abandoning a public improvement shall be governed by general ordinance or, to the extent not so governed, by applicable state law. Proposed action on a public improvement that is not declared by two-thirds of the council present to be needed at once because of an emergency, shall be suspended for six months upon remonstrances by owners of land to be specially assessed for the improvement. The number of owners necessary to suspend the action shall be prescribed by general ordinance. A second such remonstrance suspends the action only with the consent of the council.

(2) In this section "owner" means the record holder of legal title or, as to land being purchased under a land-sale contract that is recorded or verified in writing by the record holder of legal title, the purchaser.


SECTION 33. SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS

The procedure for fixing, levying, and collecting special assessments against real property for public improvements or other public services shall be governed by general ordinance.


SECTION 34. BIDS

Contracts for public improvements to be made by a private contractor shall be governed by rules prescribed by general ordinance and state law. The city council, unless otherwise designated by the council, is designated as the public contract review board for the City of Veneta.


CHAPTER IX       MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS


SECTION 35. DEBT

The city's indebtedness may not exceed debt limits imposed by state law. A city officer or employee who creates or officially approves indebtedness in excess of this limitation is jointly and severally liable for the excess. A charter amendment is not required to authorize city indebtedness.


SECTION 36. CONTINUATION OF  ORDINANCES

Insofar as is consistent with this charter, and until amended or repealed, all ordinances in force when the charter takes effect retain the effect they have at that time.


SECTION 37. REPEAL

All charter provisions adopted before this charter takes effect are hereby repealed.


SECTION 38. SEVERABILITY

The terms of this charter are severable. If a part of the charter is held invalid, that invalidity does not affect another part of the charter, except as the logical relation between the two parts requires.


SECTION 39. TIME OF EFFECT

This charter shall take effect April 1, 1999.


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01  Code Adoption

1.05  General Provisions

1.10  Violation – Penalty

1.15  Police Powers

1.20  Election Dates for City Initiatives
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



Chapter 1.01       CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.010    Adopted.

1.01.020    Title – Citation – Reference.

1.01.030    Contents.

1.01.040    Ordinances passed prior to adoption of code.

1.01.050    Reference applies to all amendments.

1.01.060    Title, chapter and section headings.

1.01.070    Reference to specific ordinances.

1.01.080    Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

1.01.090    Effective date of code.

1.01.100    Continuity of existing provisions.

1.01.110    Designations and references.

1.01.120    Constitutionality.


1.01.010      Adopted.

The provisions of the documents marked and designated as "Veneta Municipal Code" (hereinafter referred to as "code"), and marked as Exhibit "A" attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, are hereby enacted as the general and permanent law of the city of Veneta. (Ord. 410 § 1, 1999)


1.01.020      Title – Citation – Reference.

This code shall be known as the Veneta Municipal Code and it shall be sufficient to refer to such code as the Veneta Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Veneta Municipal Code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Veneta Municipal Code, and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 410 § 2, 1999)


1.01.030      Contents.

This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain administrative ordinances of the city. (Ord. 410 § 3, 1999)


1.01.040      Ordinances passed prior to adoption of code.

This code consists of all ordinances through Ordinance 406, passed on April 12, 1999. Ordinance 409, amending Ordinance 258, regulating public and private sewers, passed subsequent to Ordinance 406, but prior to adoption of this Code, is hereby also adopted and made a part of this code. (Ord. 410 § 4, 1999)


1.01.050      Reference applies to all amendments.

Whenever a reference is made to this code as the Veneta Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions thereto, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 410 § 5, 1999)


1.01.060      Title, chapter and section headings.

Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section. (Ord. 410 § 6, 1999)


1.01.070      Reference to specific ordinances.

The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 410 § 7, 1999)


1.01.080      Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at such effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 410 § 8, 1999)


1.01.090      Effective date of code.

This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter adopting this code as the Veneta Municipal Code shall become effective. (Ord. 410 § 9, 1999)


1.01.100      Continuity of existing provisions.

The provisions of the code that are the same in substance as code or ordinance provisions that are in effect immediately before this code becomes effective are construed as restatements and continuations of the prior provisions. (Ord. 410 § 10, 1999)


1.01.110      Designations and references.

In any prosecution for the violation of any provisions of the Veneta Municipal Code, or in any legal proceeding within the purview thereof, it shall be sufficient to refer to the applicable title, chapter, section or subsection of the Veneta Municipal Code, and all such references shall apply to the applicable numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the Veneta Municipal Code.

Any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any portion of a section of the code shall refer to and designate the applicable title, chapter, section or subsection of the Veneta Municipal Code, and whenever reference is made to any portion of the code, the reference shall apply and be applicable to amendments, corrections or additions hereto or hereafter enacted by the city of Veneta. (Ord. 410 § 11, 1999)


1.01.120      Constitutionality.

If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this entire code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 410 § 12, 1999)


Chapter 1.05       GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

1.05.010    Resolutions and franchises – Effective date.


1.05.010      Resolutions and franchises – Effective date.

All resolutions and franchises shall become immediately effective upon passage by the city council and approval by the mayor. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2001)


Chapter 1.10 VIOLATION – PENALTY

Sections:

1.10.010    Limitation of penalties.

1.10.020    Penalties.


1.10.010 Limitation of penalties.

Where any city ordinance is substantially similar to a state statute, the maximum and minimum penalties of both fines and terms of imprisonment shall be limited to the maximum and minimum penalties provided for in the substantially similar state statute. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to affect penalties provided by city ordinance which are less severe than the penalties provided for in a substantially similar state statute. For purposes of this chapter, a state statute is substantially similar to a city ordinance if the same conduct is proscribed and the elements of the crime, offense, violation, or infraction are the same. (Ord. 300 § 1, 1987)


1.10.020 Penalties.

Any person violating any ordinance of this city which does not provide a penalty in the ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a violation and fined an amount not to exceed $1,000 for each violation. (Ord. 486 § 2, 2009; Ord. 71 § 1, 1971)


Chapter 1.15       POLICE POWERS

Sections:

1.15.010    Designated.


1.15.010      Designated.

All powers and duties which are stated, defined, or promulgated in any of the statutes of the state of Oregon or in any of the ordinances of the city of Veneta to be done or exercised by city police, police officer, or chief of police, or any other phrase having any of those connotations, shall hereafter devolve upon and be exercised by deputy sheriffs of Lane County, Oregon as they are assigned to duty in the city of Veneta from time to time. (Ord. 109 § 1, 1975)


Chapter 1.20 ELECTION DATES FOR  CITY INITIATIVES

Sections:

1.20.010    Purpose.

1.20.020    Application.

1.20.030    Elections.

1.20.040    Additional procedures.


1.20.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the election dates for initiative measures in the city of Veneta, pursuant to the authority set forth in Article IV, Section 1(5) of the Oregon Constitution, Chapter VI, Sections 27 and 28 of the Veneta Charter, and ORS 250.255. (Ord. 481, 2008; Ord. 387 § 8, 1998; Ord. 348 § 1, 1993)


1.20.020 Application.

This measure shall apply to initiative measures which propose enactment of ordinances or Charter amendments for the city. (Ord. 348 § 2, 1993)


1.20.030 Elections.

Elections on initiative measures for the city of Veneta shall be held at the next regular statewide primary or general election, held not sooner than the ninetieth day after the measure was filed with the city governing body. (Ord. 387 § 8, 1998; Ord. 348 § 3, 1993)


1.20.040 Additional procedures.

Except as otherwise provided herein, city measures shall be governed by ORS 250.255 to 250.346, which are incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 387 § 8, 1998; Ord. 348 § 4, 1993)


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:

2.05  Personnel

2.10  City Attorney

2.15  Planning Commission

2.20  City Office Elections

2.25  Public Contract Review Board

2.30  Urban Renewal Agency

2.35  Regional Cable Television Commission

2.40  Recordkeeping

2.45  Youth Advisory Committee
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



Chapter 2.05       PERSONNEL

Sections:

2.05.010    Title.

2.05.020    Purpose.

2.05.030    Variances.

2.05.040    Resolutions.


2.05.010      Title.

The title of this chapter shall be "the personnel ordinance of the city of Veneta." (Ord. 283 § 1, 1988)


2.05.020      Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide systematic and equitable procedures and regulations relating to the hiring, compensation, hours of work, leave, safety, training, work conditions, promotions, transfers, discipline, removal, and other matters affecting the status of employees of the city of Veneta. (Ord. 283 § 2, 1988)


2.05.030      Variances.

The city council shall have the power to vary or modify the strict application of the provisions of this chapter in any case in which the strict application would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships. (Ord. 283 § 3, 1988)


2.05.040      Resolutions.

The city council shall adopt a personnel system for the city by resolution. The resolution shall be reviewed at least once each year. The resolution may be modified and changed as deemed necessary by the council as it would modify or change other resolutions. (Ord. 283 § 4, 1988)


Chapter 2.10       CITY ATTORNEY

Sections:

2.10.010    Office created.

2.10.020    Bar membership required.

2.10.030    Duties.

2.10.040    Compensation.

2.10.050    Additional duties – Compensation.


2.10.010      Office created.

There is hereby created the office of city attorney. (Ord. 5 § 1, 1962)


2.10.020      Bar membership required.

The city attorney shall be an active member of the Oregon State Bar in good standing. (Ord. 5 § 2, 1962)


2.10.030      Duties.

The duties of the city attorney shall include the following:

(1) Preparation of ordinances and resolutions;

(2) The rendering of legal advice to the city council when so requested and at such other times as the city attorney may consider appropriate;

(3) Assisting with the prosecution in the municipal court of persons charged with violations of city ordinances. (Ord. 5 § 3, 1962)


2.10.040      Compensation.

For the performance of the duties heretofore mentioned in VMC 2.10.030, the city attorney shall receive as compensation such remuneration as the city council may, from time to time, authorize. (Ord. 5 § 4, 1962)


2.10.050      Additional duties – Compensation.

In addition to the duties specifically mentioned in VMC 2.10.030, the city attorney shall, when requested by the city council, represent and appear for the city of Veneta, or its officials, in any matter or cause pending in the county court, the circuit court, the Supreme Court, or before any board, commission or legislative committee, and as compensation for such services he shall receive such sum or sums as may be mutually agreed upon between himself and the city council. (Ord. 5 § 5, 1962)


Chapter 2.15       PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:

2.15.010    Re-establishment.

2.15.020    Membership.

2.15.030    Term of office.

2.15.040    Vacancies and removal.

2.15.050    Presiding members.

2.15.060    Compensation.

2.15.070    Meetings.

2.15.080    Powers and duties.


2.15.010      Re-establishment.

There is hereby re-established a city planning commission for the city of Veneta. (Ord. 98 § 1, 1974)


2.15.020      Membership.

(1) The commission shall consist of five members who are not officials or employees of the city. Not more than one member shall be a nonresident of the city. The mayor, city attorney, city engineer and one councilman shall be entitled to sit with the commission and take part in its discussions, but shall not have the right to vote.

(2) No more than two voting members shall be engaged principally in the buying, selling or developing of real estate for profit as individuals, or be members of any partnership, or officers or employees or any corporation that is engaged principally in the buying, selling or developing of real estate for profit. No more than two voting members shall be engaged in the same kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation.

(3) A member of the planning commission shall not participate in any commission proceeding or action in which any of the following has a direct or substantial financial interest: the member or his spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, any business in which the member is then serving or has served within the previous two years or any business with which the member is negotiating for or has an arrangement or understanding concerning prospective partnership or employment. Any actual or potential interest shall be disclosed at the meeting of the commission where the action is being taken. (Ord. 387 § 4, 1998; Ord. 98 § 2, 1974)


2.15.030      Term of office.

Members of the planning commission shall be appointed by the mayor for terms of approximately four years, which terms shall expire on the day of the second city council meeting after January 1st of the year in which the term expires. The mayor may extend the term of incumbent planning commission members by a period not to exceed 60 days. Terms of planning commission members shall be staggered in order to establish an approximately equal number of expiring terms each year. (Ord. 363 § 1, 1997; Ord. 98 § 3, 1974)


2.15.040      Vacancies and removal.

Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. A member may be removed by the city council, after hearing, for misconduct or nonperformance of duty. A member who is absent from three consecutive meetings without an excuse as approved by the planning commission is presumed to be in nonperformance of duty and the city council shall declare the position vacant unless finding otherwise following the hearing. (Ord. 98 § 4, 1974)


2.15.050      Presiding members.

(1) The commission, at its first meeting, shall elect a president and vice president, who shall be voting members and who shall hold office during the pleasure of the commission.

(2) The commission shall elect a secretary who need not be a member of the commission. The secretary shall keep an accurate record of all commission proceedings. The commission shall, on the first day of October of each year, make and file a report of all its transactions with the city council. (Ord. 98 § 5, 1974)


2.15.060      Compensation.

Members of the planning commission shall receive no compensation other than authorized expenses. (Ord. 98 § 6, 1974)


2.15.070      Meetings.

The commission shall have its headquarters in the City Hall. A majority of the members of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum. The commission shall meet at least once a month. Meetings of the commission shall be open to the public. Meetings other than at regularly scheduled times may be announced at a prior meeting and thereby be made a part of the meeting records. The chairman upon his own motion may, or at the request of three members of the commission shall, by giving notice to members of the commission, call a previously unannounced special meeting of the commission for a time not earlier than 24 hours after the notice is given. Notice of a previously unannounced meeting shall be telephoned to the newspaper, posted at the City Hall and, to the extent feasible, provided to interested persons at least 24 hours prior to the meeting. (Ord. 98 § 7, 1974)


2.15.080      Powers and duties.

The commission shall have the powers and duties which are now or may hereafter be assigned to it by Charter, ordinances, or resolutions of this city and general laws of this state. The duties of the commission shall include the following:

(1) Conduct studies appropriate to an understanding of area development and its significance to the public interest;

(2) Develop and maintain comprehensive plan proposals for recommendation to the city council;

(3) Develop specific plans for selected areas or functions as indicated by studies and other evidence of community need and recommend plan adoption if appropriate;

(4) Periodically review the city's capital improvement program and make recommendations to the city administration;

(5) Prepare and periodically review land development regulations including but not limited to zoning, subdivision, and land partitioning and make recommendations to the city council;

(6) Consult and advise with public agencies and private citizens on ways to carry out the comprehensive plan including matters concerning the area within six miles of the city limits;

(7) Submit an annual report to the city council on the activities of the planning commission and on the status of the comprehensive plan and its implementation;

(8) Review public programs that are referred to it for recommendation, such as property acquisition or disposition, public building or other public facility proposals and transportation or right-of-way plans. Report as to the program's conformity with the comprehensive plan;

(9) Shall review subdivisions and partitioning proposals and approve those meeting state and city requirements with such conditions or restrictions as are found appropriate under such requirement;

(10) Shall review and act on zone change proposals, contested cases, variances, conditional uses, planned unit developments, design reviews and other discretionary permits as provided by the land use control ordinances;

(11) Perform other functions as the city council may request. (Ord. 98 § 8, 1974)


Chapter 2.20       CITY OFFICE ELECTIONS

Sections:

2.20.010    Notice of election of council position.

2.20.020    Qualification of electors.

2.20.030    Qualifications for elective city office.

2.20.040    Nominating petitions and declaration of candidacy.

2.20.050    Review of nominating petitions.

2.20.060    Notice to county elections officer.


2.20.010      Notice of election of council position.

The city will publish a notice of election listing the city offices coming up for election, filing requirements and deadlines. This notice will be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the week preceding the earliest date for filing with the city election officer. (Ord. 225 § 1, 1982)


2.20.020      Qualification of electors.

A qualified elector is a resident of the city who qualifies as a legal voter under state law. (Ord. 225 § 2, 1982)


2.20.030      Qualifications for elective city office.

Every qualified elector who has resided in the city of Veneta during the 12 months immediately preceding the election may be nominated for elective city office. (Ord. 225 § 3, 1982)


2.20.040      Nominating petitions and declaration of candidacy.

(1) Nominating petitions shall be available at the Veneta City Hall. Prior to collecting signatures, each prospective petition must be signed by the candidate and approved for circulation by the city elections official in writing. This approval shall verify the prospective petition contains all required information, specify any specific requirements for signers, and advise candidate of the number of signatures required.

(2) A nomination petition shall include the signatures of not fewer than 20 qualified electors.

(3) Declarations of candidacy shall be available at the Veneta City Hall. The declaration of candidacy and a nominee's written acceptance of the nomination shall include the signature of the nominee and the nominee's name as it shall be printed on the ballot.

(4) A petition nominating a qualified person for elective city office and a nominee's declaration of candidacy shall be submitted to the city recorder at the same time, not sooner than 100 days prior to a general election, and not later than 70 days before the date specified by state law or county elections division. (Ord. 445 § 1, 2004)


2.20.050      Review of nominating petitions.

Prior to filing the petition with the city elections official, the candidate must submit the nominating petition signature sheets to the Lane County elections official in sufficient time to allow signature verification of 20 qualified electors. In no case may a petition be submitted to the city elections official after the filing deadline or with less than 20 signatures, as verified by the Lane County elections official. (Ord. 445 § 2, 2004)


2.20.060      Notice to county elections officer.

The city elections officer shall notify the county elections officer as required by law to have the names of all eligible nominees placed on the ballot. The city elections officer shall also notify each nominee that his name has been placed on the ballot. (Ord. 225 § 6, 1982)


Chapter 2.25       PUBLIC CONTRACT REVIEW BOARD

Sections:

2.25.010    Contract review board.

2.25.020    Public contract rules and procedures.


2.25.010      Contract review board.

The city council of the city of Veneta is hereby designated as the local contract review board and shall have all powers necessary for all contractual matters for which the city of Veneta is a party, including the power to adopt public contracting rules. (Ord. 387 § 7, 1998; Ord. 243 § 2, 1983)


2.25.020      Public contract rules and procedures.

All public contracts for the city of Veneta shall be awarded in accordance with rules and procedures adopted by the city council under a separate resolution. (Ord. 271 § 1, 1985; Ord. 243 § 3, 1983)


Chapter 2.30       URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY

Sections:

I. The Agency

2.30.010    Policy and purposes of the Veneta downtown renewal agency.

2.30.020    Definitions.

2.30.030    Veneta downtown renewal agency.

2.30.040    Membership of the urban renewal agency.

2.30.050    Terms of office.

2.30.060    Vacancies.

2.30.070    Officers.

2.30.080    By-laws.

2.30.090    Quorum and voting.

2.30.100    Disclosure.

2.30.110    Meetings – Notice.

II. Powers and Duties

2.30.120    Powers and duties of the urban renewal agency.

III. Urban Renewal Plan Adoption 

2.30.130    Urban renewal plan adoption.

IV. Subcommittees and Citizen Advisory Committees 

2.30.140    Subcommittees and citizen advisory committees.

V. Agency Staff 

2.30.150    Agency staff.

I. The Agency


2.30.010      Policy and purposes of the Veneta downtown renewal agency.

The city of Veneta city council finds and declares as follows:

(1) That blighted areas exist within the incorporated areas of the city;

(2) That there is a need for an urban renewal agency, a public body corporate and politic, to function in the city; and the agency shall focus on the following activities, among others, in carrying out urban renewal projects, pursuant to state law, the City Charter and this chapter:

(a) Maintenance and improvement of viable commercial and industrial business areas including support for small local businesses;

(b) Promotion of stability in residential areas, and provision, conservation or rehabilitation of adequate housing to meet the needs of city residents;

(c) Provision of public facilities, utilities and necessary physical improvements as provided in an approved urban renewal plan;

(d) Promotion of new employment opportunities;

(e) Involvement of citizens in all phases of preparing and implementing an urban renewal plan;

(3) That the Veneta city council elects to have all of those powers granted to and vested in an urban renewal agency by the laws of the state of Oregon, exercised by and vested in the urban renewal agency of the city of Veneta. (Ord. 266 § 1.010, 1984)


2.30.020      Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall mean: 

(1) "Agency" means the urban renewal agency of the city of Veneta, hereinafter to be known as the "Veneta downtown renewal agency."

(2) "Council" means the city council of the city of Veneta, Oregon.

(3) "City" means the city of Veneta, Oregon.

(4) "Urban renewal area" means a blighted area included in an urban renewal plan.

(5) "Urban renewal project" or "project" means any work or undertaking carried out in an urban renewal area.

(6) "Urban renewal plan" or "plan" means a plan as it is adopted pursuant to ORS 457.085 through 457.160 or is changed from time to time in accordance with ORS 457.220 by the council for one or more urban renewal areas. (Ord. 266 § 1.020, 1984)


2.30.030      Veneta downtown renewal agency.

The Veneta downtown renewal agency is hereby established. The agency shall have the powers and duties described in VMC 2.30.120. (Ord. 266 § 1.030, 1984)


2.30.040      Membership of the urban renewal agency.

The agency shall consist of five members who shall be the mayor and four council persons who together constitute the city council of Veneta as provided by the City Charter. (Ord. 266 § 1.040, 1984)


2.30.050      Terms of office.

The terms of office of agency members shall coincide with their terms of office on the city council. (Ord. 266 § 1.050, 1984)


2.30.060      Vacancies.

Vacancies shall be filled as provided for council members by the City Charter. (Ord. 266 § 1.060, 1984)


2.30.070      Officers.

At its first meeting after appointment, the agency shall select a chairman, vice-chairman and such other officers deemed necessary. Thereafter, such officers shall be elected by the agency's membership at or before the agency's first meeting in January of each succeeding year. (Ord. 266 § 1.070, 1984)


2.30.080      By-laws.

The agency shall adopt by-laws and rules of procedure to regulate the conduct of meetings; until such rules are adopted, proceedings of the agency shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order. (Ord. 266 § 1.080, 1984)


2.30.090      Quorum and voting.

(1) Three members of the agency shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business.

(2) The agency shall act by a majority vote of the members present at a meeting, excluding members present but abstaining; provided, that no action shall be taken without the affirmative concurrence of three members.

(3) Actions, reports and recommendations adopted by the agency shall be adopted by resolution, signed by the chairman or vice-chairman, or their designated member substitute, and filed with the city recorder. (Ord. 266 § 1.090, 1984)


2.30.100      Disclosure.

Prior to voting on any issue under this chapter, members of the Veneta downtown renewal agency shall publicly disclose the nature and extent of any previous conversation relating to that issue with any person having a pecuniary interest in the matter. (Ord. 266 § 1.100, 1984)


2.30.110      Meetings – Notice.

(1) The agency shall hold at least one meeting per month and may hold such other meetings as are necessary to perform its functions.

(2) Before any meeting of the agency, notice shall be given as required by law.

(3) The agency may continue any proceeding, and a proceeding continued to a time, date and place certain requires no additional notice unless such notice is required by law or is ordered by the agency. (Ord. 266 § 1.110, 1984)

II. Powers and Duties


2.30.120      Powers and duties of the urban renewal agency.

The agency shall:

(1) Have such powers and duties as are authorized by law and set forth in Chapter 457 ORS, including, without limitation, the power to:

(a) Carry out any work or undertaking and exercise any powers which a housing authority is authorized by law to perform;

(b) Carry out any rehabilitation or conservation work in an urban renewal area;

(c) Acquire real property, by condemnation if necessary, when needed to carry out the plan; provided, however, that no such real property shall be so acquired by the agency unless the urban renewal plan, as approved by the council, specifically provides for such property acquisition or the council amends the approved urban renewal plan specifically to provide for such property acquisition;

(2) Exercise of this authority shall be in accord with the following criteria among others:

(a) The need to construct public services including, but not limited to, new streets, sewer lines, water lines, or storm drainage facilities;

(b) The need to provide public facilities including, but not limited to, public structures, parks, open space, parking or pedestrian walkways;

(c) The need to realize more efficient uses of lands;

(d) The need to clear any areas acquired, including the demolition, removal, rehabilitation or conservation of buildings and improvements;

(e) The need to install, construct or reconstruct streets, utilities and site improvements in accordance with the urban renewal plan;

(f) The need to carry out plans for a program of the voluntary repair and rehabilitation of buildings or other improvements in an urban renewal area in accordance with the urban renewal plan;

(g) The need to assist in relocating persons living in, and property situated in, the urban renewal area in accordance with the approved urban renewal plan, and to make relocation payments;

(h) The need to dispose of, including by sale or lease, any property or part thereof acquired in the urban renewal area in accordance with the approved urban renewal plan;

(i) The need to plan, undertake and carry out neighborhood development programs consisting of urban renewal project undertakings in one or more urban renewal areas which are planned and carried out on the basis of annual increments in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for planning and carrying out urban renewal plans;

(j) The need to accomplish a combination of the things listed in this chapter to carry out an urban renewal plan;

(3) Provide for public involvement in all stages of the preparation and development of an urban renewal plan;

(4) Forward an urban renewal plan and accompanying report to the city planning commission for recommendations prior to presenting the plan to the council for approval;

(5) Prepare a statement by August 1st of each year containing:

(a) The amount of money actually received during the preceding year as "tax increment financing" revenue under subsection (4) of ORS 457.440, and the amount of indebtedness incurred during the preceding year from obtaining loans and advances under subsection (6) of ORS 457.440;

(b) The purpose and amounts for which any monies received under subsection (4) of ORS 457.440, and from indebtedness incurred under subsection (6) of ORS 457.440 were expended during the preceding fiscal year;

(c) An estimate of monies to be received during the current fiscal year under subsection (4) of ORS 457.440, and from indebtedness incurred under subsection (6) of ORS 457.440;

(d) A budget setting forth the purpose and estimated amounts for monies which have been or will be received under subsection (4) of ORS 457.440, and from indebtedness incurred under subsection (6) of ORS 457.440, are to be expended during the current fiscal year;

(e) An analysis of the impact of carrying out the urban renewal plan on the tax rate for the preceding year for all taxing bodies that levy a tax on property inside urban renewal areas;

(6) The statement required under subsection (5) of this section shall be filed with the council, and notice shall be published that the statement has been prepared and is on file with the city recorder and the agency, and that the information contained in the statement is available to all interested persons. The notice shall be published once a week for not less than two successive weeks before September 1st of the year for which the statement is required in the newspaper having the greatest circulation in the city, and which is published in the city. The notice shall summarize the information required under subsections (5)(a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section, and shall set forth in full the information required under subsection (5)(e) of this section;

(7) Exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be given to the agency by law, provided such other powers and duties are not in conflict with the provisions of ORS Chapter 457, the State Urban Renewal Law, the Charter of the city of Veneta, or other provisions of this chapter;

(8) The agency may:

(a) Incur indebtedness, including obtaining loans and advances in carrying out an urban renewal plan;

(b) Irrevocably pledge any or all of that portion of the taxes received as tax increment financing revenue under ORS 457.420 through 457.450 for payment of principal of and interest on indebtedness incurred. (Ord. 266 § 2.010, 1984)

III. Urban Renewal Plan Adoption


2.30.130      Urban renewal plan adoption.

Upon receipt of a proposed urban renewal plan and report from the agency, and after public notice and hearing and consideration of public testimony and recommendations by the planning commission, the council may approve the urban renewal plan. The approval shall be by nonemergency ordinance which shall incorporate the plan by reference. The ordinance shall include determinations and findings for each urban renewal area that:

(1) The area is blighted;

(2) The rehabilitation and redevelopment is necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare of the municipality;

(3) The urban renewal plan conforms to the comprehensive plan of the municipality as a whole, and provides an outline for accomplishing the urban renewal projects the urban renewal plan proposes;

(4) Provision has been made to house displaced persons within their financial means in accordance with ORS 281.045 through 281.105 and, except in the relocation of elderly or handicapped individuals, without displacing on priority lists persons already waiting for existing federally subsidized housing;

(5) If acquisition of real property is provided for, that it is necessary;

(6) Adoption and implementation of the urban renewal plan is economically sound and feasible; and

(7) The municipality shall assume and complete any activities prescribed it by the urban renewal plan. (Ord. 266 § 3.010, 1984)

IV. Subcommittees and Citizen Advisory Committees


2.30.140      Subcommittees and citizen advisory committees.

The chairman of the agency may establish and appoint from the membership of the agency such advisory subcommittees as are deemed appropriate or as directed by the agency.

The chairman of the agency may appoint one or more citizen advisory committees consisting of persons who are owners or tenants of property located in the urban renewal area to act as advisors to the agency on matters related to the urban renewal plan and projects of the agency in each urban renewal area. (Ord. 266 § 4.010, 1984)

V. Agency Staff


2.30.150      Agency staff.

The city administrator and persons designated by the city administrator shall serve as staff for the agency and its subcommittees and shall provide such administrative and technical assistance as may be required. The agency may also contract for such services as it requires. (Ord. 266 § 5.010, 1984)


Chapter 2.35       REGIONAL CABLE TELEVISION COMMISSION

Sections:

2.35.010    Definitions.

2.35.020    Creation of regional commission.

2.35.030    Commission duties and powers.

2.35.040    Procedure for adopting regulations.

2.35.050    Reservation of powers.


2.35.010      Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section:

(1) "Commission" means the commission established by VMC 2.35.020.

(2) "Federal Act" means the sections of the Communications Act of 1934 dealing with cable television as amended by the Cable Commissions Policy Act of 1984, Public Law 98-549 (1984) and by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Public Law 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460 (1992).

(3) "Franchising authority" means any local government with authority to grant a franchise to a cable operator. (Ord. 354 § 1, 1994)


2.35.020      Creation of regional commission.

(1) The regional cable television commission is hereby created. It shall consist of a public elected or appointed official from each franchising authority enacting an ordinance similar to the ordinance codified in this chapter empowering the commission as herein provided.

(2) A majority of the public officials designated under subsection (1) of this section or five of them, whichever is less, shall constitute a quorum and, except as provided in this subsection, all actions of the commission shall be determined by a majority of the officials present. When a matter before the commission only affects cable customers in one city, the public official representing that city on the commission must vote with the prevailing side for the commission to take action.

(3) The franchising authority's representative on the commission shall be an appointed or elected official of the franchising authority, nominated by the mayor or other chief executive and approved by the council or governing body. The representative shall serve at the pleasure of the council or governing body. When unable to attend commission meetings, the representative may designate an alternate who shall be another appointed or elected official of the franchising authority and who may act in the representative's stead on matters before the commission. (Ord. 354 § 2, 1994)


2.35.030      Commission duties and powers.

(1) Duties. The duties of the commission shall be:

(a) To administer the existing cable television franchise issued by the franchising authority and any future franchise enacted by the franchising authority;

(b) To establish by resolution within the franchise authority territories where the commission has been empowered all necessary regulations of cable television operators, including but not limited to, rate regulations, rate setting procedures, procedures to insure only properly established rates are being charged customers, consumer protection regulations, and such other regulations as the commission deems necessary to perform its duties;

(c) Within the limitations of this chapter, to establish and impose such penalties for violation of the commission's regulations;

(d) To establish procedures for hearing and disposing of all complaints concerning cable television service within the franchising authority;

(e) Except for powers expressly reserved to the franchising authority in this chapter, to perform within the geographic jurisdiction of the franchising authority all functions now or hereafter granted to local franchising authorities under the Federal Act and FCC regulations; and

(f) To perform such other duties delegated to the commission by a member franchising authority.

(2) Delegation. Except as expressly reserved to the franchising authority in this chapter, all powers of the franchising authority under state and federal law and under the franchising authority's existing cable television franchise are hereby delegated to the commission.

(3) Powers. To enable it to perform its duties but subject to the limitations in this chapter, the commission shall have the following powers:

(a) By resolution of the commission, to adopt by-laws, rules of procedure, and other regulations, including the determination of penalties within the jurisdictional limits of the franchising authority for violation of its rules and regulations;

(b) To contract and enforce its contracts and regulations in administrative and judicial forums of the state and federal governments;

(c) Negotiate and recommend to the franchising authority for enactment amendments to existing cable television and new franchises;

(d) To sue and be sued in the name of the commission;

(e) To employ staff by contracting with Lane Council of Governments or with a local franchising authority that is a member of the commission;

(f) To impose dues upon member franchising authorities to cover the cost of performing its responsibilities under this chapter when the fees and charges collected from the cable operator are insufficient to meet the expenses of the commission and its staff, and to deny participation of any member franchising authority's representatives and to refuse to consider matters which only affect a franchising authority that is delinquent in payment of its dues until the delinquency is corrected;

(g) To designate Lane Council of Governments or another member franchising authority to budget the commission's revenues and expenditures and, to the degree necessary, comply with the state local government budget law;

(h) To take any action necessary or convenient to perform its duties. (Ord. 354 § 3, 1998)


2.35.040      Procedure for adopting regulations.

(1) Permanent Regulations. Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, all resolutions which impose a penalty, or which concern consumer protection regulations or ratemaking regulations, shall be adopted by the commission only after published notice of the proposal and an opportunity for public comment. Such notice shall contain a brief summary of and specify the date, time and location where the commission will receive public comment. The notice shall be published twice; the first publication not less than 10 days and second publication not less than three days before the time of receiving comments. Such notice shall be in a newspaper of general circulation within the community or communities affected by the proposed regulation.

(2) Temporary Regulations. When the commission determines that it lacks adequate regulations to fulfill its duties, that if such regulation is not enacted the commission's ability to perform its duties will be impaired, and that it is acting in a manner that is not prohibited by the federal act or regulations propounded thereunder, it may summarily adopt regulations which shall remain in effect until permanent regulations may be enacted, provided the temporary regulation shall expire upon enactment of the regulation under subsection (1) of this section or six months, whichever first occurs. (Ord. 354 § 4, 1994)


2.35.050      Reservation of powers.

The franchising authority hereby reserves to itself the power to:

(1) Enact cable television service franchises after receiving the commission's recommendation;

(2) Appear in any proceeding before the commission or its designee and to appeal any decision of the commission or its designee;

(3) Regulate the cable operator's use of the public way and public property over which the operator has been given a right of use and to enforce local land development laws;

(4) Withdraw from the commission by repealing the ordinance codified in this chapter after giving 90 days' prior written notice of its intent to withdraw to the commission. (Ord. 354 § 5, 1994)


Chapter 2.40       RECORDKEEPING

Sections:

2.40.010    Custody.

2.40.020    Public inspection.

2.40.030    Removal from custody.

2.40.040    Return.

2.40.050    Alteration.

2.40.060    Storage.

2.40.070    Destruction on completion of each fiscal year and completion of an independent post-audit.

2.40.080    Times for retention.


2.40.010      Custody.

(1) The city recorder is the legal custodian of all records of the proceedings of the council, including all ordinances and papers pertaining to the council's proceedings.

(2) The city treasurer is the legal custodian of all books and records pertaining to the accounts between the treasurer and the city and all records of financial conditions and accounts.

(3) The city recorder is the legal custodian of all other records of the city. In making any or all public records committed to that custodianship, or receiving and filing or recording such public records, the city recorder may do such making or receiving and filing or recording by means of photocopying. "Photocopy" includes a photograph, microphotograph and any other reproduction on paper or film in any scale, and "photocopying" means the process of reproducing, in the form of a photocopy, a public record or writing. (Ord. 395 § 1, 1998)


2.40.020      Public inspection.

Access shall be given at reasonable times to the public or to any person who may be interested and may demand access to those records, books, papers and documents in the custody of the city recorder which are required to be disclosed pursuant to the Oregon Public Records Law, ORS 192.001 through 192.505. Documents which are not required to be disclosed pursuant to the Public Records Law shall be disclosed only with the prior authorization of the city administrator, the city council, or the city attorney. Examination of records shall be in the presence of the officer in whose charge the books, records, or papers may be, or in the presence of a person working under the officer's supervision. (Ord. 395 § 2, 1998)


2.40.030      Removal from custody.

It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any record or any part of any record from the custody of the person in whose custody the record or part has been placed by VMC 2.40.010, except by consent of the person having the custody or by authority of some paramount law or governmental officer or agency. (Ord. 395 § 3, 1998)


2.40.040      Return.

No person shall refuse to return any record after demand for the return thereof has been made by the legal custodian, unless the refusal is authorized by some paramount law or governmental officer or agency. (Ord. 395 § 4, 1998)


2.40.050      Alteration.

It shall be unlawful to make any change in a public record of the city except by authority of law or of some governmental officer or agency legally empowered to effect a change in the record. (Ord. 395 § 5, 1998)


2.40.060      Storage.

The city administrator of the city of Veneta is authorized to cause to have all papers, documents, and records received in all city departments maintained and stored to assure an expeditious and orderly filing system. All records and documents to be stored shall be placed in transfer files or suitable containers that will insure the safekeeping of all documents and records, and each file or container shall be clearly marked as to the type of record or document contained therein, with the date of disposal, if any, noted on each file or container. (Ord. 395 § 6, 1998)


2.40.070      Destruction on completion of each fiscal year and completion of an independent post-audit.

The city recorder is authorized to examine or cause to have examined all records scheduled for disposal or destruction pursuant to the retention schedules adopted by this chapter; provided, however, that records in the possession of the city administrator or the city attorney may only be examined by the city recorder with the consent of the city administrator or the city attorney. Following such examination the person making such examination shall complete a certificate authorizing the destruction of such records as may be allowed by this chapter, which certificate shall be reviewed, approved and signed by the city administrator prior to destruction of any records. Records to be disposed of shall be destroyed in such a manner that the city recorder or the city of Veneta may direct. The certificate to authorize destruction of records shall be in a form provided by the city recorder. (Ord. 395 § 7, 1998)


2.40.080      Times for retention.

The schedules of record retention as promulgated by the State Archivist, as set forth in Chapter 166 OAR, Divisions 10 through 40, shall be adhered to and shall govern the retention and disposal of all files, documents, papers and records now on file in each department of the city of Veneta. Until such time as the city of Veneta has received approval from the state of Oregon Archives Department authorizing destruction of records not presently included in the retention schedules hereby adopted, those records shall not be destroyed. A copy of the OAR Chapter 166, Divisions 10 through 40, shall be maintained on file at City Hall. (Ord. 395 § 8, 1998)


Chapter 2.45       YOUTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.45.010    Established.

2.45.020    Committee member appointment.

2.45.030    Term of office.

2.45.040    Vacancies and removal.

2.45.050    Ex-officio members.

2.45.060    Meetings.

2.45.070    Officers.

2.45.080    Advisory capacity.

2.45.090    Recommendations and reports.

2.45.100    Duties and responsibilities.

2.45.110    Compensation of members.

2.45.120    Quorum – Rules and regulations – Meetings.

2.45.130    Members, prohibited acts.


2.45.010      Established.

A youth advisory committee is hereby established to be composed of a minimum of five student members appointed by the council upon recommendation by the mayor. (Ord. 440, 2003)


2.45.020      Committee member appointment.

To be eligible to serve on the youth advisory committee students must have been a resident of the Fern Ridge School District area for at least one year prior to submitting the application for membership; and be at least 13 years of age and no older than 19 years of age as of July 1st for the year for which they will serve. In addition, at least three of the five members must also reside within the corporate limits of Veneta. Interested students should submit an application, together with a letter of interest and a list of references to the city recorder no later than May 1st of each year. The council shall review all applications received. The council may choose to conduct interviews of applicants to determine appointments or may make appointments based solely upon the completed applications. Appointments shall be made no later than July 1st for terms to begin July 1st of each year. Attempts shall be made to include students from private schools and home school families in addition to students from the Fern Ridge School District. (Ord. 440, 2003)


2.45.030      Term of office.

Youth advisory committee members shall be appointed for one-year terms. Terms shall be from July 1st through June 30th. No member may serve more than three consecutive terms. (Ord. 440, 2003)


2.45.040      Vacancies and removal.

Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. A member may be removed by the city council after hearing, for misconduct or nonperformance of duty. A member who is absent from three consecutive meetings without an excuse as approved by the chairperson is presumed to be in nonperformance of duty and the city council shall declare the position vacant unless finding otherwise following the hearing. (Ord. 440, 2003)


2.45.050      Ex-officio members.

A representative of the city council and the city administrator or his/her designee shall serve as ex-officio members. The council member shall be appointed by the mayor. Ex-officio members may participate in youth advisory committee meetings. (Ord. 440, 2003)


2.45.060      Meetings.

The youth advisory committee shall meet at least monthly, on a specific schedule adopted for the year by the committee members. Special meetings of the committee may be called by the committee chairman, by and upon the concurrence of three members, or by the city administrator. (Ord. 440, 2003)


2.45.070      Officers.

At the first meeting of the committee in September of each year, the youth advisory committee shall elect from among its members a chairperson, a vice chairperson, and a secretary to serve for a one-year term. The chairperson or vice chairperson, in the event of the absence of the chairperson, shall conduct the meeting. The secretary shall be responsible for taking minutes of the meetings. (Ord. 440, 2003)


2.45.080      Advisory capacity.

The youth advisory committee shall be an advisory committee to the city council and shall make recommendations and reports to the city council regarding issues of concern to youth in the community. Final determination for all matters pertaining to recommendations from the youth advisory committee shall remain the responsibility of the city council. (Ord. 440, 2003)


2.45.090      Recommendations and reports.

Each recommendation and/or report made by the youth advisory committee shall be presented to the city council orally by a member of the youth advisory committee to be selected by the committee at the time they vote on the recommendation or report. The committee shall also select an alternate member to make the recommendation or report in the event the initial person selected by the committee cannot, for any reason, personally make the recommendation or report. (Ord. 440, 2003)


2.45.100      Duties and responsibilities.

The youth advisory committee shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

(1) Advise the city council regarding issues of concern to youth in the community.

(2) Assist in planning and implementing social, educational, cultural and recreational activities for youth.

(3) Work with the mayor, city council, city department heads, schools, Chamber of Commerce, civic clubs and service organizations to provide service and leadership opportunities for the youth of the city.

(4) Inform and educate other youth of issues facing the city and opportunities for youth involvement in the city and community affairs.

(5) Promote community pride.

(6) Assist in developing and implementing ways to eliminate negative influences among our future community leaders. (Ord. 440, 2003)


2.45.110      Compensation of members.

Members of the youth advisory committee shall receive no compensation, but shall be reimbursed for authorized and necessary expenditures. The city administrator shall preauthorize all such expenditures. The youth advisory committee shall have no authority to make any expenditure on behalf of the city, nor to obligate the city for payment of any sums of money. (Ord. 440, 2003)


2.45.120      Quorum – Rules and regulations – Meetings.

A majority of the youth advisory committee members shall constitute a quorum. The youth advisory committee shall adopt rules and regulations which shall be consistent with the laws of the state of Oregon, the Veneta City Charter and city of Veneta ordinances. (Ord. 440, 2003)


2.45.130      Members, prohibited acts.

A member of the youth advisory committee shall not participate in any committee proceeding or action in which any of the following has a direct or substantial financial interest:

A member or his/her spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, any business in which (s)he has been serving or has served within the previous two years, or any business with which (s)he is negotiating for or has an arrangement or understanding concerning a prospective partnership or employment.

An actual or potential conflict of interest shall be disclosed at the meeting of the committee in which the action is being taken. (Ord. 440, 2003)


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:

3.05    Disposition of Personal Property

3.10    Public Improvements and Special Assessments

3.15    Transportation Utility Fee

3.20    Utility Account Deposits

3.25    Utility Service Billing Code

3.30    Land Use and Improvement Fees

3.35    Motor Vehicle Fuel Dealers Tax

3.40    Marijuana Tax

3.50    Transient Room Tax
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:

3.05    Disposition of Personal Property

3.10    Public Improvements and Special Assessments

3.15    Transportation Utility Fee

3.20    Utility Account Deposits

3.25    Utility Service Billing Code

3.30    Land Use and Improvement Fees

3.35    Motor Vehicle Fuel Dealers Tax

3.40    Marijuana Tax

3.50    Transient Room Tax
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



3.05.010 Custody of property.

Whenever any personal property other than motor vehicles is taken into the custody by any city department by reason of seizure, abandonment, or for any other similar reason, the personal property shall be turned over to and held by the public works department at the expense and risk of the owner or person lawfully entitled to possession of the property. (Ord. 537 § 1, 2016; Ord. 219 § 1, 1981)


3.05.020 Surrender to true owner.

Within 60 days after such property is taken into possession, except when confiscated or held as evidence, the owner or person lawfully entitled to possession may reclaim the same upon written request to the public works director, or designee, submission of satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession, and payment of charges and expenses, if any, incurred in the storage, preservation and custody of the property. (Ord. 537 § 1, 2016; Ord. 219 § 2, 1981)


3.05.030 Sale procedure.

(1) At any time after said 60-day period, the public works director, or designee, shall sell at public auction any property which has been taken into custody and not reclaimed and any property which has been confiscated and not ordered destroyed, except such property held as evidence in any legal or court proceeding. Notice of such sale shall be given once by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 10 days before the date of sale, giving the time and place of sale and generally describing the property to be sold.

(2) All sales of such property shall be for cash to the highest and best bidder; provided, however, that any person appearing at or prior to such sale and proving ownership or right of possession thereto shall be entitled to reclaim the property upon the payment of the charges and expenses incurred by the city in the storage, preservation and custody of the property and a proportionate share of the costs of advertising the same for sale.

(3) If no bids are entered for the property or if the highest bid entered is less than the costs incurred by the city, the public works director may enter a bid on behalf of the city in an amount equal to such costs. If bid on by the city, the property shall become the property of the city as compensation for the costs incurred or, if no use or value to the city, shall be disposed of in such manner as the city administrator directs.

(4) The proceeds of a sale shall be first applied to payment of the cost of the sale and the expense incurred in the preservation, storage and custody of the property, and the balance, if any, shall be credited to the general fund of the city.

(5) Sales shall be without the right of redemption. (Ord. 537 § 1, 2016; Ord. 219 § 3, 1981)


3.05.040 Bill of sale.

At the time of the payment of the purchase price, the public works director, or designee, shall execute a bill of sale and release of liability in duplicate, the original to be delivered to the purchaser and a copy to be kept on file in the office of the city recorder, which bill of sale shall contain the date of sale, the consideration paid, a brief description of the property, and a stipulation that the city does not warrant the condition or title of such property other than the return of the purchase price in case the title is for any reason invalid. (Ord. 537 § 1, 2016; Ord. 387 § 5, 1998; Ord. 219 § 4, 1981)


3.05.050 Alternative disposal.

In lieu of a sale of the property under the foregoing provisions of this act, the public works director, with the approval of the Veneta city council, may transfer any portion of the unclaimed property to the city for use by the city or may donate the unclaimed property to a worthy charity. (Ord. 537 § 1, 2016; Ord. 219 § 5, 1981)


3.05.060 Dangerous or perishable property.

Any property coming into the possession of the public works department which the public works director, or designee, determines to be dangerous or perishable may be disposed of immediately, without notice, in such manner as is determined to be in the public interest. (Ord. 537 § 1, 2016; Ord. 219 § 6, 1981)


3.05.070 Scope.

This chapter shall apply to all personal property, except motor vehicles, now or hereafter taken into the custody of the city. This chapter shall not apply to personal property purchased by or donated to the city. (Ord. 537 § 1, 2016; Ord. 219 § 7, 1981)


Chapter 3.10 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS

Sections:

3.10.010    Definitions.

3.10.020    Initiation of proceedings and report from the city engineer.

3.10.030    Council’s action on engineer’s report.

3.10.040    Resolution and notice of hearing.

3.10.050    Manner of doing work.

3.10.060    Hearing.

3.10.070    Call for bids.

3.10.080    Assessment.

3.10.090    Method of assessment.

3.10.100    Assessment ordinance.

3.10.110    Notice of assessment.

3.10.120    Deferred payment of assessments.

3.10.130    Deferment eligibility.

3.10.140    Financing of program.

3.10.150    Interest.

3.10.160    Administration.

3.10.170    Appeals.

3.10.180    Termination of deferment.

3.10.190    Confidentiality.

3.10.200    Lien.

3.10.210    Installment payment terms.

3.10.220    Lien records and foreclosure proceedings.

3.10.230    Errors in assessment calculations.

3.10.240    Deficit assessment.

3.10.250    Rebates.

3.10.260    Abandonment of proceedings.

3.10.270    Curative provisions.

3.10.280    Reassessment.

3.10.290    Remedies.


3.10.010 Definitions.

(1) “Improvement district” means that portion of land affected by a local improvement for which assessments are being apportioned and which includes all benefited property.

(2) “Local improvement” has the meaning as set forth in ORS 310.140(9). (Ord. 475 § 1, 2007)


3.10.020 Initiation of proceedings and report from the city engineer.

Whenever the council shall deem it necessary, upon its own motion or upon the petition of the owners of one-half of the property that benefits specially from the improvement, to make any street, sewer, sidewalk, drain, water line or other public improvement to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment according to benefits, then the council shall, by motion, direct the city engineer to make a survey and written report for such project and file the same with the city recorder. Unless the council shall direct otherwise, such report shall contain the following matters:

(1) A map or plat showing the general nature, location and extent of the proposed improvement and the land to be assessed for the payment of any part of the cost thereof;

(2) Estimates of the work to be done; provided, however, that where the proposed project is to be carried out in cooperation with any other governmental agency, the engineer may adopt the plans, specifications or estimates of such agency;

(3) An estimate of the probable cost of the improvement including any legal, administrative and engineering costs attributable thereto;

(4) An estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the specially benefited properties;

(5) A recommendation as to the method of assessment to be used to arrive at a fair apportionment of the whole or any portion of the cost of the improvement to the properties specially benefited;

(6) The description (which description may be by county tax lot numbers only) and assessed value of each lot, parcel of land, or portion thereof, to be specially benefited by the improvement with the names of the record owners thereof and, when readily available, the names of the contract purchasers thereof;

(7) A statement of outstanding assessments against property to be assessed. (Ord. 475 § 2, 2007)


3.10.030 Council’s action on engineer’s report.

After the city engineer’s report shall have been filed with the city recorder, the council may thereafter by motion approve the report, modify the report and approve it as modified, require the engineer to supply additional or different information for such improvements, or it may abandon the improvement. (Ord. 475 § 3, 2007)


3.10.040 Resolution and notice of hearing.

After the council shall have approved the report as submitted or modified, the council shall, by resolution, designate the proposed improvement, declare its intention to make such improvement, provide the manner and method of carrying out the improvement, and shall direct the recorder to give notice of such improvement by two publications one week apart in a newspaper of general circulation within the city of Veneta and by mailing copies of such notice by registered or certified mail to the owners to be assessed for the costs of such improvement, which said notice shall contain the following matters:

(1) That a written report on the improvement is on file in the office of the recorder and is subject to public examination;

(2) That the council will hold a public hearing on the proposed improvement at a specified place, time and date, which shall not be earlier than 10 days following the first publication of notice, at which hearing the council will hear and consider objections and remonstrances to the proposed improvement by any parties aggrieved thereby; and that if, prior to such hearing, there shall be presented to the recorder valid, written remonstrances of the owners of two-thirds of the property or two-thirds of the front footage of the property to be specially assessed by such improvement, then the improvement will be abandoned for at least six months, unless the improvement is a sidewalk or an improvement unanimously declared by the council to be needed at once because of an emergency; 

(3) A description of the property to be specially benefited by the improvement (which description may be by county tax lot numbers only), the owners of such property, and the estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the property to be specially benefited, and the total cost of the improvement to be paid for by special assessments to benefited properties. (Ord. 475 § 4, 2007)


3.10.050 Manner of doing work.

The council may provide in the improvement resolution that the construction work may be done in whole or in part by the city of Veneta or by a contract, or by any other governmental agency, or by any combination thereof. (Ord. 475 § 5, 2007)


3.10.060 Hearing.

At the time of the public hearing on the proposed improvement, if the written remonstrances shall represent less than the amount of property required to defeat the proposed improvement, if such an improvement is one that can be remonstrated against, then on the basis of such hearing of written remonstrances and oral objections, if any, the council may, by motion, at the time of said hearing or within 60 days thereafter, order said improvement to be carried out in accordance with the resolution, or the council may, on its own motion, abandon the improvement. When the council decides to proceed with the improvement, plans and specifications of the work to be done shall be prepared by the city engineer or other authorized person. (Ord. 475 § 6, 2007)


3.10.070 Call for bids.

(1) The council may, at its discretion, direct the city recorder to advertise for bids for construction of all or any part of the improvement project on the basis of the council-approved engineer’s report and before the passage of the resolution, or after the passage of the resolution and before the public hearing on the proposed improvement, or at any time after said public hearing; provided, however, that no contract shall be let until after the public hearing has been held to hear remonstrances and oral objections to the proposed improvement. In the event that any part of the work of the improvement is to be done under contract bids, then the council shall determine the time and manner of advertisement for bids; and the contracts shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder; provided, that the council shall have the right to reject all bids when they are deemed unreasonable or unsatisfactory. The city shall provide for the bonding of all contractors for the faithful performance of any contract let under its authority, and the provisions thereof in case of default shall be enforced by action in the name of the city of Veneta.

(2) If the council finds, upon opening bids for the work of such improvement, that the lowest responsible bid is substantially in excess of the engineer’s estimate, it may, in its discretion, provide for holding a special hearing of objections to the proceeding with the improvement on the basis of such bid, and it may direct the city recorder to publish one notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of Veneta. (Ord. 475 § 7, 2007)


3.10.080 Assessment.

If the council decides to make the improvement, when the estimated cost thereof is ascertained, the city engineer shall determine the amount of the assessments in accordance with VMC 3.10.090, to each specially benefited lot or parcel in the improvement district, including a proportionate share of overhead costs, such as the cost of engineering, interest on warrants, advertising, postage and supplies for mailing notices of assessments and bonding. (Ord. 475 § 8, 2007)


3.10.090 Method of assessment.

(1) The council shall:

(a) Use a fair and reasonable method for determining the extent of the improvement district boundaries that is consistent with the benefits derived.

(b) Use a fair and reasonable method for apportioning the actual cost or estimated cost of the local improvement among the benefited properties.

(2) The council may:

(a) Authorize payment by the city of all or any part of the cost of such improvements; provided, that the method selected creates a reasonable relation between the benefits derived by the property specially benefited and the benefits derived by the city as a whole. 

(b) At any time prior to the effective date of the ordinance levying the assessments for any improvement district, modify the method adopted in the resolution forming the improvement district if the council determines that a different method is a more just and reasonable method of apportioning the cost of the project to the properties benefited.

(c) Use any other means to finance improvements, including federal or state grants-in-aid, user charges or fees, revenue bonds, general obligation bonds, or any other legal means of finance to pay either all or any part of the cost of the improvements.

(3) In establishing a fair and reasonable method for apportioning the actual or estimated cost of local improvements among benefited properties, the council shall rely upon the following guidelines:

(a) Individual property owners shall pay for public improvements specially benefiting their property. The determination of benefit shall be made irrespective of whether the property is vacant or the owner elects to connect to the local improvements. Special costs or features of the improvement that benefit a particular parcel of property in a manner peculiar to that parcel shall, together with a share of the overhead for the improvement, be assessed separately against the parcel. 

(b) Costs of the improvement to be borne by the city shall be excluded from the assessment before apportionment. The city will pay the cost of:

(i) Extra capacity improvements when the size of the public improvements required exceed the minimum standards established in the specifications and standards for construction of public improvements adopted in accordance with Chapter 13.30 VMC, and the project has been included in the city budget document for the fiscal year during which construction of the improvement is scheduled; or

(ii) Special and unusual costs when the council determines that circumstances exist which warrant city payment of all or a portion of the cost of the public improvements.

(4) In establishing a fair and reasonable method for apportioning actual or estimated costs of local improvements among benefited properties, the council may, but in no way is required to, rely upon the following guidelines:

(a) Improvement Costs of Streets. Street improvement costs may include all improvements required or as established by the improvement district from right-of-way to right-of-way. Such improvements shall meet the minimum standards adopted under Chapter 13.30 VMC and may include improvement components associated with the street, including but not limited to:

(i) Complete street structure; 

(ii) Gutters, catch basins, inlets and other street stormwater improvements; 

(iii) Curbs; 

(iv) Sidewalks; 

(v) Driveways and other access means; 

(vi) Lighting; and 

(vii) Painting, striping, signals and signage. 

Costs shall be applied on a per linear foot basis, unless otherwise directed by the council or as interpreted in subsection (4)(h) of this section. Where a property owner requests or requires supplemental approach construction, the costs associated with that additional construction shall be assessed to the individual property owner.

(b) Improvement Costs of Sidewalks. Parcels abutting a sidewalk shall be liable for a proportionate share of the cost of the sidewalks, based on the front footage of the parcel abutting the sidewalk. Where, however, the council finds that construction of a sidewalk on both sides of the street is unnecessary or unfeasible, the cost of the sidewalk on one side of the street may be assessed to both the parcels abutting the sidewalk and the parcels on the opposite side of the street from the sidewalk.

(c) Improvement Costs of Surface Water Management. The cost to be assessed shall be apportioned to each parcel within the improvement district on the basis of its land area that contributes to or otherwise directly benefits from the city’s drainage system. 

(d) Improvement Costs of Water and Sewer Lines.

(i) The properties specially benefited by a sewer main or water pipe shall bear the cost of the system up to and including eight inches of pipe diameter. These costs shall be apportioned to each parcel on the basis of a cost per square foot of benefited property, determined by dividing the total system cost by the total improvement district area. 

(ii) In addition to main or pipe costs, each property benefited by a sewer main or water pipe shall be considered to have at least one service line connection point. If more than one service line connection point is provided for a benefited parcel, it shall be assessed for the actual number of service line connection points. All costs related to the service lines, including overhead costs, shall be divided by the total number of service line connection points to determine the cost per service line connection point. 

(e) Corner Lots. Corner lots may be exempted from an assessment for the first 100 feet of frontage on the side abutting a local improvement, or for the full length of the side abutting the improvement, whichever is shorter, if one or more of the following conditions exist and the city council grants an exemption:

(i) The local improvement is required to serve a new subdivision or new development, the corner lot is located outside the subdivision or development, and the corner lot will receive no benefit from the local improvement for which the assessment is levied; or 

(ii) The corner lot has two sides abutting the local improvement for which the assessment is levied and is being assessed for the full frontage of one side abutting the improvement; or

(iii) The council determines the corner lot receives no benefit from the local improvement for which the assessment is levied and the property has been previously assessed for the same type of local improvement on the side not abutting the local improvement for which the assessment is levied.

The city council need not grant a corner lot exemption if the council determines the property will receive a benefit from the local improvement for which the assessment is being levied.

(f) Minimum Frontage. All lots may be assessed for an equivalent front footage of no less than 60 feet.

(g) Benefited Property. A benefited property may be defined as one which is adjacent to any street, easement or right-of-way on which a local improvement is installed or, in the case of a water, surface water management, or wastewater sewer improvement, which reasonably is capable of connecting to, or directly benefiting from, the improvement. 

(h) Assessment Alternative. Assessment may be made at an average rate per square foot of land benefited, the average rate of assessment being the total assessed costs divided by the total area of land within the improvement district. The total area of land may constitute the total of the lot, parcel or tract of land served by the local improvement, up to a maximum of 100 feet from the street, easement, or right-of-way containing the local improvement. 

(i) Equal Assessments. If property owners of all or part of the benefited properties within the improvement district are in unanimous agreement, and so request, then their share of the improvement costs may be apportioned as an equal amount. (Ord. 475 § 9, 2007)


3.10.100 Assessment ordinance.

If the council determines that the local improvement shall be made when the estimated cost thereof is ascertained on the basis of the contract award or city departmental or other agency cost, or after the work is done and the cost thereof has been actually determined, the council shall determine whether the property benefited shall bear all or a portion of the cost. The recorder or other person designated by the council shall prepare the proposed assessment to the respective lots within the assessment district and file it in the appropriate city office. Notice of such proposed assessment shall be mailed or personally delivered to the owner of each lot proposed to be assessed, which notice shall state the amounts of assessment proposed on that property and shall fix a date by which time written objections shall be filed with the recorder. Any such objection shall state the grounds thereof. The council shall consider such objections and may adopt, correct, modify or revise the proposed assessment and shall determine the amount of assessment to be charged against each lot within the district, according to the special and peculiar benefits accruing thereto from the improvement, and shall by ordinance spread the assessments. (Ord. 475 § 10, 2007)


3.10.110 Notice of assessment.

Within 10 days after the ordinance levying assessments has been passed, the city recorder shall send by registered or certified mail a notice of assessment to the owner of the assessed property, and shall publish notice of such assessment once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of Veneta, the first publication of which shall be made not later than 10 days after the date of the assessment ordinance. The notice of assessment shall recite the date of the assessment ordinance and shall state that, upon the failure of the owner of the property assessed to make application to pay the assessment in installments within 10 days from the date of the first publication of notice, or upon the failure of the owner to pay the assessment in full within 30 days from the date of the assessment ordinance, then interest will commence to run on the assessment and that the property assessed will be subject to foreclosure. The mailed notices shall further set forth a description of the property assessed (which description may be by county tax lot numbers only), the name of the owner of the property, and the amount of the assessment. The published notice need only describe the project generally, and need not describe the specific properties assessed or the names of the property owners or the amounts of the assessments. (Ord. 475 § 11, 2007)


3.10.120 Deferred payment of assessments.

(1) To the extent that city funds are available and the requirements of this section through VMC 3.10.210 are met, a property owner may request deferred payment of special assessments for local improvements levied by the city.

(2) To be eligible for a deferment, the applicant must meet guidelines as set forth in VMC 3.10.130. 

(3) A property owner shall submit an application for deferred payment privileges to the city administrator within 30 days after an assessment is entered in the city lien docket or within such time as the city administrator may establish; and enter into a contract with the city to pay the assessment when the deferment is terminated. (Ord. 475 § 12, 2007)


3.10.130 Deferment eligibility.

To the extent that resources are available in the local improvements fund, deferral may be accorded eligible real property owners. 

(1) Collection of a portion of a construction assessment may be deferred if:

(a) The assessment is a result of an action by the city council; 

(b) The real property has the potential for development as more than one lot under applicable city standards and is located either:

(i) In a GR or SFR zone and is undeveloped real property, but not part of a phased development; or

(ii) In any zone and used for an owner-occupied single-family dwelling.

(c) The real property is used for an owner-occupied single-family dwelling, all owners must apply for the deferral and reside on the property as their principal residence, unless required to be absent for medical reasons. A life estate interest will not qualify a resident as an owner. A revocable inter vivos trust may qualify the resident as the owner, so long as the resident is both the trustor and beneficiary of the trust. Any other trust interest will not qualify a resident for a deferral;

(d) A funding source is available from a public entity or any other source approved by the council at the time the project is initiated that will provide the city with sufficient funds to ensure construction and that costs to other property owners do not increase; and 

(e) The city administrator finds that the deferral is consistent with council goals and policies, and otherwise is in the public interest. 

(2) Collection of an assessment for construction of a new or upgraded street opened through action of the council may be deferred when the abutting real property does not have driveway access to the street and is not developed for a purpose which makes use of the street. Abutting property taking access from the road over other abutting property shall not be eligible for assessment deferral under this section. The parcel shall be assessed for a minimum frontage of 60 feet. The costs for the remaining frontage may be deferred.

(3) Collection of a wastewater, sewer, water, or surface water management improvement assessment may be deferred when such improvements are installed that will provide a future benefit to undeveloped real property, as determined by the city council, and when connection will not be made immediately upon project completion. Deferral will be allowed only on the undeveloped portion of a parcel. Owners of vacant parcels shall pay a minimum assessment amount equal to that assessed a single-family dwelling. The remainder of the assessment may be deferred.

(4) Notwithstanding a deferral granted under this subsection, the owner of any real property affected by the deferral may elect to pay the assessment at the time it is levied, in the manner provided in this chapter.

(5) Following full payment of the assessment, the public entity or other source providing the temporary funds for construction of the improvement shall be reimbursed the amount it provided. (Ord. 475 § 13, 2007)


3.10.140 Financing of program.

(1) The city of Veneta local improvements fund will be used for the payment of construction costs or for the retirement of debt incurred by the city in connection with local improvement projects on which the payment of assessments has been deferred under this chapter.

(2) The initial funds for the program will be taken from interest earnings accumulated in the city of Veneta capital construction fund in an amount not to exceed 40 percent of the total accumulated interest earnings as of June 30th of the preceding fiscal year. Program resources shall be replenished from time to time by interest payments on deferred accounts, payments made when deferments are terminated, and by additional interest revenue from the capital construction fund.

(3) Deferments shall be granted on a pro rata or otherwise equitable basis, depending upon individual assessment amounts for applications received within the time period set under VMC 3.10.120(3) for submittal to the extent that program funds are available. (Ord. 475 § 14, 2007)


3.10.150 Interest.

Interest shall accrue at the same rate applicable to installment payments of special assessments under the Bancroft Bonding Act (ORS 223.205 through 223.300), and shall be calculated from the date the original assessments on the project became due. The interest shall accrue on the unpaid balance of any assessment for which payment has been deferred under this chapter and will be paid upon deferral payment or termination. (Ord. 475 § 15, 2007)


3.10.160 Administration.

(1) The city administrator shall be responsible for the administration of deferrals under this chapter and may:

(a) Adopt reasonable rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to special assessment deferral administration; 

(b) Prepare and make available all necessary forms. Such forms shall include a statement informing applicants of the possible deferral of special assessments for local improvements under the State of Oregon Department of Revenue Rules and ORS 311.702 through 311.735.

(2) The contract required under VMC 3.10.120(3) shall be in a form satisfactory to the city attorney; shall be binding on the heirs, successors and assigns to whom ownership of the property may be transferred; and may be recorded in the official records of Lane County, Oregon. The city administrator is hereby authorized to execute such contracts on behalf of the city.

(3) In determining eligibility, the city administrator shall follow the requirements of VMC 3.10.130.

(4) The city administrator shall notify any deferment applicant of the city administrator’s decision in writing. (Ord. 475 § 16, 2007)


3.10.170 Appeals.

Any person aggrieved by a deferral decision of the city administrator under this chapter may appeal it to the council by serving, within 10 days after the date of the notice containing the decision, a notice of appeal in writing on the city recorder specifying the grounds for objection to the decision. The council shall consider the matter and may sustain, modify or reverse the decision of the city administrator. (Ord. 475 § 17, 2007)


3.10.180 Termination of deferment.

(1) A deferment shall terminate if:

(a) The property owner defaults in the performance of the terms and provisions of the owner’s contract with the city or the contract term expires and is not renewed;

(b) Eligibility requirements are no longer met. This includes, but is not limited to, circumstances such as access to street are established or connection to improvement is made;

(c) Fee title and/or possessory interest in the property is sold or transferred, except sales or transfers to persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption;

(d) Subdivision or partition platting is initiated;

(e) A building permit is issued which allows the property use to intensify; or

(f) The property owner fails to comply with any rule or regulation adopted under this chapter; refuses to provide information to, or hinders any investigation by, the city administrator into the continued eligibility of the property owner for a deferment; willfully makes any false or misleading statement in order to obtain or retain a deferment; or receives benefits under this chapter with knowledge that the owner does not qualify for such benefits.

(2) Upon termination of the deferral, the owner of the real property shall thereupon be required to pay the assessment and accrued interest according to the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 475 § 18, 2007)


3.10.190 Confidentiality.

To the maximum extent possible under the law, the applications, records and other information relating to deferments shall be kept confidential by the city. (Ord. 475 § 19, 2007)


3.10.200 Lien.

Any assessment for which payment is deferred under this chapter shall continue to be a recorded lien on the affected property, notwithstanding the granting of a deferment. If the deferment is terminated, the lien may be enforced as though no deferment had ever been granted. (Ord. 475 § 20, 2007)


3.10.210 Installment payment terms.

The allowance of deferment under this chapter shall have no effect on the number of installment payment periods or terms of payment permitted under the Bancroft Bonding Act as they are now or hereafter constituted or amended. Once deferment is terminated, and if an installment agreement is entered into, each installment payment shall accrue at each successive payment period as though no deferment had been granted. (Ord. 475 § 21, 2007)


3.10.220 Lien records and foreclosure proceedings.

After passage of the assessment ordinance by the council, the city recorder shall enter in the docket of city liens a statement of the amounts assessed upon each particular lot, parcel of land or portion thereof, together with a description of the improvement, the name of the owners and the date of the assessment ordinance. Upon such entry in the lien docket, the amount so entered shall become a lien and charge upon the respective lots, parcels of land or portions thereof, which have been assessed for such improvement. All assessment liens of the city of Veneta shall be superior and prior to all other liens or encumbrances on property insofar as the laws of the state of Oregon permit. Interest shall be charged at a rate to be fixed by ordinance, not exceeding 10 percent per annum, until paid, on all amounts not paid within 30 days from the date of such assessment ordinance, and after expiration of 30 days from the date of such assessment ordinance, the city may proceed to foreclose or enforce collection of the assessment liens in the manner provided by the general law of the state of Oregon; provided, however, that the city may, at its option, enter a bid for the property being offered at a foreclosure sale, which bid shall be prior to all bids except those made by persons who would be entitled under the laws of the state of Oregon to redeem such property. (Ord. 475 § 22, 2007)


3.10.230 Errors in assessment calculations.

Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the attention of the city recorder, who shall determine whether there has been an error in fact. If the recorder shall find that there has been an error in fact, the recorder shall recommend to the council an amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct such error, and upon enactment of such amendment, the city recorder shall make the necessary correction in the docket of city liens and send a correct notice of assessment by registered or certified mail. (Ord. 475 § 23, 2007)


3.10.240 Deficit assessment.

In the event that an assessment shall be made before the total cost of the improvement is ascertained, and if it is found that the amount of the assessment is insufficient to defray the expenses of the improvement, the council may, by motion, declare such deficit and prepare a proposed deficit assessment. The council shall set a time for a hearing of objections to such deficit assessment and shall direct the city recorder to publish one notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of Veneta. After such hearing, the council shall make a just and equitable deficit assessment by ordinance, which shall be entered in the docket of city liens as provided by this chapter, and notices of the deficit assessment shall be published and mailed and the collection of the assessment shall be made in accordance with VMC 3.10.100 and 3.10.110. (Ord. 475 § 24, 2007)


3.10.250 Rebates.

If, upon the completion of the improvement project, it is found that the assessment previously levied upon any property is more than sufficient to pay the costs of such improvements, then the council must ascertain and declare the same by ordinance, and when so declared, the excess amounts must be entered on the lien docket as a credit upon the appropriate assessment. In the event that any assessment has been paid, the person who paid the same, or his legal representative, shall be entitled to the repayment of such rebate credit, or the portion thereof which exceeds the amount unpaid on the original assessment. (Ord. 475 § 25, 2007)


3.10.260 Abandonment of proceedings.

The council shall have full power and authority to abandon and rescind proceedings for improvements made under this chapter at any time prior to the final completion of such improvements; and if liens have been assessed upon any property under such procedure, they shall be cancelled, and any payments made on such assessments shall be refunded to the person paying the same, or his assigns or legal representatives. (Ord. 475 § 26, 2007)


3.10.270 Curative provisions.

No improvement assessment shall be rendered invalid by reason of a failure of the engineer’s report to contain all of the information required by VMC 3.10.020, or by reason of a failure to have all of the information required to be in the improvement resolution, the assessment ordinance, the lien docket or notices required to be published and mailed, nor by the failure to list the name of, or mail notice to, the owner of any property as required by this chapter, or by reason of any other error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity, or other act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in any of the proceedings or steps herein specified; unless it appears that the assessment is unfair or unjust in its effect upon the person complaining; and the council shall have the power and authority to remedy and correct all such matters by suitable action and proceedings. (Ord. 475 § 27, 2007)


3.10.280 Reassessment.

Whenever any assessment, deficit or reassessment for any improvement which has been made by the city has been, or shall be, set aside, annulled, declared or rendered void, or its enforcement restrained by any court of this state, or any federal court having jurisdiction thereof, or when the council shall be in doubt as to the validity of such assessment, deficit assessment, or reassessment, or any part thereof, then the council may make a reassessment in the manner provided by the laws of the state of Oregon. (Ord. 475 § 28, 2007)


3.10.290 Remedies.

Subject to the curative provisions of VMC 3.10.270 and the rights of the city to reassess as provided in VMC 3.10.280, proceedings for writs of review and suits in equity may be filed no later than 60 days after the passage by the council of the ordinance spreading the assessment; providing that the property owner shall have filed a written objection to the proposed assessment as provided in VMC 3.10.060, and shall not have paid the assessment or signed an application to pay the assessment in installments. Such property owner may commence a suit for equitable relief based on a total lack of jurisdiction on the part of the city; and if notice of the improvement shall not have been sent to the owner, and if the owner did not have actual knowledge of the proposed improvement prior to the hearing, then the owner may file written objections alleging lack of jurisdiction with the recorder within 30 days after receiving notice or knowledge of the improvement. No provision of this section shall be construed so as to lengthen any period of redemption, or so as to affect the running of any statute of limitation or equitable defense, including laches. Any proceeding on a writ of review or suit in equity shall be abated if proceedings are commenced and diligently pursued by the city to remedy or cure the alleged errors or defects. (Ord. 475 § 29, 2007)


Chapter 3.15 TRANSPORTATION UTILITY FEE

Sections:

3.15.010    Creation and purpose.

3.15.020    Definitions.

3.15.030    Administrative officers designated.

3.15.040    Transportation utility fees allocated to the transportation utility fee fund.

3.15.050    Determination of transportation utility fee.

3.15.060    Determination of amount, billing and collection of fee.

3.15.070    Exemption.

3.15.080    Waiver of fees in case of vacancy.

3.15.090    Reduction of fees for low income households.

3.15.100    Appeals.

3.15.110    Penalty.


3.15.010 Creation and purpose.

A transportation utility fee is created and imposed for the purpose of maintaining the city of Veneta’s streets. The transportation utility fee shall be paid by the responsible party for each billing unit or occupied unit of real property per the terms of this chapter. The purposes of the transportation utility fee are to charge users for the service the city provides in maintaining public streets and to ensure that maintenance occurs in a timely fashion, thereby reducing increased costs that result when maintenance is deferred. (Ord. 527 § 1, 2016)


3.15.020 Definitions.

Unless otherwise defined herein, terms used in this chapter have the meaning ascribed by VMC 3.20.005. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean:

“City” means the city of Veneta.

“City administrator” means the city’s administrator or the city administrator’s designee.

“Council” means the city council for the city of Veneta.

“Developed property” means a parcel or legal portion of real property, on which an improvement exists or has been constructed. Improvement on developed property includes, but is not limited to, buildings, parking lots, landscaping and outside storage.

“Finance director” means the city finance director or the finance director’s designee.

“Nonresidential property” means property that is not primarily used for personal domestic accommodation. Nonresidential property includes industrial, commercial, institutional, hotel and motel, group homes, and other nonresidential uses.

“Occupied unit” means any structure or any portion of any structure occupied for residential, commercial, industrial, or other purposes. For example, in a multifamily residential development, each dwelling unit shall be considered a separate occupied unit when occupied, and each retail outlet in a shopping mall shall be considered a separate occupied unit. An occupied unit may include more than one structure if all structures are part of the same dwelling unit or commercial or industrial operation. For example, an industrial site with several structures that form an integrated manufacturing process operated by a single manufacturer constitutes one occupied unit. Property that is undeveloped or, if developed, is not in current use is not considered an occupied unit.

“Public works director” means the city public works director or the public works director’s designee.

“Residential property” means property that is used primarily for personal domestic accommodation, including single-family, multifamily residential property and home occupations, but not including group homes, hotels and motels.

“Responsible party” means the person or persons who by occupancy or contractual arrangement are responsible to pay for utility and other services provided to an occupied unit. Unless another party has agreed in writing to pay and a copy of the writing is filed with the city, the person(s) paying the city’s water or sewer bill for an occupied unit shall be deemed the responsible party as to that occupied unit. For any occupied unit not otherwise required to pay a city utility bill, “responsible party” shall mean the person or persons legally entitled to occupancy of the occupied unit, unless another responsible party has agreed in writing to pay and a copy of the writing is filed with the city. Any person who has agreed in writing to pay is considered the responsible party if a copy of the writing is filed with the city.

“Street maintenance” means any action to maintain or improve city streets, including repair, renewal, resurfacing, replacement, and reconstruction. Street maintenance does not include work that increases the capacity of a street such as street widening, adding bike lanes or sidewalks, or the construction of new streets or street lighting. Street maintenance shall include resurfacing of existing streets; the repair, replacement or addition of curb and gutters; improving storm drainage; updating ADA access; repair or replacement of the entire existing street structural section; repair or replacement of existing street shoulders, pavement markers, striping and other street markings; repair or replacement of existing channelization devices; adjustment of existing utilities to match finish grades; and any other related work within existing streets. (Ord. 527 § 2, 2016)


3.15.030 Administrative officers designated.

(1) Except as provided in subsections (2) and (3) of this section, the city administrator shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter. The city administrator shall be responsible for developing administrative procedures for this chapter, administration of fees, and for the purposes of establishing the fee for a specific occupied unit, and the consideration and assignment of categories of use subject to appeal in accordance with this chapter.

(2) The public works director shall be responsible for developing and maintaining street maintenance programs for the maintenance of city streets and, subject to city budget committee review and city council approval, allocation and expenditure of budget resources for street system maintenance in accordance with this chapter.

(3) The finance director shall be responsible for the collection and calculation of fees. (Ord. 527 § 3, 2016)


3.15.040 Transportation utility fees allocated to the transportation utility fee fund.

(1) All transportation utility fees received shall be deposited into the street fund or other fund dedicated to the operation and maintenance of the city street system. Other revenue sources may also be used for street maintenance. Amounts in the street fund may be invested by the finance director in accordance with state law. Earnings from such investments shall be dedicated to the street fund.

(2) The street fund shall not be used for other governmental or proprietary purposes of the city, except to pay for an equitable share of the city’s overhead costs including accounting, management and other costs related to management and operation of the street maintenance program. Engineering design, pavement evaluation, construction management, and other related costs, including project advertisements for bid, in the implementation of the street maintenance projects shall also be considered as being used for street maintenance. (Ord. 527 § 4, 2016)


3.15.050 Determination of transportation utility fee.

(1) A transportation utility fee is hereby established and shall be based upon the following:

(a) The city’s priority corrective and preventative street maintenance projects.

(b) For residential property, the fee shall be charged on a per unit basis.

(c) For nonresidential property, the fee shall be charged on a per unit basis.

(2) The amount of the transportation utility fee shall be set by council resolution.

(3) The transportation utility fee program shall be reviewed annually as part of the city’s budget process.

(4) Following each review of the program, the finance director shall review the revenue received from the new rates after a full year of collection to determine if the annual revenues meet the annual funding level needed for the priority street maintenance projects. The finance director shall report the findings of that review to city council and may make recommendations on any potential fee increases or decreases based on that review. Any unspent funds will be carried over to the following year’s beginning fund balance for the street fund. (Ord. 527 § 5, 2016)


3.15.060 Determination of amount, billing and collection of fee.

(1) Based upon the fees set by council resolution, the finance director shall charge a per unit transportation utility fee to the responsible party for each billing unit with an active utility account or, for occupied units not connected to city water and/or sewer, to the responsible party for each occupied unit of residential and nonresidential property. The amount payable shall be redetermined if there is a change in use or development. All redeterminations based on a change in use or development shall be prospective only.

(2) The transportation utility fee shall be billed to and collected from the responsible party identified in subsection (1) of this section. Transportation utility fees shall be included as part of the water and sewer bill for billing units with active utility accounts, and included on an “other utility” bill for occupied units not connected to city water or sewer services. All such bills shall be rendered regularly by the finance director and shall become due and payable upon receipt.

(3) Collections from responsible parties will be applied first to interest and penalties, second to transportation utility fees, third to stormwater drainage fees, fourth to sanitary sewer service utilities, and last to water utilities.

(4) An account is delinquent if the transportation utility fee is not paid by the due date shown on the utility bill. The city may follow the procedures for collection of delinquent accounts as outlined in Chapters 3.20 and 3.25 VMC, including termination of water and sanitary sewer service.

(5) For newly developed properties, the fees imposed under this chapter shall become due and payable from and after the earlier of the date when the developed property is occupied or when city water or sanitary sewer system service is initiated. (Ord. 527 § 6, 2016)


3.15.070 Exemption.

Transportation utility fees imposed under this chapter shall apply to all billing units and occupied units per VMC 3.15.060(1), including property which may be entitled to exemption from or deferral of ad valorem property taxation. Such units owned or occupied by local, state and federal governments are exempt from the transportation utility fee. (Ord. 527 § 7, 2016)


3.15.080 Waiver of fees in case of vacancy.

(1) When any developed property within the city becomes vacant as described in subsection (5) of this section, upon written application by the responsible party and approval by the finance director, the transportation utility fee shall thereafter not be billed until such time as the property is no longer vacant.

(2) The finance director is authorized to cause an investigation of any property for which an application for determination of vacancy is submitted to verify any of the information contained in the application. The finance director is further authorized to develop and use a standard form of application, provided it shall contain a space for verification of the information and the person signing such form affirms under penalty for false swearing the accuracy of the information provided therein.

(3) When any developed property within the city has the utilities shut off due to vacancy, the transportation utility fee shall be waived for the duration of the vacancy as described in subsection (5) of this section.

(4) When a change of use occurs, a vacancy has been filled, or a property is developed, it is the responsible party’s responsibility to inform the city of any change so the proper transportation utility fees may be assessed. If the responsible party does not inform the city of any change, the city shall cancel the vacancy waiver and charge the responsible party as per subsection (5) of this section.

(5) For purposes of this section, developed property is vacant when it has been continuously unoccupied and unused for at least 30 days. Fees shall be waived in accordance with this section only while the property remains vacant. The waiver duration is for six months. After six months, the responsible party must reapply for the waiver if the property continues to be unoccupied and unused. The responsible party has 30 days to reapply for the vacancy waiver after the expiration of the six-month waiver. Any occupancy or use of the property terminates the waiver. As a penalty for not reporting a change in property vacancy, the city may charge any property two times the appropriate transportation utility fee that would have been due without the vacancy waiver for prior billing periods, upon determining, in city’s sole discretion, that the property did not qualify for waiver of charges during the relevant time. The decision of the finance director under subsections (1), (2), and (5) of this section is final. (Ord. 527 § 8, 2016)


3.15.090 Reduction of fees for low income households.

Upon written application by the responsible party and approval by the finance director, occupied units receiving or otherwise eligible for a reduction in water and sewer base fees per the city’s low-income eligibility policy shall receive a commensurate reduction in the transportation utility fee charged. The finance director’s decision under this section is final. (Ord. 527 § 9, 2016)


3.15.100 Appeals.

(1) The city administrator shall have the initial authority and responsibility to interpret all terms, provisions and requirements of this chapter and to determine the appropriate charges thereunder. The responsible party for an occupied unit may request reconsideration of the public work director’s determination of the amount of the fee by submission of a written application to the city administrator. The application shall be supported with sufficient factual details to enable the city administrator to render a decision.

(2) Within 30 days of the submission of a complete application requesting reconsideration of the amount of the transportation utility fee to be charged to an occupied unit, the city administrator shall render a decision on the application. The decision shall be written and shall include findings of fact and conclusions for the particular aspects of the decision, based upon applicable criteria. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the person submitting the request.

(3) For the purpose of reviewing the fee, the city administrator may determine that the land use category is proper and that the fee charged is appropriate. However, if the decision of the city administrator results in a change in the category of land use, the city administrator shall, for the purpose of establishing the fee, assign a new use category, and notify the finance director so that the appropriate change may be made in the applicable fee to be charged in the future. No back charges or refunds are required.

(4) The responsible party may appeal the city administrator’s determination to the council. The notice of appeal must be filed in writing within 10 days of the date notice of change of category of land use and determination of fee is sent and must be filed with the office of the city administrator in writing, stating:

(a) The name and address of the appellant.

(b) The address of the affected premises.

(c) The nature of the determination being appealed.

(d) The reason the determination is incorrect.

(e) What the correct determination of the appeal should be.

A responsible party who fails to file such a statement within the time permitted waives his or her objections and the appeal shall be dismissed. If notice of appeal is properly filed, except in an emergency, the city shall take no enforcement action regarding the responsible party’s failure to pay the transportation utility fee until the council renders a final determination on the appeal.

At its next available meeting, the council shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the written statement and such additional evidence as the council deems appropriate. The appellant shall be allowed at least 10 days’ written notice of the hearing on appeal. At the hearing the appellant may present testimony and oral argument personally or by counsel, and additional evidence. The rules of evidence as used by courts of law do not apply. The decision of the council shall be in writing and shall contain findings of fact that substantiate the council’s decision. The decision shall be mailed to the appellant within 10 days of the completion of the appeal hearing. The decision of the council shall be final. (Ord. 527 § 10, 2016)


3.15.110 Penalty.

In addition to any other remedy, violation of any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, constitute a violation punishable by a maximum fine of $360.00. Each day of delinquency in paying the transportation utility fee constitutes a separate violation. (Ord. 527 § 11, 2016)


Chapter 3.15 TRANSPORTATION UTILITY FEE

Sections:

3.15.010    Creation and purpose.

3.15.020    Definitions.

3.15.030    Administrative officers designated.

3.15.040    Transportation utility fees allocated to the transportation utility fee fund.

3.15.050    Determination of transportation utility fee.

3.15.060    Determination of amount, billing and collection of fee.

3.15.070    Exemption.

3.15.080    Waiver of fees in case of vacancy.

3.15.090    Reduction of fees for low income households.

3.15.100    Appeals.

3.15.110    Penalty.


3.15.010 Creation and purpose.

A transportation utility fee is created and imposed for the purpose of maintaining the city of Veneta’s streets. The transportation utility fee shall be paid by the responsible party for each billing unit or occupied unit of real property per the terms of this chapter. The purposes of the transportation utility fee are to charge users for the service the city provides in maintaining public streets and to ensure that maintenance occurs in a timely fashion, thereby reducing increased costs that result when maintenance is deferred. (Ord. 527 § 1, 2016)


3.15.020 Definitions.

Unless otherwise defined herein, terms used in this chapter have the meaning ascribed by VMC 3.20.005. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean:

“City” means the city of Veneta.

“City administrator” means the city’s administrator or the city administrator’s designee.

“Council” means the city council for the city of Veneta.

“Developed property” means a parcel or legal portion of real property, on which an improvement exists or has been constructed. Improvement on developed property includes, but is not limited to, buildings, parking lots, landscaping and outside storage.

“Finance director” means the city finance director or the finance director’s designee.

“Nonresidential property” means property that is not primarily used for personal domestic accommodation. Nonresidential property includes industrial, commercial, institutional, hotel and motel, group homes, and other nonresidential uses.

“Occupied unit” means any structure or any portion of any structure occupied for residential, commercial, industrial, or other purposes. For example, in a multifamily residential development, each dwelling unit shall be considered a separate occupied unit when occupied, and each retail outlet in a shopping mall shall be considered a separate occupied unit. An occupied unit may include more than one structure if all structures are part of the same dwelling unit or commercial or industrial operation. For example, an industrial site with several structures that form an integrated manufacturing process operated by a single manufacturer constitutes one occupied unit. Property that is undeveloped or, if developed, is not in current use is not considered an occupied unit.

“Public works director” means the city public works director or the public works director’s designee.

“Residential property” means property that is used primarily for personal domestic accommodation, including single-family, multifamily residential property and home occupations, but not including group homes, hotels and motels.

“Responsible party” means the person or persons who by occupancy or contractual arrangement are responsible to pay for utility and other services provided to an occupied unit. Unless another party has agreed in writing to pay and a copy of the writing is filed with the city, the person(s) paying the city’s water or sewer bill for an occupied unit shall be deemed the responsible party as to that occupied unit. For any occupied unit not otherwise required to pay a city utility bill, “responsible party” shall mean the person or persons legally entitled to occupancy of the occupied unit, unless another responsible party has agreed in writing to pay and a copy of the writing is filed with the city. Any person who has agreed in writing to pay is considered the responsible party if a copy of the writing is filed with the city.

“Street maintenance” means any action to maintain or improve city streets, including repair, renewal, resurfacing, replacement, and reconstruction. Street maintenance does not include work that increases the capacity of a street such as street widening, adding bike lanes or sidewalks, or the construction of new streets or street lighting. Street maintenance shall include resurfacing of existing streets; the repair, replacement or addition of curb and gutters; improving storm drainage; updating ADA access; repair or replacement of the entire existing street structural section; repair or replacement of existing street shoulders, pavement markers, striping and other street markings; repair or replacement of existing channelization devices; adjustment of existing utilities to match finish grades; and any other related work within existing streets. (Ord. 527 § 2, 2016)


3.15.030 Administrative officers designated.

(1) Except as provided in subsections (2) and (3) of this section, the city administrator shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter. The city administrator shall be responsible for developing administrative procedures for this chapter, administration of fees, and for the purposes of establishing the fee for a specific occupied unit, and the consideration and assignment of categories of use subject to appeal in accordance with this chapter.

(2) The public works director shall be responsible for developing and maintaining street maintenance programs for the maintenance of city streets and, subject to city budget committee review and city council approval, allocation and expenditure of budget resources for street system maintenance in accordance with this chapter.

(3) The finance director shall be responsible for the collection and calculation of fees. (Ord. 527 § 3, 2016)


3.15.040 Transportation utility fees allocated to the transportation utility fee fund.

(1) All transportation utility fees received shall be deposited into the street fund or other fund dedicated to the operation and maintenance of the city street system. Other revenue sources may also be used for street maintenance. Amounts in the street fund may be invested by the finance director in accordance with state law. Earnings from such investments shall be dedicated to the street fund.

(2) The street fund shall not be used for other governmental or proprietary purposes of the city, except to pay for an equitable share of the city’s overhead costs including accounting, management and other costs related to management and operation of the street maintenance program. Engineering design, pavement evaluation, construction management, and other related costs, including project advertisements for bid, in the implementation of the street maintenance projects shall also be considered as being used for street maintenance. (Ord. 527 § 4, 2016)


3.15.050 Determination of transportation utility fee.

(1) A transportation utility fee is hereby established and shall be based upon the following:

(a) The city’s priority corrective and preventative street maintenance projects.

(b) For residential property, the fee shall be charged on a per unit basis.

(c) For nonresidential property, the fee shall be charged on a per unit basis.

(2) The amount of the transportation utility fee shall be set by council resolution.

(3) The transportation utility fee program shall be reviewed annually as part of the city’s budget process.

(4) Following each review of the program, the finance director shall review the revenue received from the new rates after a full year of collection to determine if the annual revenues meet the annual funding level needed for the priority street maintenance projects. The finance director shall report the findings of that review to city council and may make recommendations on any potential fee increases or decreases based on that review. Any unspent funds will be carried over to the following year’s beginning fund balance for the street fund. (Ord. 527 § 5, 2016)


3.15.060 Determination of amount, billing and collection of fee.

(1) Based upon the fees set by council resolution, the finance director shall charge a per unit transportation utility fee to the responsible party for each billing unit with an active utility account or, for occupied units not connected to city water and/or sewer, to the responsible party for each occupied unit of residential and nonresidential property. The amount payable shall be redetermined if there is a change in use or development. All redeterminations based on a change in use or development shall be prospective only.

(2) The transportation utility fee shall be billed to and collected from the responsible party identified in subsection (1) of this section. Transportation utility fees shall be included as part of the water and sewer bill for billing units with active utility accounts, and included on an “other utility” bill for occupied units not connected to city water or sewer services. All such bills shall be rendered regularly by the finance director and shall become due and payable upon receipt.

(3) Collections from responsible parties will be applied first to interest and penalties, second to transportation utility fees, third to stormwater drainage fees, fourth to sanitary sewer service utilities, and last to water utilities.

(4) An account is delinquent if the transportation utility fee is not paid by the due date shown on the utility bill. The city may follow the procedures for collection of delinquent accounts as outlined in Chapters 3.20 and 3.25 VMC, including termination of water and sanitary sewer service.

(5) For newly developed properties, the fees imposed under this chapter shall become due and payable from and after the earlier of the date when the developed property is occupied or when city water or sanitary sewer system service is initiated. (Ord. 527 § 6, 2016)


3.15.070 Exemption.

Transportation utility fees imposed under this chapter shall apply to all billing units and occupied units per VMC 3.15.060(1), including property which may be entitled to exemption from or deferral of ad valorem property taxation. Such units owned or occupied by local, state and federal governments are exempt from the transportation utility fee. (Ord. 527 § 7, 2016)


3.15.080 Waiver of fees in case of vacancy.

(1) When any developed property within the city becomes vacant as described in subsection (5) of this section, upon written application by the responsible party and approval by the finance director, the transportation utility fee shall thereafter not be billed until such time as the property is no longer vacant.

(2) The finance director is authorized to cause an investigation of any property for which an application for determination of vacancy is submitted to verify any of the information contained in the application. The finance director is further authorized to develop and use a standard form of application, provided it shall contain a space for verification of the information and the person signing such form affirms under penalty for false swearing the accuracy of the information provided therein.

(3) When any developed property within the city has the utilities shut off due to vacancy, the transportation utility fee shall be waived for the duration of the vacancy as described in subsection (5) of this section.

(4) When a change of use occurs, a vacancy has been filled, or a property is developed, it is the responsible party’s responsibility to inform the city of any change so the proper transportation utility fees may be assessed. If the responsible party does not inform the city of any change, the city shall cancel the vacancy waiver and charge the responsible party as per subsection (5) of this section.

(5) For purposes of this section, developed property is vacant when it has been continuously unoccupied and unused for at least 30 days. Fees shall be waived in accordance with this section only while the property remains vacant. The waiver duration is for six months. After six months, the responsible party must reapply for the waiver if the property continues to be unoccupied and unused. The responsible party has 30 days to reapply for the vacancy waiver after the expiration of the six-month waiver. Any occupancy or use of the property terminates the waiver. As a penalty for not reporting a change in property vacancy, the city may charge any property two times the appropriate transportation utility fee that would have been due without the vacancy waiver for prior billing periods, upon determining, in city’s sole discretion, that the property did not qualify for waiver of charges during the relevant time. The decision of the finance director under subsections (1), (2), and (5) of this section is final. (Ord. 527 § 8, 2016)


3.15.090 Reduction of fees for low income households.

Upon written application by the responsible party and approval by the finance director, occupied units receiving or otherwise eligible for a reduction in water and sewer base fees per the city’s low-income eligibility policy shall receive a commensurate reduction in the transportation utility fee charged. The finance director’s decision under this section is final. (Ord. 527 § 9, 2016)


3.15.100 Appeals.

(1) The city administrator shall have the initial authority and responsibility to interpret all terms, provisions and requirements of this chapter and to determine the appropriate charges thereunder. The responsible party for an occupied unit may request reconsideration of the public work director’s determination of the amount of the fee by submission of a written application to the city administrator. The application shall be supported with sufficient factual details to enable the city administrator to render a decision.

(2) Within 30 days of the submission of a complete application requesting reconsideration of the amount of the transportation utility fee to be charged to an occupied unit, the city administrator shall render a decision on the application. The decision shall be written and shall include findings of fact and conclusions for the particular aspects of the decision, based upon applicable criteria. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the person submitting the request.

(3) For the purpose of reviewing the fee, the city administrator may determine that the land use category is proper and that the fee charged is appropriate. However, if the decision of the city administrator results in a change in the category of land use, the city administrator shall, for the purpose of establishing the fee, assign a new use category, and notify the finance director so that the appropriate change may be made in the applicable fee to be charged in the future. No back charges or refunds are required.

(4) The responsible party may appeal the city administrator’s determination to the council. The notice of appeal must be filed in writing within 10 days of the date notice of change of category of land use and determination of fee is sent and must be filed with the office of the city administrator in writing, stating:

(a) The name and address of the appellant.

(b) The address of the affected premises.

(c) The nature of the determination being appealed.

(d) The reason the determination is incorrect.

(e) What the correct determination of the appeal should be.

A responsible party who fails to file such a statement within the time permitted waives his or her objections and the appeal shall be dismissed. If notice of appeal is properly filed, except in an emergency, the city shall take no enforcement action regarding the responsible party’s failure to pay the transportation utility fee until the council renders a final determination on the appeal.

At its next available meeting, the council shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the written statement and such additional evidence as the council deems appropriate. The appellant shall be allowed at least 10 days’ written notice of the hearing on appeal. At the hearing the appellant may present testimony and oral argument personally or by counsel, and additional evidence. The rules of evidence as used by courts of law do not apply. The decision of the council shall be in writing and shall contain findings of fact that substantiate the council’s decision. The decision shall be mailed to the appellant within 10 days of the completion of the appeal hearing. The decision of the council shall be final. (Ord. 527 § 10, 2016)


3.15.110 Penalty.

In addition to any other remedy, violation of any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, constitute a violation punishable by a maximum fine of $360.00. Each day of delinquency in paying the transportation utility fee constitutes a separate violation. (Ord. 527 § 11, 2016)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



3.20.005 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean:

Active. All utility accounts are considered “active” unless the city has been notified in writing, on a form provided by the city, of the responsible party’s intention to temporarily or permanently inactivate the responsible party’s account and to stop receiving utility services or other services at a particular billing unit, occupied unit or developed property.

“Billing unit” means any structure or any portion of any structure intended for residential, commercial, industrial, or other uses. For example, in a multifamily residential development, each dwelling unit shall be considered a separate billing unit, and each retail outlet or nonresidential operation in a shopping mall shall be considered a separate billing unit.

“City” means the city of Veneta, Oregon.

“City administrator” means the city’s administrator or the city administrator’s designee.

“City system” means the city’s property, infrastructure, service yard, and offices connected therewith, clerical or field, existing and necessary for the provision of water, sewage, transportation and stormwater services, individually or combined, within and without the limits of the city of Veneta, Oregon.

“Developed property” means a parcel or legal portion of real property, on which improvements exist or are being constructed. The term “improvement” includes, but is not limited to, buildings, parking lots, landscaping and outside storage.

“Dwelling unit” means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities, designed for occupancy by one family and including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

“Finance director” means the city finance director or the finance director’s designee.

“Nonresidential property” means property that is not primarily used for personal domestic accommodation. Nonresidential property includes industrial, commercial, institutional, hotels and motels, and other nonresidential uses. Also includes property with facilities for residential homes and/or care as defined in the city’s land development ordinance.

“Other services” means the existence and availability for use of streets, pathways, bike lanes, stormwater infrastructure and drainage ways.

“Owner” means the owner or owners of record title, or the purchaser or purchasers under a recorded land sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in the described real property.

“Past due notice” means the notice stating that a utility account is past due and delinquent and that failure to submit required payment will jeopardize the continuance of utility or other services to the billing unit, occupied unit or developed property.

“Person” means any individual, firm, co-partnership, association, corporation, or other legally recognized organization.

“Premises” means a parcel of land within the Veneta city limits that receives services or has the potential to receive services from one or more of the city’s systems.

“Public works director” means the city public works director or the public works director’s designee.

“Residential property” means property that is used primarily for personal domestic accommodation, including single-family, multifamily residential property and home occupations, but not including hotels and motels or other uses listed in the definition of “nonresidential property.”

“Responsible party” means the person or persons who by occupancy or ownership use one or more city utility and other services, or by contractual arrangement on file with city are responsible to pay for utility and other services provided to a billing unit, occupied unit or developed property.

“Service month” means a period that begins with the first day of each calendar month and ends with the last day of that month.

“Utility account” means the account set up for each responsible party to record billings, payments, adjustments, and other information pertaining to city’s provision of utility services and/or other services.

“Utility services” means the city’s provision of water to and sewage removal from a billing unit, occupied unit or developed property. (Ord. 530 § 1, 2016)


3.20.010 Deposit.

(1) The city shall bill the responsible party a deposit amount as established by council resolution to guarantee the payment for services rendered to such premises whenever:

(a) An application for city utility services is approved to a premises having no prior service;

(b) An application is approved for services to a premises having an existing service, said application made for reasons of change in property ownership, responsible party or other persons;

(c) An application is approved for services or restoration of services to a premises having been disconnected or service discontinued by the city for delinquency of payment or other violations of this code or other causes; or

(d) Any deposit on record is applied, in whole or in part, to a utility account unpaid balance and the responsible party has not provided written notice of service termination per VMC 3.25.055.

(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, no deposit shall be required of any responsible party agreeing to accept services from the city prior to construction of the applicable city system until said system is constructed and the premises are connected.

(3) Such deposits, when paid, shall be recorded in the city’s financial records and held as payable. Reductions of the payable amount shall occur when deposits are refunded or applied to the unpaid balances of utility accounts. (Ord. 530 § 1, 2016)


3.20.015 Deposit refund – Conditions.

Whenever any water or sewer deposit required by the Veneta Municipal Code (VMC) or by the city’s resolutions, has been on file with the city for at least two years, and whenever during such two-year period all amounts billed on the utility account have been paid on a regular and timely basis, such responsible party may, after such period, make written application for and be granted a refund of the deposit amount. This section shall be subject to the remaining sections of this chapter. (Ord. 530 § 1, 2016)


3.20.020 Reposting of deposit – Conditions.

If, at any time after such deposit refund is made to a responsible party, the responsible party becomes consistently delinquent in making payments on the associated utility account or to the extent that it is necessary to issue a “past due notice,” the city, as a condition of continuation or reconnection of service, shall require such deposit to be repaid on the utility account. (Ord. 530 § 1, 2016)


3.20.030 Deduction of unpaid balances on utility account.

Whenever a responsible party shall apply for the refund of the deposit, whether because of the provisions of this chapter or those of the VMC or whenever a responsible party requests, in writing on forms provided by the city, a discontinuance of service due to vacating the premises the city shall first apply said deposit to any unpaid balance on the responsible party’s utility account and for services rendered by the city and billable, before remitting any excess to the responsible party upon termination of their utility account. (Ord. 530 § 1, 2016)


3.20.035 Minimum amount of deposit refund.

If the deposit amount remaining after applying amounts due to the city, per VMC 3.20.030, is $5.00 or more, a refund check shall be issued to the responsible party and mailed to the responsible party’s last known address. Deposit amounts of less than $5.00 shall be forfeited to the city by the responsible party. (Ord. 530 § 1, 2016)


Chapter 3.15 TRANSPORTATION UTILITY FEE

Sections:

3.15.010    Creation and purpose.

3.15.020    Definitions.

3.15.030    Administrative officers designated.

3.15.040    Transportation utility fees allocated to the transportation utility fee fund.

3.15.050    Determination of transportation utility fee.

3.15.060    Determination of amount, billing and collection of fee.

3.15.070    Exemption.

3.15.080    Waiver of fees in case of vacancy.

3.15.090    Reduction of fees for low income households.

3.15.100    Appeals.

3.15.110    Penalty.


3.15.010 Creation and purpose.

A transportation utility fee is created and imposed for the purpose of maintaining the city of Veneta’s streets. The transportation utility fee shall be paid by the responsible party for each billing unit or occupied unit of real property per the terms of this chapter. The purposes of the transportation utility fee are to charge users for the service the city provides in maintaining public streets and to ensure that maintenance occurs in a timely fashion, thereby reducing increased costs that result when maintenance is deferred. (Ord. 527 § 1, 2016)


3.15.020 Definitions.

Unless otherwise defined herein, terms used in this chapter have the meaning ascribed by VMC 3.20.005. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean:

“City” means the city of Veneta.

“City administrator” means the city’s administrator or the city administrator’s designee.

“Council” means the city council for the city of Veneta.

“Developed property” means a parcel or legal portion of real property, on which an improvement exists or has been constructed. Improvement on developed property includes, but is not limited to, buildings, parking lots, landscaping and outside storage.

“Finance director” means the city finance director or the finance director’s designee.

“Nonresidential property” means property that is not primarily used for personal domestic accommodation. Nonresidential property includes industrial, commercial, institutional, hotel and motel, group homes, and other nonresidential uses.

“Occupied unit” means any structure or any portion of any structure occupied for residential, commercial, industrial, or other purposes. For example, in a multifamily residential development, each dwelling unit shall be considered a separate occupied unit when occupied, and each retail outlet in a shopping mall shall be considered a separate occupied unit. An occupied unit may include more than one structure if all structures are part of the same dwelling unit or commercial or industrial operation. For example, an industrial site with several structures that form an integrated manufacturing process operated by a single manufacturer constitutes one occupied unit. Property that is undeveloped or, if developed, is not in current use is not considered an occupied unit.

“Public works director” means the city public works director or the public works director’s designee.

“Residential property” means property that is used primarily for personal domestic accommodation, including single-family, multifamily residential property and home occupations, but not including group homes, hotels and motels.

“Responsible party” means the person or persons who by occupancy or contractual arrangement are responsible to pay for utility and other services provided to an occupied unit. Unless another party has agreed in writing to pay and a copy of the writing is filed with the city, the person(s) paying the city’s water or sewer bill for an occupied unit shall be deemed the responsible party as to that occupied unit. For any occupied unit not otherwise required to pay a city utility bill, “responsible party” shall mean the person or persons legally entitled to occupancy of the occupied unit, unless another responsible party has agreed in writing to pay and a copy of the writing is filed with the city. Any person who has agreed in writing to pay is considered the responsible party if a copy of the writing is filed with the city.

“Street maintenance” means any action to maintain or improve city streets, including repair, renewal, resurfacing, replacement, and reconstruction. Street maintenance does not include work that increases the capacity of a street such as street widening, adding bike lanes or sidewalks, or the construction of new streets or street lighting. Street maintenance shall include resurfacing of existing streets; the repair, replacement or addition of curb and gutters; improving storm drainage; updating ADA access; repair or replacement of the entire existing street structural section; repair or replacement of existing street shoulders, pavement markers, striping and other street markings; repair or replacement of existing channelization devices; adjustment of existing utilities to match finish grades; and any other related work within existing streets. (Ord. 527 § 2, 2016)


3.15.030 Administrative officers designated.

(1) Except as provided in subsections (2) and (3) of this section, the city administrator shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter. The city administrator shall be responsible for developing administrative procedures for this chapter, administration of fees, and for the purposes of establishing the fee for a specific occupied unit, and the consideration and assignment of categories of use subject to appeal in accordance with this chapter.

(2) The public works director shall be responsible for developing and maintaining street maintenance programs for the maintenance of city streets and, subject to city budget committee review and city council approval, allocation and expenditure of budget resources for street system maintenance in accordance with this chapter.

(3) The finance director shall be responsible for the collection and calculation of fees. (Ord. 527 § 3, 2016)


3.15.040 Transportation utility fees allocated to the transportation utility fee fund.

(1) All transportation utility fees received shall be deposited into the street fund or other fund dedicated to the operation and maintenance of the city street system. Other revenue sources may also be used for street maintenance. Amounts in the street fund may be invested by the finance director in accordance with state law. Earnings from such investments shall be dedicated to the street fund.

(2) The street fund shall not be used for other governmental or proprietary purposes of the city, except to pay for an equitable share of the city’s overhead costs including accounting, management and other costs related to management and operation of the street maintenance program. Engineering design, pavement evaluation, construction management, and other related costs, including project advertisements for bid, in the implementation of the street maintenance projects shall also be considered as being used for street maintenance. (Ord. 527 § 4, 2016)


3.15.050 Determination of transportation utility fee.

(1) A transportation utility fee is hereby established and shall be based upon the following:

(a) The city’s priority corrective and preventative street maintenance projects.

(b) For residential property, the fee shall be charged on a per unit basis.

(c) For nonresidential property, the fee shall be charged on a per unit basis.

(2) The amount of the transportation utility fee shall be set by council resolution.

(3) The transportation utility fee program shall be reviewed annually as part of the city’s budget process.

(4) Following each review of the program, the finance director shall review the revenue received from the new rates after a full year of collection to determine if the annual revenues meet the annual funding level needed for the priority street maintenance projects. The finance director shall report the findings of that review to city council and may make recommendations on any potential fee increases or decreases based on that review. Any unspent funds will be carried over to the following year’s beginning fund balance for the street fund. (Ord. 527 § 5, 2016)


3.15.060 Determination of amount, billing and collection of fee.

(1) Based upon the fees set by council resolution, the finance director shall charge a per unit transportation utility fee to the responsible party for each billing unit with an active utility account or, for occupied units not connected to city water and/or sewer, to the responsible party for each occupied unit of residential and nonresidential property. The amount payable shall be redetermined if there is a change in use or development. All redeterminations based on a change in use or development shall be prospective only.

(2) The transportation utility fee shall be billed to and collected from the responsible party identified in subsection (1) of this section. Transportation utility fees shall be included as part of the water and sewer bill for billing units with active utility accounts, and included on an “other utility” bill for occupied units not connected to city water or sewer services. All such bills shall be rendered regularly by the finance director and shall become due and payable upon receipt.

(3) Collections from responsible parties will be applied first to interest and penalties, second to transportation utility fees, third to stormwater drainage fees, fourth to sanitary sewer service utilities, and last to water utilities.

(4) An account is delinquent if the transportation utility fee is not paid by the due date shown on the utility bill. The city may follow the procedures for collection of delinquent accounts as outlined in Chapters 3.20 and 3.25 VMC, including termination of water and sanitary sewer service.

(5) For newly developed properties, the fees imposed under this chapter shall become due and payable from and after the earlier of the date when the developed property is occupied or when city water or sanitary sewer system service is initiated. (Ord. 527 § 6, 2016)


3.15.070 Exemption.

Transportation utility fees imposed under this chapter shall apply to all billing units and occupied units per VMC 3.15.060(1), including property which may be entitled to exemption from or deferral of ad valorem property taxation. Such units owned or occupied by local, state and federal governments are exempt from the transportation utility fee. (Ord. 527 § 7, 2016)


3.15.080 Waiver of fees in case of vacancy.

(1) When any developed property within the city becomes vacant as described in subsection (5) of this section, upon written application by the responsible party and approval by the finance director, the transportation utility fee shall thereafter not be billed until such time as the property is no longer vacant.

(2) The finance director is authorized to cause an investigation of any property for which an application for determination of vacancy is submitted to verify any of the information contained in the application. The finance director is further authorized to develop and use a standard form of application, provided it shall contain a space for verification of the information and the person signing such form affirms under penalty for false swearing the accuracy of the information provided therein.

(3) When any developed property within the city has the utilities shut off due to vacancy, the transportation utility fee shall be waived for the duration of the vacancy as described in subsection (5) of this section.

(4) When a change of use occurs, a vacancy has been filled, or a property is developed, it is the responsible party’s responsibility to inform the city of any change so the proper transportation utility fees may be assessed. If the responsible party does not inform the city of any change, the city shall cancel the vacancy waiver and charge the responsible party as per subsection (5) of this section.

(5) For purposes of this section, developed property is vacant when it has been continuously unoccupied and unused for at least 30 days. Fees shall be waived in accordance with this section only while the property remains vacant. The waiver duration is for six months. After six months, the responsible party must reapply for the waiver if the property continues to be unoccupied and unused. The responsible party has 30 days to reapply for the vacancy waiver after the expiration of the six-month waiver. Any occupancy or use of the property terminates the waiver. As a penalty for not reporting a change in property vacancy, the city may charge any property two times the appropriate transportation utility fee that would have been due without the vacancy waiver for prior billing periods, upon determining, in city’s sole discretion, that the property did not qualify for waiver of charges during the relevant time. The decision of the finance director under subsections (1), (2), and (5) of this section is final. (Ord. 527 § 8, 2016)


3.15.090 Reduction of fees for low income households.

Upon written application by the responsible party and approval by the finance director, occupied units receiving or otherwise eligible for a reduction in water and sewer base fees per the city’s low-income eligibility policy shall receive a commensurate reduction in the transportation utility fee charged. The finance director’s decision under this section is final. (Ord. 527 § 9, 2016)


3.15.100 Appeals.

(1) The city administrator shall have the initial authority and responsibility to interpret all terms, provisions and requirements of this chapter and to determine the appropriate charges thereunder. The responsible party for an occupied unit may request reconsideration of the public work director’s determination of the amount of the fee by submission of a written application to the city administrator. The application shall be supported with sufficient factual details to enable the city administrator to render a decision.

(2) Within 30 days of the submission of a complete application requesting reconsideration of the amount of the transportation utility fee to be charged to an occupied unit, the city administrator shall render a decision on the application. The decision shall be written and shall include findings of fact and conclusions for the particular aspects of the decision, based upon applicable criteria. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the person submitting the request.

(3) For the purpose of reviewing the fee, the city administrator may determine that the land use category is proper and that the fee charged is appropriate. However, if the decision of the city administrator results in a change in the category of land use, the city administrator shall, for the purpose of establishing the fee, assign a new use category, and notify the finance director so that the appropriate change may be made in the applicable fee to be charged in the future. No back charges or refunds are required.

(4) The responsible party may appeal the city administrator’s determination to the council. The notice of appeal must be filed in writing within 10 days of the date notice of change of category of land use and determination of fee is sent and must be filed with the office of the city administrator in writing, stating:

(a) The name and address of the appellant.

(b) The address of the affected premises.

(c) The nature of the determination being appealed.

(d) The reason the determination is incorrect.

(e) What the correct determination of the appeal should be.

A responsible party who fails to file such a statement within the time permitted waives his or her objections and the appeal shall be dismissed. If notice of appeal is properly filed, except in an emergency, the city shall take no enforcement action regarding the responsible party’s failure to pay the transportation utility fee until the council renders a final determination on the appeal.

At its next available meeting, the council shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the written statement and such additional evidence as the council deems appropriate. The appellant shall be allowed at least 10 days’ written notice of the hearing on appeal. At the hearing the appellant may present testimony and oral argument personally or by counsel, and additional evidence. The rules of evidence as used by courts of law do not apply. The decision of the council shall be in writing and shall contain findings of fact that substantiate the council’s decision. The decision shall be mailed to the appellant within 10 days of the completion of the appeal hearing. The decision of the council shall be final. (Ord. 527 § 10, 2016)


3.15.110 Penalty.

In addition to any other remedy, violation of any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, constitute a violation punishable by a maximum fine of $360.00. Each day of delinquency in paying the transportation utility fee constitutes a separate violation. (Ord. 527 § 11, 2016)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



3.25.005 Definitions.

(1) As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean:

Active. All utility accounts are considered “active” unless the city has been notified in writing, on a form provided by the city, of the responsible party’s intention to temporarily or permanently inactivate the responsible party’s account and to stop receiving utility services or other services at a particular billing unit, occupied unit or developed property. 

“Billing unit” means any structure or any portion of any structure intended for residential, commercial, industrial, or other uses. For example, in a multifamily residential development, each dwelling unit shall be considered a separate billing unit, and each retail outlet or nonresidential operation in a shopping mall shall be considered a separate billing unit. 

“City” means the city of Veneta, Oregon.

“City administrator” means the city’s administrator or the city administrator’s designee. 

“City system” means the city’s property, infrastructure, service yard, and offices connected therewith, clerical or field, existing and necessary for the provision of water, sewage, transportation and stormwater services, individually or combined, within and without the limits of the city of Veneta, Oregon. 

“Developed property” means a parcel or legal portion of real property, on which improvements exist or are being constructed. The term “improvement” includes but is not limited to buildings, parking lots, landscaping and outside storage. 

“Dwelling unit” means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities, designed for occupancy by one family and including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

“Finance director” means the city finance director or the finance director’s designee. 

“Nonresidential property” means property that is not primarily used for personal domestic accommodation. Nonresidential property includes industrial, commercial, institutional, hotels and motels, and other nonresidential uses. Also includes property with facilities for residential homes and/or care as defined in the city’s land development ordinance.

“Other services” means the existence and availability for use of streets, pathways, bike lanes, stormwater infrastructure and drainage ways. 

“Owner” means the owner or owners of record title, or the purchaser or purchasers under a recorded land sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in the described real property. 

“Past due notice” means the notice stating that a utility account is past due and delinquent and that failure to submit required payment will jeopardize the continuance of utility or other services to the billing unit, occupied unit or developed property.

“Person” means any individual, firm, co-partnership, association, corporation, or other legally recognized organization. 

“Premises” means a parcel of land within the Veneta city limits that receives services or has the potential to receive services from one or more of the city’s systems. 

“Public works director” means the city public works director or the public works director’s designee.

“Residential property” means property that is used primarily for personal domestic accommodation, including single-family, multifamily residential property and home occupations, but not including hotels and motels or other uses listed in the definition of “nonresidential property.”

“Responsible party” means the person or persons who by occupancy or ownership use one or more city utility and other services, or by contractual arrangement on file with city are responsible to pay for utility and other services provided to a billing unit, occupied unit or developed property. 

“Service month” means a period that begins with the first day of each calendar month and ends with the last day of the month.

“Utility account” means the account set up for each responsible party to record billings, payments, adjustments, and other information pertaining to city’s provision of utility services and/or other services.

“Utility services” means the city’s provision of water to and sewage removal from a billing unit, occupied unit or developed property.

(2) Unless otherwise defined herein, terms used in this chapter have the meaning ascribed in VMC 3.20.005. (Ord. 531 § 1, 2016)


3.25.010 Council to set rates and other fees by resolution.

(1) The council shall have power and authority to establish all rates, deposits, fees, penalties and other charges for connection to and use of city utility services by council resolution and to provide for the payment of billings, deposits, penalties and other charges and to discontinue services to any billing unit where any such charge is not duly paid within the time provided therefor, or when any of the rules and regulations of the city are disregarded or disobeyed. 

(2) The council shall have power and authority to classify utility and other services by service pipe size, meter size, demand, nature of usage, or other means deemed equitable by the council, and to establish associated rates and minimum charges by council resolution.

(3) The council shall have power and authority to enter into special agreements for utility service users and at special rates either greater or less than existing rates to users within or without the boundaries of the city. (Ord. 531 § 1, 2016)


3.25.015 Annual reviews – Revisions.

An annual review of established utility service fees may be made by the council and said fees may be revised periodically to reflect actual costs for operation, repairs, improvements, expansion and maintenance of the city’s utility systems. (Ord. 531 § 1, 2016)


3.25.020 Additional fees for nonassessed partition property.

In addition to city utility service fees set forth above, an applicant desiring to partition property, any part of which has never been fully assessed, shall pay an additional fee which shall also be set forth by resolution. This additional fee shall not relieve the property or properties created from any assessments provided by other ordinances in the future. This section shall not apply when, after the partitioning, all the parcels or lots created are located within 100 feet of a dedicated city right-of-way. The fee shall not apply to each additional lot created. (Ord. 531 § 1, 2016)


3.25.025 Use of funds collected – Applicability.

(1) All sewer funds collected from the provisions of this chapter shall be recorded into the municipal sewer fund and shall be used only for the operation, repairs, improvements, expansion and maintenance of city’s sewage collection, treatment and effluent system. 

(2) All water funds collected from the provisions of this chapter shall be recorded into the municipal water fund and shall be used only for the operation, repairs, improvements, expansion and maintenance of city’s water treatment and distribution system. (Ord. 531 § 1, 2016)


3.25.030 Application for service – Requirements.

(1) Person(s) requesting to receive utility or other services from the city shall make written application to the city, on the forms provided by the city, and provide other information as requested to identify a responsible party for the utility account to be established upon approval of the application for service.

(2) A completed application identifying the responsible party and including owner and occupant’s agreement to abide by this code and any written rules or regulations adopted for the utility system and owner’s consent to lien the premises being served in the amount of past due amounts and charges in the event of nonpayment shall be submitted in person to city with at least one piece of government issued identification for the identified responsible party. 

(3) Nonowner persons applying for utility services or other services shall also present an executed and valid rental agreement.

(4) If an application meeting the requirements of subsection (2) of this section is not on file with the city, utility and other service charges and fees shall be charged to the utility account and the billings mailed to the property owner on record.

(5) City shall determine, in city’s sole discretion, whether all utility service application requirements are met. Utility and other services shall begin on the earlier of the date specified on the application or on the date the city approves the application. (Ord. 531 § 1, 2016)


3.25.035 Withholding of services – Unpaid balances.

(1) If a person moves to a different premises within the city, leaving an unpaid balance on their utility account for utility or other services at a former premises, the city shall, prior to initiation of utility services at the new premises and in addition to payment of the required deposits at the new premises, require the payment of the unpaid balance and payment for utility and other services rendered and billable at the former premises. 

(2) If a person submits an application for utility or other services at a premises for which an unpaid balance exists on any utility account associated with the provision of utility or other services at that premises, the city shall, prior to initiation of utility services at the premises and in addition to payment of the required deposits at the premises, require the payment of the unpaid utility account(s) balance(s) or require that an agreement, provided by and satisfactory to the city, be entered into by the property owner.

(3) The owner’s responsibility for payment of bills per subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall not be reduced or waived because of the city’s attempts to collect from the responsible party, so long as the owner is sent notice of the delinquent billing by first class mail to owner’s last address on file with the city at the time notice is sent to the responsible party. (Ord. 531 § 1, 2016)


3.25.040 Person responsible for payment for services rendered.

The person known or determined to be the responsible party at the time utility or other services are rendered shall be responsible for payment of applicable fees authorized by this and other chapters of this code, as adopted by council resolution. In cases where the responsible party is not the owner and responsible party is delinquent on a utility account, the owner of that premises shall be liable for all past due amounts and charges. The owner’s responsibility for payment of bills shall not be reduced or waived because of the city’s attempts to collect from the responsible party, so long as the owner is sent notice of the delinquent billing by first class mail to owner’s last address on file with the city at the time notice is sent to the responsible party. (Ord. 531 § 1, 2016)


3.25.045 Meter reading and billing.

The water meters for all service connections will be read on or about the twenty-fifth day of each month, and the responsible party for each utility account shall be billed on or about the first day of each month for the utility and other services rendered during the preceding month. Said bills shall be due and payable on or before the fifteenth day of each month, and shall become delinquent on the sixteenth day of said month. (Ord. 531 § 1, 2016)


3.25.050 Delinquent accounts – Suspension of services.

(1) Where the responsible party is delinquent in payment on their utility account, a past due notice shall be mailed to the responsible party and to the property owner of record, if different than the responsible party. 

(2) The past due notice shall inform the responsible party and the property owner that: 

(a) If the unpaid balance on the utility account has not been paid in full by 4:00 p.m. on the twenty-seventh day of the month, utility services shall be suspended on the following business day without any further notice; 

(b) A turn-off/turn-on fee will be charged and payable prior to restoration of utility service; and

(c) A lien may be placed on the property and the utility account may be assigned to a third-party collection agency. 

(3) Payment extensions of no more than five calendar days may be granted upon request of the responsible party, if the utility service bills for the prior three months were timely paid and any prior extension terms were honored. Requests for payment extensions need not be in writing; however, such request must be made no later than 3:00 p.m. on the fifteenth day of the month. If the fifteenth day of the month falls on a weekend or holiday, the request must be made the preceding business day.

(4) Payments returned to the city due to “nonsufficient funds” (NSF) shall be treated as if no payment was made. The responsible party shall be notified in writing of lack of payment. Notification will include a deadline for repayment and inform the responsible party of the NSF fee, in an amount set by council resolution. Lack of repayment by the deadline shall put the utility account into delinquent status, subject to discontinuance of service per this code. 

(5) If utility service is discontinued for lack of payment, the entire unpaid balance on the utility account plus the turn-off/turn-on fee must be received by the city prior to restoration of utility services. Exceptions, if requested in writing, may be granted by the finance director or city administrator in their sole discretion. Considerations for granting exceptions shall include payment history, whether or not prior exceptions or extensions were honored, and whether or not the service has been discontinued previously for lack of payment. 

(6) Should the water to any premises served by a city system be turned on by any user or other person without authority from the city, the utility service may then be shut off at the main, or the meter removed. The cost thereof shall be established by council resolution, and service shall not be restored to premises until all accrued charges are paid. 

(7) Unpaid balances on utility accounts shall be a lien against the premises served and entry made on the ledger or other records of the city pertaining to such ledger 30 days after the utility service has been discontinued for nonpayment or other violations of applicable provisions of this code. 

(8) Utility accounts with unpaid balances shall be assigned to a third-party collection agency 30 days after the utility service has been discontinued for nonpayment or other violations of applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 531 § 1, 2016)


3.25.055 Voluntary discontinuation of services – Permanent and temporary.

(1) The responsible party for each utility account shall continue to receive billings and be charged for services rendered until such time as the city receives written application, using forms provided by the city, to transfer responsible party status for the utility account to a different responsible party.

(2) Persons can request to have utility and other services discontinued by giving written notice to the city when the premises will be permanently or temporarily vacated or utility services are requested to be temporarily suspended for premises repairs or maintenance.

(3) When written notice is received for the reason of permanently vacating the premises, the city shall prepare and mail a final bill to the address on record. The final billing will include prorated base charges and fees, a use fee based on the actual use of water from the last meter reading and a credit for any deposit remaining on the utility account per VMC 3.20.015. 

(4) The final billing shall be due on or before the due date shown on the billing.

(5) Responsible parties or property owners of premises with unpaid and inactive utility accounts may request to enter into a written pay agreement with city. Said agreement shall be recorded against the premises and allow payment for a period of time not to exceed six months from the date services were discontinued. No variances to payment terms will be allowed unless a new agreement has been requested and approved by the city. Violations of pay agreement terms shall result in charges, penalties and collection per applicable provisions of this code. Existence of a pay agreement for one premises within the city shall have no bearing on city’s approval for services at another premises within the city.

(6) Unpaid and inactive utility accounts not subject to a written pay agreement shall be recorded as a lien against the premises served and are subject to referral to a third-party collection agency.

(7) Unless the city has written instructions stating otherwise, the water meter for all premises being permanently vacated shall be turned off and locked until such time as a new responsible party is approved by the city.

(8) When written notice is received for the reason of temporarily leaving the premises the city shall prorate the base charges and fees and calculate a usage fee based on the actual use of water from the last meter reading. The city shall also charge the responsible party the turn-off/turn-on fee set by council resolution.

(9) The city will bill the responsible party the calculated charges at the responsible party’s address on record or as otherwise provided on the notice, as part of city’s regular billing cycle established in VMC 3.25.045.

(10) Base charges and fees shall be suspended until such time as the city receives notice that services are to be restored or until water use occurs. It will be determined that water use has occurred if and when any digits on the water meter register for that premises have changed from the previous reading. 

(11) When written notice is received to temporarily suspend utility service, city will endeavor to turn off the appropriate meter within 24 hours of the time and date requested and to turn on the meter within 24 hours after city receives notice that the repairs and/or maintenance have been completed. 

(12) A turn-off/turn-on fee shall not be charged for temporary service discontinuances requested for repairs or maintenance. A proration of the base charges and fees shall not be made and all water used, as determined by reading the water meter register, shall be billed at the standard use rates. (Ord. 531 § 1, 2016)


3.25.060 Adjustments and refunds other than deposits and leaks.

(1) Adjustments and refunds, other than deposits, to utility accounts may be made by the finance director or designee pursuant to the following:

(a) All adjustments and refunds will be reviewed by a staff member other than the staff preparing the adjustment or refund.

(b) All adjustment and refunds in the amount of $200.00 or more shall be reviewed by the finance director, or finance director’s designee.

(c) All adjustments and refunds in the amount of $2,500 or more shall only be made upon motion of the city council.

(2) No retroactive adjustment or refund shall extend beyond three service months nor be granted in amounts less than $5.00. 

(3) The provisions of this section apply to all adjustments and refunds increasing or decreasing amounts due on utility accounts. 

(4) In the event of a responsible party’s death or bankruptcy, the city may eliminate any unpaid balance on the applicable utility account subject to the procedures set forth in subsection (1) of this section. (Ord. 531 § 1, 2016)


3.25.065 Excessive water leaks – Adjustments and payment terms.

(1) Requests for a billing adjustment due to a leak occurring may be made, using the forms provided by the city.

(2) Adjustments shall only be made if the leak resulted in water use equal to or greater than two times the previous highest monthly usage for that responsible party at the same premises.

(3) Adjustment shall be limited to removing excess sewer charges, if such charges have occurred, and recalculating the water usage charge at the Tier 1 rate. 

(4) Payment for the recalculated amount shall be due, in full, under the same terms as the regular monthly utility bill. 

(5)  If payment in full is not possible by the due date, the responsible party may request to enter into a payment agreement with the city. City acceptance of the agreement is subject to finance director’s approval. The payment amount subject to the agreement shall be an amount exceeding the average amount billed for water usage to that premises for the preceding three service months. (Ord. 531 § 1, 2016)


3.25.070 Charges for inspecting and testing and broken meters.

(1) When any responsible party submits a complaint that the water use fee billed for any particular period is excessive, the city shall, upon written request by the responsible party, have such meter reread and the service inspected for leaks. The city will not charge for such rereading and inspection unless more than one request is made within a 30-day period. The costs of more than one repeat rereading and inspections shall be charged to the utility account of the responsible party in an amount established by council resolution.

(2) Should such responsible party desire that the meter be tested or changed, such test or change shall be made by the city and the cost of said test or change shall be charged to the utility account of the responsible party in an amount established by council resolution. However, should the test of the meter show a registration in excess of three percent in favor of the city, the amount charged to the associated utility account for such test will be cancelled or credited as the case may be and the balance on the utility account adjusted accordingly. The excess registration, not to exceed the three previous readings, shall be credited to the account. Where no such error is found, the amount charged for such test will be retained to cover city test or change expenses.

(3) When any owner or person receiving utility service from the city shall request a relocation or alteration of the service or meter location, either vertically or horizontally, a determination of advisability of such relocation or alteration shall be made by the public works director or designee. The decision of the public works director or designee shall prevail, subject to the order of the council. In no event shall the meter or service be relocated onto private property beyond the property line, except by order of the council. The cost of such relocation or alteration shall be charged to the utility account of said owner or person in an amount established by council resolution. However, should a service or meter relocation or alteration be deemed beneficial to the city by the public works director or designee, such relocation or alteration may be done by the city whether desired by the property owner or not, and such relocation or alteration shall be at city’s expense.

(4) Whenever a water meter is found by the meter reader to be inoperative, an amount equal to the average water use of the three preceding months and the applicable base charges and fees shall be charged to the utility account for that month. (Ord. 531 § 1, 2016)


Chapter 3.30       LAND USE AND IMPROVEMENT FEES

Sections:

3.30.010    Application or petition processing costs – Requirements.


3.30.010      Application or petition processing costs – Requirements.

In order to cover the actual processing costs connected with an application or petition as required by the city's zoning and subdivision ordinances, the applicant is hereby required to submit those applications required by the above referenced ordinance and pay the following fees:

(1) An application fee to be established by resolution of the city council;

(2) The actual costs of preparing and mailing notices to abutting property owners or others required to be notified; the costs of any notices required to be published in newspapers; technical reviews of application materials by city-designated experts, including but not limited to engineers, attorneys, wetland specialists, geologists, arborists, and biologists; and any other mandated costs. At the time an application is filed, the applicant shall pay deposits established by resolution of the city council to cover these costs. The applicant shall be required to reimburse the city for actual costs over and above the required deposit. (Ord. 460 § 1, 2006; Ord. 165 § 1, 1978)


Chapter 3.35 MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL DEALERS TAX

Sections:

3.35.010    Definitions.

3.35.020    Tax imposed.

3.35.030    Amount and payment.

3.35.040    License requirements.

3.35.050    License applications and issuance.

3.35.060    Failure to secure license.

3.35.070    Suspension and revocation of license.

3.35.080    Cancellation of license.

3.35.090    Remedies cumulative.

3.35.100    Payment of tax and delinquency.

3.35.110    Monthly statement of dealer.

3.35.120    Failure to file monthly statement.

3.35.130    Billing purchasers.

3.35.140    Failure to provide invoice or delivery tag.

3.35.150    Transporting motor vehicle fuel in bulk.

3.35.160    Exemption of export fuel.

3.35.170    Sales to armed forces exempted.

3.35.180    Fuel in vehicles coming into city not taxed.

3.35.190    Refunds.

3.35.200    Examinations and investigations.

3.35.210    Limitation on credit for or refund of overpayment and on assessment of additional tax.

3.35.220    Examining books and accounts of carrier of motor vehicle fuel.

3.35.230    Records to be kept by dealers.

3.35.240    Records to be kept three years.

3.35.250    Use of tax revenues.


3.35.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following words and phrases shall mean:

(1) “City” means the city of Veneta.

(2) “Dealer” means any person who:

(a) Imports or causes to be imported motor vehicle fuel for sale, use or distribution in the city, but “dealer” does not include any person who imports into the city motor vehicle fuel in quantities of 500 gallons or less purchased from a supplier who is licensed as a dealer hereunder if that dealer assumes liability for the payment of the applicable license tax to the city; or

(b) Produces, refines, manufactures or compounds motor vehicle fuels in the city for export or for use, distribution or sale in the city; or 

(c) Acquires in the city for sale, use or distribution in the city motor vehicle fuels with respect to which there has been no license tax previously incurred. 

(3) “Distribution” means, in addition to its ordinary meaning, the delivery of motor vehicle fuel by a dealer to any service station or into any tank, storage facility or series of tanks or storage facilities connected by pipelines, from which motor vehicle fuel is withdrawn directly for sale or for delivery into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles whether or not the service station, tank or storage facility is owned, operated or controlled by the dealer.

(4) “Highway” means every street, road, way, thoroughfare and place of whatever nature, open for use of the public for the purpose of vehicular travel. 

(5) “Motor vehicle” means all vehicles, engines or machines, movable or immovable, operated or propelled by the use of motor vehicle fuel. 

(6) “Motor vehicle fuel” includes gasoline, diesel, mogas, methanol and any other flammable or combustible gaseous, liquid, or solid substance, by whatever name such substance is known or sold, usable as fuel for the operation of motor vehicles except a substance, the chief use of which, as determined by the tax administrator, is for purposes other than the propulsion of motor vehicles upon the highways.

(7) “Person” includes every natural person, association, firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture or other business entity. 

(8) “Service station” means any place operated for the purpose of retailing and delivering motor vehicle fuel into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles. 

(9) “Tax administrator” means the city administrator, the city administrator’s designee, or any person or entity with whom the city administrator contracts to perform those duties. (Ord. 453 § 1, 2004)


3.35.020 Tax imposed.

A business license tax is hereby imposed on every dealer. This tax is in addition to any other business license fee imposed by city. The tax imposed shall be paid monthly to the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to exercise all supervisory and administrative powers with regard to the enforcement, collection and administration of the business license tax, including all powers specified in ORS 319.010 to 319.430. (Ord. 453 § 2, 2004)


3.35.030 Amount and payment.

In addition to any fees or taxes otherwise provided for by law, every dealer in the city engaging in the sale, use or distribution of motor vehicle fuel shall:

(1) Not later than the twenty-fifth day of each calendar month, render a statement to the tax administrator on forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator of all motor vehicle fuel sold, used or distributed by him/her in the city as well as all such fuel sold, used or distributed in the city by a purchaser thereof upon which sale, use or distribution the dealer has assumed liability for the applicable license tax during the preceding calendar month.

(2) Pay a license tax computed on the basis of $0.03 per gallon of such motor vehicle fuel so sold, used or distributed as shown by such statement in the manner and within the time provided in this code. (Ord. 453 § 3, 2004)


3.35.040 License requirements.

No dealer shall sell, use or distribute any motor vehicle fuel until he/she has secured a dealer’s license as required herein. (Ord. 453 § 4, 2004)


3.35.050 License applications and issuance.

(1) Every person, before becoming a dealer in motor vehicle fuel in this city, shall make application to the tax administrator for a license authorizing such person to engage in business as a dealer.

(2) Applications for the license shall be made on forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator.

(3) Applications shall be accompanied by a duly acknowledged certificate containing:

(a) The business name under which the applicant transacts business.

(b) The address of applicant’s principal place of business and location of distributing stations in and within three miles of the city.

(c) The name and address of the managing agent, the names and addresses of the several persons constituting the firm or partnership or, if a corporation, the name under which the corporation is authorized to transact business and the names and addresses of its principal officers and registered agent, as well as primary transport carrier.

(4) If an application for a motor vehicle fuel dealer’s license is complete and accepted for filing, the tax administrator shall issue to the dealer a license in such form as the tax administrator may prescribe to transact business in the city; provided, however, that the tax administrator may refuse to issue such license if it finds that the applicant meets any of the conditions for refusal to issue a license under state law. A license issued hereunder is not assignable and is valid only for the dealer in whose name it is issued. 

(5) The tax administrator shall retain all completed applications with an alphabetical index thereof, together with a record of all licensed dealers. (Ord. 453 § 5, 2004)


3.35.060 Failure to secure license.

(1) If a dealer sells, distributes or uses any motor vehicle fuel without first filing the certificate and obtaining the license required by VMC 3.35.050:

(a) The license tax on all motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by that dealer shall be immediately due and payable.

(b) The tax administrator shall proceed forthwith to determine, from as many available sources as the tax administrator determines reasonable, the amount of tax due, shall assess the dealer for the tax in the amount found due, together with a penalty of 100 percent of the tax, and shall make its certificate of such assessment and penalty. In any suit or proceeding to collect the tax or penalty or both, the certificate shall be prima facie evidence that the dealer therein named is indebted to the city in the amount of the tax and penalty stated.

(c) Any tax or penalty assessed pursuant to this section may be collected in the manner prescribed in VMC 3.35.100 with reference to delinquency in payment of the fee or by an action of law.

(2) In the event any suit or action is instituted to enforce this section, if the city is the prevailing party, the city shall be entitled to recover from the person sued reasonable attorney’s fees at trial or upon appeal of such suit or action, in addition to all other sums provided by law. (Ord. 453 § 6, 2004)


3.35.070 Suspension and revocation of license.

The tax administrator may, to the extent permitted by law, suspend, and, upon 10 days’ written notice, revoke the license of any dealer who fails to comply with any provision of this chapter. The tax administrator shall mail, by certified mail addressed to the dealer at his/her last known address appearing in the files of the tax administrator, a notice of intent to cancel. The notice of revocation shall include the reason for cancellation. (Ord. 453 § 7, 2004)


3.35.080 Cancellation of license.

(1) The tax administrator may, upon written request of a dealer, cancel a license issued to that dealer. The tax administrator shall, upon approving the dealer’s request for cancellation, set a date not later than 30 days after receipt of the written request, after which the license shall no longer be effective.

(2) The tax administrator may, after 30 days’ notice has been mailed to the last known address of the dealer, cancel the license of dealer upon finding that the dealer is no longer engaged in the business of a dealer. (Ord. 453 § 8, 2004)


3.35.090 Remedies cumulative.

Except as otherwise provided in VMC 3.35.100 and 3.35.110, the remedies provided in VMC 3.35.060 through 3.35.080 are cumulative. No action taken pursuant to those sections shall relieve any person from the penalty provisions of this code. (Ord. 453 § 9, 2004)


3.35.100 Payment of tax and delinquency.

(1) The license tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid to the tax administrator on or before the twenty-fifth day of each month. 

(2) Except as provided in subsections (3) and (4) of this section, if payment of the license tax is not paid as required by subsection (1) of this section, a penalty of one percent of such license tax shall be assessed and be immediately due and payable.

(3) Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, if the payment of the tax and penalty, if any, is not made on or before the first day of the next month following that month in which payment is due, a further penalty of 10 percent of the tax shall be assessed. Said penalty shall be in addition to the penalty provided for in subsection (2) of this section and shall be immediately due and payable.

(4) Penalties imposed by this section shall not apply if a penalty has been assessed and paid pursuant to VMC 3.35.060. The tax administrator may for good cause shown waive any penalties assessed under this section.

(5) If any person fails to pay the license tax or any penalty provided for by this section, the tax and/or penalty shall be collected from that person for the use of the city. The tax administrator shall commence and prosecute to final determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect the same.

(6) In the event any suit or action is instituted to collect the business license tax or any penalty provided for by this section, if the city is the prevailing party, the city shall be entitled to recover from the person sued reasonable attorney’s fees at trial or upon appeal of such suit or action, in addition to all other sums provided by law. (Ord. 453 § 10, 2004)


3.35.110 Monthly statement of dealer.

Every dealer in motor vehicle fuel shall provide to the tax administrator on or before the twenty-fifth day of each month, on forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator, a statement of the number of gallons of motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by the dealer during the preceding calendar month. The statement shall be signed by the dealer or the dealer’s agent. (Ord. 453 § 11, 2004)


3.35.120 Failure to file monthly statement.

If a dealer fails to file any statement required by VMC 3.35.110, the tax administrator shall proceed forthwith to determine from as many available sources as the tax administrator determines reasonable the amount of motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by such dealer for the period unreported, and such determination shall in any proceeding be prima facie evidence of the amount of fuel sold, distributed or used. The tax administrator shall immediately assess the dealer for the license tax upon the amount determined, adding thereto a penalty of 10 percent of the tax. The penalty shall be cumulative to other penalties provided in this code. (Ord. 453 § 12, 2004)


3.35.130 Billing purchasers.

Dealers in motor vehicle fuel shall render bills to all purchasers of motor vehicle fuel. The bills shall separately state and describe the different products sold or shipped thereunder and shall be serially numbered except where other sales invoice controls acceptable to the tax administrator are maintained. (Ord. 453 § 13, 2004)


3.35.140 Failure to provide invoice or delivery tag.

No person shall receive and accept motor vehicle fuel from any dealer, or pay for the same, or sell or offer the motor vehicle fuel for sale, unless the motor vehicle fuel is accompanied by an invoice or delivery tag showing the date upon which motor vehicle fuel was delivered, purchased or sold and the name of the dealer in motor vehicle fuel. (Ord. 453 § 14, 2004)


3.35.150 Transporting motor vehicle fuel in bulk.

Every person operating any conveyance for the purpose of hauling, transporting or delivering motor vehicle fuel in bulk shall, before entering upon the public highways of the city with such conveyance, have and possess during the entire time of the hauling or transporting of such motor vehicle fuel an invoice, bill of sale or other written statement showing the number of gallons, the true name and address of the seller or consignor, and the true name and address of the buyer or consignee, if any, of the same.

The person hauling such motor vehicle fuel shall, at the request of any officer authorized by law to inquire into or investigate such matters, produce and offer for inspection the invoice, bill of sale or other statement. (Ord. 453 § 15, 2004)


3.35.160 Exemption of export fuel.

(1) The license tax imposed by VMC 3.35.020 shall not be imposed on motor vehicle fuel:

(a) Exported from the city by a dealer; or

(b) Sold by a dealer in individual quantities of 500 gallons or less for export by the purchaser to an area or areas outside the city in containers other than the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, but every dealer shall be required to report such exports and sales to the city in such detail as may be required. 

(2) In support of any exemption from license taxes claimed under this section other than in the case of stock transfers or deliveries in the dealer’s own equipment, every dealer must execute and file with the tax administrator an export certificate in such form as shall be prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator, containing a statement, made by some person having actual knowledge of the fact of such exportation, that the motor vehicle fuel has been exported from the city, and giving such details with reference to such shipment as the tax administrator may require. The tax administrator may demand of any dealer such additional data as is deemed necessary in support of any such certificate, and failure to supply such data will constitute a waiver of all right to exemption claimed by virtue of such certificate. The tax administrator may, in a case where the tax administrator believes no useful purpose would be served by filing of an export certificate, waive the filing of the certificate.

(3) Any motor vehicle fuel carried from the city in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle shall not be considered as exported from the city.

(4) No person shall, through false statement, trick or device, or otherwise, obtain motor vehicle fuel for export as to which the city tax has not been paid and fail to export the same, or any portion thereof, or cause the motor vehicle fuel or any portion thereof not to be exported, or divert or cause to be diverted the motor vehicle fuel or any portion thereof to be used, distributed or sold in the city and fail to notify the tax administrator and the dealer from whom the motor vehicle fuel was originally purchased of his/her act.

(5) No dealer or other person shall conspire with any person to withhold from export, or divert from export or to return motor vehicle fuel to the city for sale or use so as to avoid any of the fees imposed herein. 

(6) In support of any exemption from taxes on account of sales of motor vehicle fuel in individual quantities of 500 gallons or less for export by the purchaser, the dealer shall retain in his/her files for at least three years an export certificate executed by the purchaser in such form and containing such information as is prescribed by the tax administrator. This certificate shall be prima facie evidence of the exportation of the motor vehicle fuel to which it applies only if accepted by the dealer in good faith. (Ord. 453 § 16, 2004)


3.35.170 Sales to armed forces exempted.

The license tax imposed by VMC 3.35.020 and 3.35.030 shall not be imposed on any motor vehicle fuel sold to the armed forces of the United States for use in ships, aircraft or for export from the city; but every dealer shall be required to report such sales to the tax administrator in such detail as may be required. A certificate by an authorized officer of such armed forces shall be accepted by the dealer as sufficient proof that the sale is for the purpose specified in the certificate. (Ord. 453 § 17, 2004)


3.35.180 Fuel in vehicles coming into city not taxed.

Any person coming into the city in a motor vehicle may transport in the fuel tank of such vehicle, motor vehicle fuel for his/her own use only and for the purpose of operating such motor vehicle without securing a license or paying the tax provided in VMC 3.35.020 and 3.35.030 or complying with any of the provisions imposed upon dealers herein, but if the motor vehicle fuel so brought into the city is removed from the fuel tank of the vehicle or used for any purpose other than the propulsion of the vehicle, the person so importing the fuel into the city shall be subject to all the provisions herein applying to dealers. (Ord. 453 § 18, 2004)


3.35.190 Refunds.

Refunds will be made pursuant to applicable portions of Chapter 319 of the Oregon Revised laws. Claim forms for refunds may be obtained from the tax administrator’s office. (Ord. 453 § 19, 2004)


3.35.200 Examinations and investigations.

The tax administrator, or duly authorized agents, may make any examination of accounts, records, stocks, facilities and equipment of dealers, service stations and other persons engaged in storing, selling or distributing motor vehicle fuel or other petroleum product or products within this city, and such other investigations as it considers necessary in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. If the examinations or investigations disclose that any reports of dealers or other persons theretofore filed with the tax administrator pursuant to the requirements herein have shown incorrectly the amount of gallonage of motor vehicle fuel distributed or the tax accruing thereon, the tax administrator may make such changes in subsequent reports and payments of such dealers or other persons, or may make such refunds, as may be necessary to correct the errors disclosed by its examinations or investigation. The dealer shall reimburse the city for the reasonable costs of the examination or investigation if the action discloses that the dealer paid 95 percent or less of the tax owing for the period of the examination or investigation. In the event that such an examination or investigation results in an assessment by and an additional payment due to the city, such additional payment shall be subject to interest at the rate of 12 percent per year from the date the original tax payment was due. (Ord. 453 § 20, 2004)


3.35.210 Limitation on credit for or refund of overpayment and on assessment of additional tax.

(1) Except as otherwise provided in this code, any credit for erroneous overpayment of tax made by a dealer taken on a subsequent return or any claim for refund of tax erroneously overpaid and filed by a dealer must be so taken or filed within three years after the date on which the overpayment was made to the city.

(2) Except in the case of a fraudulent report or neglect to make a report, every notice of additional tax proposed to be assessed under this code shall be served on dealers within three years from the date upon which such additional taxes become due, and shall be subject to penalty as provided in VMC 3.35.100. (Ord. 453 § 21, 2004)


3.35.220 Examining books and accounts of carrier of motor vehicle fuel.

The tax administrator or duly authorized agents of the tax administrator may at any time during normal business hours examine the books and accounts of any carrier of motor vehicle fuel operating within the city for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this code. (Ord. 453 § 22, 2004)


3.35.230 Records to be kept by dealers.

Every dealer in motor vehicle fuel shall keep a record in such form as may be prescribed by the tax administrator of all purchases, receipts, sales and distribution of motor vehicle fuel. The records shall include copies of all invoices or bills of all such sales and shall at all times during the business hours of the day be subject to inspection by the tax administrator or authorized officers or agents of the tax administrator. (Ord. 453 § 23, 2004)


3.35.240 Records to be kept three years.

Every dealer shall maintain and keep, for a period of three years, all records of motor vehicle fuel used, sold and distributed within the city by such dealer, together with stock records, invoices, bills of lading and other pertinent papers as may be required by the tax administrator. In the event such records are not kept within the state of Oregon, the dealer shall reimburse the tax administrator for all travel, lodging, and related expenses incurred by the tax administrator in examining such records. The amount of such expenses shall be assessed in addition to the tax imposed by VMC 3.35.020. (Ord. 453 § 24, 2004)


3.35.250 Use of tax revenues.

(1) For the purpose of this section, “net revenue” shall mean the revenue from the tax and penalties imposed by this chapter remaining after providing for the cost of administration and any refunds and credits authorized herein.

(2) The net revenue shall be used only for the construction, reconstruction, improvement, repair, maintenance, operation, and use of public highways, roads and streets within the city. (Ord. 453 § 25, 2004)


Chapter 3.35 MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL DEALERS TAX

Sections:

3.35.010    Definitions.

3.35.020    Tax imposed.

3.35.030    Amount and payment.

3.35.040    License requirements.

3.35.050    License applications and issuance.

3.35.060    Failure to secure license.

3.35.070    Suspension and revocation of license.

3.35.080    Cancellation of license.

3.35.090    Remedies cumulative.

3.35.100    Payment of tax and delinquency.

3.35.110    Monthly statement of dealer.

3.35.120    Failure to file monthly statement.

3.35.130    Billing purchasers.

3.35.140    Failure to provide invoice or delivery tag.

3.35.150    Transporting motor vehicle fuel in bulk.

3.35.160    Exemption of export fuel.

3.35.170    Sales to armed forces exempted.

3.35.180    Fuel in vehicles coming into city not taxed.

3.35.190    Refunds.

3.35.200    Examinations and investigations.

3.35.210    Limitation on credit for or refund of overpayment and on assessment of additional tax.

3.35.220    Examining books and accounts of carrier of motor vehicle fuel.

3.35.230    Records to be kept by dealers.

3.35.240    Records to be kept three years.

3.35.250    Use of tax revenues.


3.35.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following words and phrases shall mean:

(1) “City” means the city of Veneta.

(2) “Dealer” means any person who:

(a) Imports or causes to be imported motor vehicle fuel for sale, use or distribution in the city, but “dealer” does not include any person who imports into the city motor vehicle fuel in quantities of 500 gallons or less purchased from a supplier who is licensed as a dealer hereunder if that dealer assumes liability for the payment of the applicable license tax to the city; or

(b) Produces, refines, manufactures or compounds motor vehicle fuels in the city for export or for use, distribution or sale in the city; or 

(c) Acquires in the city for sale, use or distribution in the city motor vehicle fuels with respect to which there has been no license tax previously incurred. 

(3) “Distribution” means, in addition to its ordinary meaning, the delivery of motor vehicle fuel by a dealer to any service station or into any tank, storage facility or series of tanks or storage facilities connected by pipelines, from which motor vehicle fuel is withdrawn directly for sale or for delivery into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles whether or not the service station, tank or storage facility is owned, operated or controlled by the dealer.

(4) “Highway” means every street, road, way, thoroughfare and place of whatever nature, open for use of the public for the purpose of vehicular travel. 

(5) “Motor vehicle” means all vehicles, engines or machines, movable or immovable, operated or propelled by the use of motor vehicle fuel. 

(6) “Motor vehicle fuel” includes gasoline, diesel, mogas, methanol and any other flammable or combustible gaseous, liquid, or solid substance, by whatever name such substance is known or sold, usable as fuel for the operation of motor vehicles except a substance, the chief use of which, as determined by the tax administrator, is for purposes other than the propulsion of motor vehicles upon the highways.

(7) “Person” includes every natural person, association, firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture or other business entity. 

(8) “Service station” means any place operated for the purpose of retailing and delivering motor vehicle fuel into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles. 

(9) “Tax administrator” means the city administrator, the city administrator’s designee, or any person or entity with whom the city administrator contracts to perform those duties. (Ord. 453 § 1, 2004)


3.35.020 Tax imposed.

A business license tax is hereby imposed on every dealer. This tax is in addition to any other business license fee imposed by city. The tax imposed shall be paid monthly to the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to exercise all supervisory and administrative powers with regard to the enforcement, collection and administration of the business license tax, including all powers specified in ORS 319.010 to 319.430. (Ord. 453 § 2, 2004)


3.35.030 Amount and payment.

In addition to any fees or taxes otherwise provided for by law, every dealer in the city engaging in the sale, use or distribution of motor vehicle fuel shall:

(1) Not later than the twenty-fifth day of each calendar month, render a statement to the tax administrator on forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator of all motor vehicle fuel sold, used or distributed by him/her in the city as well as all such fuel sold, used or distributed in the city by a purchaser thereof upon which sale, use or distribution the dealer has assumed liability for the applicable license tax during the preceding calendar month.

(2) Pay a license tax computed on the basis of $0.03 per gallon of such motor vehicle fuel so sold, used or distributed as shown by such statement in the manner and within the time provided in this code. (Ord. 453 § 3, 2004)


3.35.040 License requirements.

No dealer shall sell, use or distribute any motor vehicle fuel until he/she has secured a dealer’s license as required herein. (Ord. 453 § 4, 2004)


3.35.050 License applications and issuance.

(1) Every person, before becoming a dealer in motor vehicle fuel in this city, shall make application to the tax administrator for a license authorizing such person to engage in business as a dealer.

(2) Applications for the license shall be made on forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator.

(3) Applications shall be accompanied by a duly acknowledged certificate containing:

(a) The business name under which the applicant transacts business.

(b) The address of applicant’s principal place of business and location of distributing stations in and within three miles of the city.

(c) The name and address of the managing agent, the names and addresses of the several persons constituting the firm or partnership or, if a corporation, the name under which the corporation is authorized to transact business and the names and addresses of its principal officers and registered agent, as well as primary transport carrier.

(4) If an application for a motor vehicle fuel dealer’s license is complete and accepted for filing, the tax administrator shall issue to the dealer a license in such form as the tax administrator may prescribe to transact business in the city; provided, however, that the tax administrator may refuse to issue such license if it finds that the applicant meets any of the conditions for refusal to issue a license under state law. A license issued hereunder is not assignable and is valid only for the dealer in whose name it is issued. 

(5) The tax administrator shall retain all completed applications with an alphabetical index thereof, together with a record of all licensed dealers. (Ord. 453 § 5, 2004)


3.35.060 Failure to secure license.

(1) If a dealer sells, distributes or uses any motor vehicle fuel without first filing the certificate and obtaining the license required by VMC 3.35.050:

(a) The license tax on all motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by that dealer shall be immediately due and payable.

(b) The tax administrator shall proceed forthwith to determine, from as many available sources as the tax administrator determines reasonable, the amount of tax due, shall assess the dealer for the tax in the amount found due, together with a penalty of 100 percent of the tax, and shall make its certificate of such assessment and penalty. In any suit or proceeding to collect the tax or penalty or both, the certificate shall be prima facie evidence that the dealer therein named is indebted to the city in the amount of the tax and penalty stated.

(c) Any tax or penalty assessed pursuant to this section may be collected in the manner prescribed in VMC 3.35.100 with reference to delinquency in payment of the fee or by an action of law.

(2) In the event any suit or action is instituted to enforce this section, if the city is the prevailing party, the city shall be entitled to recover from the person sued reasonable attorney’s fees at trial or upon appeal of such suit or action, in addition to all other sums provided by law. (Ord. 453 § 6, 2004)


3.35.070 Suspension and revocation of license.

The tax administrator may, to the extent permitted by law, suspend, and, upon 10 days’ written notice, revoke the license of any dealer who fails to comply with any provision of this chapter. The tax administrator shall mail, by certified mail addressed to the dealer at his/her last known address appearing in the files of the tax administrator, a notice of intent to cancel. The notice of revocation shall include the reason for cancellation. (Ord. 453 § 7, 2004)


3.35.080 Cancellation of license.

(1) The tax administrator may, upon written request of a dealer, cancel a license issued to that dealer. The tax administrator shall, upon approving the dealer’s request for cancellation, set a date not later than 30 days after receipt of the written request, after which the license shall no longer be effective.

(2) The tax administrator may, after 30 days’ notice has been mailed to the last known address of the dealer, cancel the license of dealer upon finding that the dealer is no longer engaged in the business of a dealer. (Ord. 453 § 8, 2004)


3.35.090 Remedies cumulative.

Except as otherwise provided in VMC 3.35.100 and 3.35.110, the remedies provided in VMC 3.35.060 through 3.35.080 are cumulative. No action taken pursuant to those sections shall relieve any person from the penalty provisions of this code. (Ord. 453 § 9, 2004)


3.35.100 Payment of tax and delinquency.

(1) The license tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid to the tax administrator on or before the twenty-fifth day of each month. 

(2) Except as provided in subsections (3) and (4) of this section, if payment of the license tax is not paid as required by subsection (1) of this section, a penalty of one percent of such license tax shall be assessed and be immediately due and payable.

(3) Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, if the payment of the tax and penalty, if any, is not made on or before the first day of the next month following that month in which payment is due, a further penalty of 10 percent of the tax shall be assessed. Said penalty shall be in addition to the penalty provided for in subsection (2) of this section and shall be immediately due and payable.

(4) Penalties imposed by this section shall not apply if a penalty has been assessed and paid pursuant to VMC 3.35.060. The tax administrator may for good cause shown waive any penalties assessed under this section.

(5) If any person fails to pay the license tax or any penalty provided for by this section, the tax and/or penalty shall be collected from that person for the use of the city. The tax administrator shall commence and prosecute to final determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect the same.

(6) In the event any suit or action is instituted to collect the business license tax or any penalty provided for by this section, if the city is the prevailing party, the city shall be entitled to recover from the person sued reasonable attorney’s fees at trial or upon appeal of such suit or action, in addition to all other sums provided by law. (Ord. 453 § 10, 2004)


3.35.110 Monthly statement of dealer.

Every dealer in motor vehicle fuel shall provide to the tax administrator on or before the twenty-fifth day of each month, on forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator, a statement of the number of gallons of motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by the dealer during the preceding calendar month. The statement shall be signed by the dealer or the dealer’s agent. (Ord. 453 § 11, 2004)


3.35.120 Failure to file monthly statement.

If a dealer fails to file any statement required by VMC 3.35.110, the tax administrator shall proceed forthwith to determine from as many available sources as the tax administrator determines reasonable the amount of motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by such dealer for the period unreported, and such determination shall in any proceeding be prima facie evidence of the amount of fuel sold, distributed or used. The tax administrator shall immediately assess the dealer for the license tax upon the amount determined, adding thereto a penalty of 10 percent of the tax. The penalty shall be cumulative to other penalties provided in this code. (Ord. 453 § 12, 2004)


3.35.130 Billing purchasers.

Dealers in motor vehicle fuel shall render bills to all purchasers of motor vehicle fuel. The bills shall separately state and describe the different products sold or shipped thereunder and shall be serially numbered except where other sales invoice controls acceptable to the tax administrator are maintained. (Ord. 453 § 13, 2004)


3.35.140 Failure to provide invoice or delivery tag.

No person shall receive and accept motor vehicle fuel from any dealer, or pay for the same, or sell or offer the motor vehicle fuel for sale, unless the motor vehicle fuel is accompanied by an invoice or delivery tag showing the date upon which motor vehicle fuel was delivered, purchased or sold and the name of the dealer in motor vehicle fuel. (Ord. 453 § 14, 2004)


3.35.150 Transporting motor vehicle fuel in bulk.

Every person operating any conveyance for the purpose of hauling, transporting or delivering motor vehicle fuel in bulk shall, before entering upon the public highways of the city with such conveyance, have and possess during the entire time of the hauling or transporting of such motor vehicle fuel an invoice, bill of sale or other written statement showing the number of gallons, the true name and address of the seller or consignor, and the true name and address of the buyer or consignee, if any, of the same.

The person hauling such motor vehicle fuel shall, at the request of any officer authorized by law to inquire into or investigate such matters, produce and offer for inspection the invoice, bill of sale or other statement. (Ord. 453 § 15, 2004)


3.35.160 Exemption of export fuel.

(1) The license tax imposed by VMC 3.35.020 shall not be imposed on motor vehicle fuel:

(a) Exported from the city by a dealer; or

(b) Sold by a dealer in individual quantities of 500 gallons or less for export by the purchaser to an area or areas outside the city in containers other than the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, but every dealer shall be required to report such exports and sales to the city in such detail as may be required. 

(2) In support of any exemption from license taxes claimed under this section other than in the case of stock transfers or deliveries in the dealer’s own equipment, every dealer must execute and file with the tax administrator an export certificate in such form as shall be prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator, containing a statement, made by some person having actual knowledge of the fact of such exportation, that the motor vehicle fuel has been exported from the city, and giving such details with reference to such shipment as the tax administrator may require. The tax administrator may demand of any dealer such additional data as is deemed necessary in support of any such certificate, and failure to supply such data will constitute a waiver of all right to exemption claimed by virtue of such certificate. The tax administrator may, in a case where the tax administrator believes no useful purpose would be served by filing of an export certificate, waive the filing of the certificate.

(3) Any motor vehicle fuel carried from the city in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle shall not be considered as exported from the city.

(4) No person shall, through false statement, trick or device, or otherwise, obtain motor vehicle fuel for export as to which the city tax has not been paid and fail to export the same, or any portion thereof, or cause the motor vehicle fuel or any portion thereof not to be exported, or divert or cause to be diverted the motor vehicle fuel or any portion thereof to be used, distributed or sold in the city and fail to notify the tax administrator and the dealer from whom the motor vehicle fuel was originally purchased of his/her act.

(5) No dealer or other person shall conspire with any person to withhold from export, or divert from export or to return motor vehicle fuel to the city for sale or use so as to avoid any of the fees imposed herein. 

(6) In support of any exemption from taxes on account of sales of motor vehicle fuel in individual quantities of 500 gallons or less for export by the purchaser, the dealer shall retain in his/her files for at least three years an export certificate executed by the purchaser in such form and containing such information as is prescribed by the tax administrator. This certificate shall be prima facie evidence of the exportation of the motor vehicle fuel to which it applies only if accepted by the dealer in good faith. (Ord. 453 § 16, 2004)


3.35.170 Sales to armed forces exempted.

The license tax imposed by VMC 3.35.020 and 3.35.030 shall not be imposed on any motor vehicle fuel sold to the armed forces of the United States for use in ships, aircraft or for export from the city; but every dealer shall be required to report such sales to the tax administrator in such detail as may be required. A certificate by an authorized officer of such armed forces shall be accepted by the dealer as sufficient proof that the sale is for the purpose specified in the certificate. (Ord. 453 § 17, 2004)


3.35.180 Fuel in vehicles coming into city not taxed.

Any person coming into the city in a motor vehicle may transport in the fuel tank of such vehicle, motor vehicle fuel for his/her own use only and for the purpose of operating such motor vehicle without securing a license or paying the tax provided in VMC 3.35.020 and 3.35.030 or complying with any of the provisions imposed upon dealers herein, but if the motor vehicle fuel so brought into the city is removed from the fuel tank of the vehicle or used for any purpose other than the propulsion of the vehicle, the person so importing the fuel into the city shall be subject to all the provisions herein applying to dealers. (Ord. 453 § 18, 2004)


3.35.190 Refunds.

Refunds will be made pursuant to applicable portions of Chapter 319 of the Oregon Revised laws. Claim forms for refunds may be obtained from the tax administrator’s office. (Ord. 453 § 19, 2004)


3.35.200 Examinations and investigations.

The tax administrator, or duly authorized agents, may make any examination of accounts, records, stocks, facilities and equipment of dealers, service stations and other persons engaged in storing, selling or distributing motor vehicle fuel or other petroleum product or products within this city, and such other investigations as it considers necessary in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. If the examinations or investigations disclose that any reports of dealers or other persons theretofore filed with the tax administrator pursuant to the requirements herein have shown incorrectly the amount of gallonage of motor vehicle fuel distributed or the tax accruing thereon, the tax administrator may make such changes in subsequent reports and payments of such dealers or other persons, or may make such refunds, as may be necessary to correct the errors disclosed by its examinations or investigation. The dealer shall reimburse the city for the reasonable costs of the examination or investigation if the action discloses that the dealer paid 95 percent or less of the tax owing for the period of the examination or investigation. In the event that such an examination or investigation results in an assessment by and an additional payment due to the city, such additional payment shall be subject to interest at the rate of 12 percent per year from the date the original tax payment was due. (Ord. 453 § 20, 2004)


3.35.210 Limitation on credit for or refund of overpayment and on assessment of additional tax.

(1) Except as otherwise provided in this code, any credit for erroneous overpayment of tax made by a dealer taken on a subsequent return or any claim for refund of tax erroneously overpaid and filed by a dealer must be so taken or filed within three years after the date on which the overpayment was made to the city.

(2) Except in the case of a fraudulent report or neglect to make a report, every notice of additional tax proposed to be assessed under this code shall be served on dealers within three years from the date upon which such additional taxes become due, and shall be subject to penalty as provided in VMC 3.35.100. (Ord. 453 § 21, 2004)


3.35.220 Examining books and accounts of carrier of motor vehicle fuel.

The tax administrator or duly authorized agents of the tax administrator may at any time during normal business hours examine the books and accounts of any carrier of motor vehicle fuel operating within the city for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this code. (Ord. 453 § 22, 2004)


3.35.230 Records to be kept by dealers.

Every dealer in motor vehicle fuel shall keep a record in such form as may be prescribed by the tax administrator of all purchases, receipts, sales and distribution of motor vehicle fuel. The records shall include copies of all invoices or bills of all such sales and shall at all times during the business hours of the day be subject to inspection by the tax administrator or authorized officers or agents of the tax administrator. (Ord. 453 § 23, 2004)


3.35.240 Records to be kept three years.

Every dealer shall maintain and keep, for a period of three years, all records of motor vehicle fuel used, sold and distributed within the city by such dealer, together with stock records, invoices, bills of lading and other pertinent papers as may be required by the tax administrator. In the event such records are not kept within the state of Oregon, the dealer shall reimburse the tax administrator for all travel, lodging, and related expenses incurred by the tax administrator in examining such records. The amount of such expenses shall be assessed in addition to the tax imposed by VMC 3.35.020. (Ord. 453 § 24, 2004)


3.35.250 Use of tax revenues.

(1) For the purpose of this section, “net revenue” shall mean the revenue from the tax and penalties imposed by this chapter remaining after providing for the cost of administration and any refunds and credits authorized herein.

(2) The net revenue shall be used only for the construction, reconstruction, improvement, repair, maintenance, operation, and use of public highways, roads and streets within the city. (Ord. 453 § 25, 2004)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



3.40.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

(1) “City” means the city of Veneta.

(2) “Tax administrator” means the city administrator of the city of Veneta, the city administrator’s designee, and/or another individual or entity designated by the city to collect the tax on behalf of the city.

(3) “Consumer” means a person who purchases, acquires, owns, holds or uses marijuana items other than for the purpose of resale.

(4) “Marijuana item” means marijuana, cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates and cannabinoid extracts as defined in ORS 475B.015.

(5) “Marijuana retailer” means a person licensed under ORS 475B.110. For purposes of this chapter, “marijuana retailer” includes any individual who is a proprietor of or person responsible for a marijuana retailer in any capacity.

(6) “Person” means individuals, corporations, associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies and joint stock companies.

(7) “Retail sale price” means the total consideration paid to a marijuana retailer for a marijuana item by or on behalf of a consumer, excluding any tax.

(8) “Tax” means either the tax payable by the consumer, or the aggregate amount of taxes due from a marijuana retailer during the period for which the marijuana retailer is required to report the marijuana retailer’s collections. (Ord. 541 § 1, 2017; Ord. 536 § 1, 2016)


3.40.015 Registration.

Every person engaging in business as a marijuana retailer in the city of Veneta shall register with the tax administrator on a form provided by the tax administrator within 15 calendar days after commencing operation as a marijuana retailer. Nonregistration under this section shall not relieve any person from the obligation to pay the tax. The registration shall set forth the name under which the marijuana retailer transacts or intends to transact business, the location of the marijuana retailer’s place or places of business, and such other information that the tax administrator requires to facilitate the collection of the tax. The registration shall be signed by an individual authorized to sign on behalf of the marijuana retailer. The tax administrator shall, within 10 days after the registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to the registrant to collect the tax from the consumers of the marijuana retailer, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of the registrant. Such a certificate shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the tax administrator upon the cessation of business at the location named on the certificates or upon sale or transfer of the business. Each such certificate and duplicate thereof shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed so as to come to the notice readily of all consumers and persons entering the marijuana retailer’s place of business. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

(1) The name of the marijuana retailer;

(2) The address of the marijuana retailer;

(3) The date when the certificate is issued;

(4) “This Marijuana Retailer Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the marijuana tax ordinance of the City of Veneta by registration with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from consumers the City’s marijuana tax and remitting the tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, or to operate as a marijuana retailer without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of the City. This certificate does not constitute a permit.” (Ord. 541 § 2, 2017)


3.40.020 Tax imposed.

The city of Veneta hereby imposes a tax on each marijuana item sold to a consumer within the city of Veneta by a marijuana retailer. The Veneta city council shall set the tax rate by resolution; however, the tax rate adopted by the city council shall not exceed three percent of the retail sale price for each marijuana item sold. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the consumer to the city and shall be extinguished only by payment to the marijuana retailer or to the city. (Ord. 536 § 1, 2016)


3.40.030 Collection.

The consumer shall pay the tax to the marijuana retailer at the time of the purchase or sale of the marijuana item. Every marijuana retailer shall collect the tax from the consumer at the time of the sale of a marijuana item. The tax collected by the marijuana retailer shall be held in trust by the marijuana retailer for payment to the city. The amount of the tax shall be separately stated upon the marijuana retailer’s records and on any receipt for the sale of marijuana items rendered by the marijuana retailer to the consumer. No marijuana retailer shall advertise that the tax or any part of the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the marijuana retailer, or that it will not be added to the sale price, or that when added, any part will be refunded. The marijuana retailer shall remit the tax to the tax administrator. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the marijuana retailer, the tax administrator may require that the tax be paid directly by the marijuana retailer. The tax administrator is authorized to exercise all supervisory and administrative powers with regard to the administration, collection and enforcement of the tax authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 541 § 3, 2017; Ord. 536 § 1, 2016)


3.40.035 Remittance forms.

(1) All taxes collected by any marijuana retailer pursuant to this chapter are due and payable to the tax administrator on the fifteenth day of the month for the preceding month and are delinquent on the last day of the month in which they are due.

(2) On or before the fifteenth day of each month, the marijuana retailer shall file a remittance form for the taxes collected in the previous month with the tax administrator. The remittance shall be filed in such form as the tax administrator prescribes.

(3) A remittance form shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period for which the remittance is filed; the total sales upon which the tax is collected or otherwise due; gross sales of the marijuana retailer for the period; the amount of any adjustments; and an explanation of any discrepancies in the amounts included in the remittance.

(4) The person required to file the remittance form shall deliver the remittance form, together with the amount of the tax due, to the tax administrator at the tax administrator’s office; either by personal delivery or by mail. If the remittance is mailed, the postmark shall be considered the date of delivery.

(5) The tax administrator may, for good cause, extend the time for making any remittance or paying any tax for a period not to exceed one month. No further extension may be granted, except by the city administrator. Any marijuana retailer to whom an extension is granted shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month on the amount of tax due, without proration for a fraction of a month. If a remittance is not filed, and the tax and interest due is not paid by the end of the extension granted, then the interest shall become a part of the tax for computation of penalties prescribed in VMC 3.40.050.

(6) The tax administrator, if he or she deems it necessary in order to insure payment or facilitate collection by the city of the amount of taxes in any individual case, may require remittances and payment of the amount of taxes for other than monthly periods. (Ord. 541 § 4, 2017)


3.40.040 Accounting and records.

(1) Every marijuana retailer must keep and preserve, in a generally accepted accounting format used for reporting revenue and taxes due on business activity, detailed records of all sales made and all taxes collected. Every marijuana retailer must keep and preserve such records for a period of six years. The tax administrator shall have the right to inspect all such records at reasonable times.

(2) For purposes of determining the accuracy of any tax return or for the purpose of an estimate of taxes due, the tax administrator may examine any books, papers, records, or memoranda bearing upon the marijuana retailer’s tax returns, including copies of the marijuana retailer’s state and federal income tax returns and copies of the marijuana retailer’s state marijuana tax returns. All books, invoices and other records shall be made available within the city for examination by the tax administrator during regular business hours. (Ord. 536 § 1, 2016)


3.40.050 Penalties and interest.

(1) Any marijuana retailer who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due and who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter prior to delinquency shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax due in addition to the amount of the tax.

(2) Any marijuana retailer who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due, and who fails to pay any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first becomes delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 15 percent of the amount of the tax due plus the amount of the tax and the 10 percent penalty first imposed.

(3) If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud or intent to evade the provisions of this chapter, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added to the amount of the remittance due, in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (1) and (2) of this section.

(4) In addition to the penalties imposed, any marijuana retailer who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof, without proration for portions of a month, on the amount of the tax due, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first becomes delinquent, until paid in full.

(5) Every penalty imposed and any interest that accrues under the provisions of this chapter shall be merged with, and become a part of, the tax required to be paid. (Ord. 541 § 5, 2017; Ord. 536 § 1, 2016)


3.40.055 Deficiencies, fraud, evasion, delay.

(1) If the tax administrator determines that a tax remittance required by VMC 3.40.035 is incorrect, the tax administrator may compute and determine the amount required to be paid, upon the basis of the facts contained in the remittance or remittances or upon the basis of any information within the tax administrator’s possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more periods, and the amount so determined shall be due and payable immediately upon service of notice as provided in this chapter and shall be subject to penalties for deficiencies as set forth in VMC 3.40.050.

(a) In making a deficiency determination the tax administrator may offset overpayments, if any, against any underpayment for a subsequent period or periods, or against penalties and interest on the underpayment. The interest on underpayment shall be computed in the manner set forth in VMC 3.40.050.

(b) The tax administrator shall give to the marijuana retailer a written notice of the tax administrator’s determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If served by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the marijuana retailer at the marijuana retailer’s address as it appears in the records of the tax administrator and service shall be deemed complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office, postage prepaid.

(c) Except in the case of fraud or intent to evade this chapter or any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice of the deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the last day of the month following the close of the monthly period for which the deficiency is alleged, or within three years after the remittance is filed, whichever period expires later.

(d) Any deficiency shall become due and payable immediately upon service of notice by the tax administrator and a deficiency determination shall become final on the tenth calendar day after the date the tax administrator serves notice of the deficiency determination unless the tax administrator receives a written petition for redetermination before the tax administrator’s determination becomes final.

(2) If any marijuana retailer fails or refuses to collect the tax or to make any report required by this chapter, within the time required by this chapter, or to remit the tax or any portion thereof required to be remitted, or makes a fraudulent remittance or otherwise willfully attempts to evade the provisions of this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due and shall proceed to determine and assess against the marijuana retailer the tax, interest, and penalties provided for by VMC 3.40.020 and 3.40.050. In the event such a determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice, in the manner prescribed by subsection (1)(b) of this section of the amount so assessed. The determination and notice shall be made and mailed within three years after discovery by the tax administrator of any fraud, intent to evade, failure or refusal to collect the tax, or failure to file a required remittance. Any deficiency determination shall become due and payable immediately upon service of the notice and shall become final on the tenth calendar day after the date the tax administrator serves notice of the deficiency determination unless the tax administrator receives a written petition for redetermination before the tax administrator’s determination becomes final.

(3) If the tax administrator believes that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the city by this chapter or any deficiency determination made under this section is jeopardized by delay, the tax administrator shall make a determination of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected, noting that fact upon the determination. The amount so determined as provided in this section shall be immediately due and payable, and the marijuana retailer shall immediately pay the determined amount to the tax administrator after service of notice thereof. However, the marijuana retailer may petition in writing for redetermination and refund, if the petition is filed within 10 calendar days from the date of service of notice by the tax administrator. (Ord. 541 § 6, 2017)


3.40.060 Appeal.

(1) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator may appeal to the city administrator by filing a notice of appeal with the tax administrator within 10 days of the date the notice of the decision is served or mailed. The tax administrator shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal and shall give the appellant 10 days’ written notice of the time and place of the hearing.

(2) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city administrator under subsection (1) of this section may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the tax administrator within 10 days of the date the city administrator’s decision is served or mailed. The tax administrator shall transmit the notice, together with the file of the appealed matter, to the council, who shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal. The council shall give the appellant not less than 10 days’ written notice of the time and place of hearing the appeal. (Ord. 536 § 1, 2016)


3.40.065 Redeterminations.

(1) Any person against whom a determination is made under VMC 3.40.055 or any person directly interested in the determination may petition for a redetermination, and refund if applicable, within the time required in VMC 3.40.055. If a petition for redetermination is not filed within the time required in VMC 3.40.055, the determination shall become final at the expiration of the allowable time.

(2) If a petition for redetermination is timely filed the tax administrator shall reconsider the determination, and, if requested in the petition, the tax administrator shall grant the petitioner hearing and shall give the petitioner at least 10 days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing. The tax administrator may continue the hearing from time to time as necessary.

(3) Following receipt of the petition, and the hearing if applicable, the tax administrator may decrease or increase the amount of the determination, and if an increase is determined, the increase shall be payable immediately upon service of the tax administrator’s redetermination.

(4) The decision of the tax administrator upon a petition for redetermination shall become final 10 calendar days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof, unless a written appeal of the tax administrator’s decision is filed with the city administrator pursuant to VMC 3.40.060 prior to the expiration of the 10-day period.

(5) No petition for redetermination or appeal therefrom shall be effective for any purpose unless the marijuana retailer first complies with the payment provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 541 § 7, 2017)


3.40.070 Refund.

Whenever the amount of any tax imposed under this chapter has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator, it may be refunded, provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific reason upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be made on forms provided by the tax administrator. If the tax administrator approves the claim, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded to, or may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from, the marijuana retailer from whom it was collected or by whom it was paid, and the balance may be refunded to the marijuana retailer or the marijuana retailer’s administrators, executors or assignees. (Ord. 536 § 1, 2016)


3.40.075 Security, collection, business registration revocation, lien.

(1) The tax administrator, whenever he or she deems it necessary to insure compliance with this chapter, may require any marijuana retailer subject to the tax imposed by this chapter to deposit with the tax administrator such security in the form of cash, bond, or other assets as the tax administrator may require. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the tax administrator but shall not be greater than twice the marijuana retailer’s estimated average monthly liability for the period for which the marijuana retailer files returns, or $5,000, whichever amount is the lesser. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the tax administrator subject to the limitations of this section.

(2) At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, or at any time within three years after any determination by the tax administrator under this chapter becomes final, the tax administrator may bring an action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States, in the name of the city, to collect the amount of delinquent tax, together with any penalties and interest.

(3) At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, or at any time within three years after any determination by the tax administrator under this chapter becomes final, the tax administrator may contract with a collections agency to collect the amount of delinquent tax, together with any penalties and interest.

(4) At any time after a determination by the tax administrator under this chapter becomes final, the city administrator may revoke a marijuana retailer’s city of Veneta business registration for nonpayment of delinquent tax. The business registration shall not be reinstated unless and until the city receives payment for the amount of delinquent tax, together with any penalties and interest.

(5) The tax imposed by VMC 3.40.020, together with the interest and penalties provided by VMC 3.40.050 and the filing fees paid to the department of deeds and records of Lane County, Oregon, and advertising costs which may be incurred when the tax becomes delinquent shall be, and until paid shall remain, a lien from the date of its recording with the department of deeds and records of Lane County, Oregon, and superior to all subsequent recorded liens on all tangible personal property used in the retail establishment of marijuana retailer within Veneta and may be foreclosed on and sold as necessary to discharge the lien. Notice of the lien may be issued by the tax administrator whenever the marijuana retailer is in default in the payment of the tax, interest, or penalties, and shall be recorded with the department of deeds and records of Lane County, Oregon, with a copy mailed to the delinquent marijuana retailer at the marijuana retailer’s address as it appears in the records of the tax administrator. The personal property subject to the lien and seized by the tax administrator may be sold by the tax administrator at public auction after 10 days’ notice thereof published in a newspaper in the city.

(6) Any such lien shall, upon the payment in full to the city of the taxes, penalties, and interest for which the lien has been imposed, be released by the tax administrator. The marijuana retailer or person making the payment shall receive a receipt stating that the full amount of the taxes, penalties, and interest has been paid and that the lien is thereby released and the record of lien satisfied. (Ord. 541 § 8, 2017)


3.40.080 Apportionment of tax revenue.

The net proceeds collected from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be allocated in equal shares to the city’s law enforcement fund and the city’s park and recreation fund. For the purpose of this section, net proceeds means the revenue received by the city from the tax and penalties imposed by this chapter, after providing for the cost of administration and any refunds and credits. (Ord. 536 § 1, 2016)


3.40.085 Administrative fee.

A marijuana retailer liable for the collection and remittance of the tax imposed by this chapter may withhold five percent of the net tax due to cover the marijuana retailer’s expenses related to the collection and remittance of the tax. (Ord. 541 § 9, 2017)


3.40.090 Administration.

(1) The city shall keep records related to the payment of the tax confidential to the extent those records are exempt from disclosure by ORS 192.502(18). Nothing in this subsection shall prevent, however:

(a) The disclosure to or the examination of records by another city of Veneta official, employee, or tax-collecting agent for the sole purpose of administering or collecting the tax.

(b) The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to any such tax paid, any such tax unpaid or the amount of any such tax required to be collected, together with interest and penalties thereon provided the city attorney approves each such disclosure. The tax administrator may refuse to make any such disclosures referred to in this subsection when in the tax administrator’s opinion the public interest would suffer thereby.

(c) The disclosure of the names and addresses of any persons to whom marijuana retailer registration certificates have been issued.

(d) The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city.

(2) Every person engaging in business as a marijuana retailer of a marijuana retailer in the city of Veneta shall comply with the business registration requirements of Chapter 5.05 VMC. (Ord. 541 § 10, 2017)


3.40.095 Violations.

No marijuana retailer or other person subject to the provisions of this chapter shall:

(1) Fail or refuse to register as required by VMC 3.40.015;

(2) Fail or refuse to furnish any remittance form or payment required to be made under this chapter or to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator;

(3) Render a false or fraudulent remittance form under this chapter; or

(4) Render, sign, or verify any false or fraudulent report regarding the city’s marijuana tax. (Ord. 541 § 11, 2017)


Chapter 3.35 MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL DEALERS TAX

Sections:

3.35.010    Definitions.

3.35.020    Tax imposed.

3.35.030    Amount and payment.

3.35.040    License requirements.

3.35.050    License applications and issuance.

3.35.060    Failure to secure license.

3.35.070    Suspension and revocation of license.

3.35.080    Cancellation of license.

3.35.090    Remedies cumulative.

3.35.100    Payment of tax and delinquency.

3.35.110    Monthly statement of dealer.

3.35.120    Failure to file monthly statement.

3.35.130    Billing purchasers.

3.35.140    Failure to provide invoice or delivery tag.

3.35.150    Transporting motor vehicle fuel in bulk.

3.35.160    Exemption of export fuel.

3.35.170    Sales to armed forces exempted.

3.35.180    Fuel in vehicles coming into city not taxed.

3.35.190    Refunds.

3.35.200    Examinations and investigations.

3.35.210    Limitation on credit for or refund of overpayment and on assessment of additional tax.

3.35.220    Examining books and accounts of carrier of motor vehicle fuel.

3.35.230    Records to be kept by dealers.

3.35.240    Records to be kept three years.

3.35.250    Use of tax revenues.


3.35.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following words and phrases shall mean:

(1) “City” means the city of Veneta.

(2) “Dealer” means any person who:

(a) Imports or causes to be imported motor vehicle fuel for sale, use or distribution in the city, but “dealer” does not include any person who imports into the city motor vehicle fuel in quantities of 500 gallons or less purchased from a supplier who is licensed as a dealer hereunder if that dealer assumes liability for the payment of the applicable license tax to the city; or

(b) Produces, refines, manufactures or compounds motor vehicle fuels in the city for export or for use, distribution or sale in the city; or 

(c) Acquires in the city for sale, use or distribution in the city motor vehicle fuels with respect to which there has been no license tax previously incurred. 

(3) “Distribution” means, in addition to its ordinary meaning, the delivery of motor vehicle fuel by a dealer to any service station or into any tank, storage facility or series of tanks or storage facilities connected by pipelines, from which motor vehicle fuel is withdrawn directly for sale or for delivery into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles whether or not the service station, tank or storage facility is owned, operated or controlled by the dealer.

(4) “Highway” means every street, road, way, thoroughfare and place of whatever nature, open for use of the public for the purpose of vehicular travel. 

(5) “Motor vehicle” means all vehicles, engines or machines, movable or immovable, operated or propelled by the use of motor vehicle fuel. 

(6) “Motor vehicle fuel” includes gasoline, diesel, mogas, methanol and any other flammable or combustible gaseous, liquid, or solid substance, by whatever name such substance is known or sold, usable as fuel for the operation of motor vehicles except a substance, the chief use of which, as determined by the tax administrator, is for purposes other than the propulsion of motor vehicles upon the highways.

(7) “Person” includes every natural person, association, firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture or other business entity. 

(8) “Service station” means any place operated for the purpose of retailing and delivering motor vehicle fuel into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles. 

(9) “Tax administrator” means the city administrator, the city administrator’s designee, or any person or entity with whom the city administrator contracts to perform those duties. (Ord. 453 § 1, 2004)


3.35.020 Tax imposed.

A business license tax is hereby imposed on every dealer. This tax is in addition to any other business license fee imposed by city. The tax imposed shall be paid monthly to the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to exercise all supervisory and administrative powers with regard to the enforcement, collection and administration of the business license tax, including all powers specified in ORS 319.010 to 319.430. (Ord. 453 § 2, 2004)


3.35.030 Amount and payment.

In addition to any fees or taxes otherwise provided for by law, every dealer in the city engaging in the sale, use or distribution of motor vehicle fuel shall:

(1) Not later than the twenty-fifth day of each calendar month, render a statement to the tax administrator on forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator of all motor vehicle fuel sold, used or distributed by him/her in the city as well as all such fuel sold, used or distributed in the city by a purchaser thereof upon which sale, use or distribution the dealer has assumed liability for the applicable license tax during the preceding calendar month.

(2) Pay a license tax computed on the basis of $0.03 per gallon of such motor vehicle fuel so sold, used or distributed as shown by such statement in the manner and within the time provided in this code. (Ord. 453 § 3, 2004)


3.35.040 License requirements.

No dealer shall sell, use or distribute any motor vehicle fuel until he/she has secured a dealer’s license as required herein. (Ord. 453 § 4, 2004)


3.35.050 License applications and issuance.

(1) Every person, before becoming a dealer in motor vehicle fuel in this city, shall make application to the tax administrator for a license authorizing such person to engage in business as a dealer.

(2) Applications for the license shall be made on forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator.

(3) Applications shall be accompanied by a duly acknowledged certificate containing:

(a) The business name under which the applicant transacts business.

(b) The address of applicant’s principal place of business and location of distributing stations in and within three miles of the city.

(c) The name and address of the managing agent, the names and addresses of the several persons constituting the firm or partnership or, if a corporation, the name under which the corporation is authorized to transact business and the names and addresses of its principal officers and registered agent, as well as primary transport carrier.

(4) If an application for a motor vehicle fuel dealer’s license is complete and accepted for filing, the tax administrator shall issue to the dealer a license in such form as the tax administrator may prescribe to transact business in the city; provided, however, that the tax administrator may refuse to issue such license if it finds that the applicant meets any of the conditions for refusal to issue a license under state law. A license issued hereunder is not assignable and is valid only for the dealer in whose name it is issued. 

(5) The tax administrator shall retain all completed applications with an alphabetical index thereof, together with a record of all licensed dealers. (Ord. 453 § 5, 2004)


3.35.060 Failure to secure license.

(1) If a dealer sells, distributes or uses any motor vehicle fuel without first filing the certificate and obtaining the license required by VMC 3.35.050:

(a) The license tax on all motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by that dealer shall be immediately due and payable.

(b) The tax administrator shall proceed forthwith to determine, from as many available sources as the tax administrator determines reasonable, the amount of tax due, shall assess the dealer for the tax in the amount found due, together with a penalty of 100 percent of the tax, and shall make its certificate of such assessment and penalty. In any suit or proceeding to collect the tax or penalty or both, the certificate shall be prima facie evidence that the dealer therein named is indebted to the city in the amount of the tax and penalty stated.

(c) Any tax or penalty assessed pursuant to this section may be collected in the manner prescribed in VMC 3.35.100 with reference to delinquency in payment of the fee or by an action of law.

(2) In the event any suit or action is instituted to enforce this section, if the city is the prevailing party, the city shall be entitled to recover from the person sued reasonable attorney’s fees at trial or upon appeal of such suit or action, in addition to all other sums provided by law. (Ord. 453 § 6, 2004)


3.35.070 Suspension and revocation of license.

The tax administrator may, to the extent permitted by law, suspend, and, upon 10 days’ written notice, revoke the license of any dealer who fails to comply with any provision of this chapter. The tax administrator shall mail, by certified mail addressed to the dealer at his/her last known address appearing in the files of the tax administrator, a notice of intent to cancel. The notice of revocation shall include the reason for cancellation. (Ord. 453 § 7, 2004)


3.35.080 Cancellation of license.

(1) The tax administrator may, upon written request of a dealer, cancel a license issued to that dealer. The tax administrator shall, upon approving the dealer’s request for cancellation, set a date not later than 30 days after receipt of the written request, after which the license shall no longer be effective.

(2) The tax administrator may, after 30 days’ notice has been mailed to the last known address of the dealer, cancel the license of dealer upon finding that the dealer is no longer engaged in the business of a dealer. (Ord. 453 § 8, 2004)


3.35.090 Remedies cumulative.

Except as otherwise provided in VMC 3.35.100 and 3.35.110, the remedies provided in VMC 3.35.060 through 3.35.080 are cumulative. No action taken pursuant to those sections shall relieve any person from the penalty provisions of this code. (Ord. 453 § 9, 2004)


3.35.100 Payment of tax and delinquency.

(1) The license tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid to the tax administrator on or before the twenty-fifth day of each month. 

(2) Except as provided in subsections (3) and (4) of this section, if payment of the license tax is not paid as required by subsection (1) of this section, a penalty of one percent of such license tax shall be assessed and be immediately due and payable.

(3) Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, if the payment of the tax and penalty, if any, is not made on or before the first day of the next month following that month in which payment is due, a further penalty of 10 percent of the tax shall be assessed. Said penalty shall be in addition to the penalty provided for in subsection (2) of this section and shall be immediately due and payable.

(4) Penalties imposed by this section shall not apply if a penalty has been assessed and paid pursuant to VMC 3.35.060. The tax administrator may for good cause shown waive any penalties assessed under this section.

(5) If any person fails to pay the license tax or any penalty provided for by this section, the tax and/or penalty shall be collected from that person for the use of the city. The tax administrator shall commence and prosecute to final determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect the same.

(6) In the event any suit or action is instituted to collect the business license tax or any penalty provided for by this section, if the city is the prevailing party, the city shall be entitled to recover from the person sued reasonable attorney’s fees at trial or upon appeal of such suit or action, in addition to all other sums provided by law. (Ord. 453 § 10, 2004)


3.35.110 Monthly statement of dealer.

Every dealer in motor vehicle fuel shall provide to the tax administrator on or before the twenty-fifth day of each month, on forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator, a statement of the number of gallons of motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by the dealer during the preceding calendar month. The statement shall be signed by the dealer or the dealer’s agent. (Ord. 453 § 11, 2004)


3.35.120 Failure to file monthly statement.

If a dealer fails to file any statement required by VMC 3.35.110, the tax administrator shall proceed forthwith to determine from as many available sources as the tax administrator determines reasonable the amount of motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by such dealer for the period unreported, and such determination shall in any proceeding be prima facie evidence of the amount of fuel sold, distributed or used. The tax administrator shall immediately assess the dealer for the license tax upon the amount determined, adding thereto a penalty of 10 percent of the tax. The penalty shall be cumulative to other penalties provided in this code. (Ord. 453 § 12, 2004)


3.35.130 Billing purchasers.

Dealers in motor vehicle fuel shall render bills to all purchasers of motor vehicle fuel. The bills shall separately state and describe the different products sold or shipped thereunder and shall be serially numbered except where other sales invoice controls acceptable to the tax administrator are maintained. (Ord. 453 § 13, 2004)


3.35.140 Failure to provide invoice or delivery tag.

No person shall receive and accept motor vehicle fuel from any dealer, or pay for the same, or sell or offer the motor vehicle fuel for sale, unless the motor vehicle fuel is accompanied by an invoice or delivery tag showing the date upon which motor vehicle fuel was delivered, purchased or sold and the name of the dealer in motor vehicle fuel. (Ord. 453 § 14, 2004)


3.35.150 Transporting motor vehicle fuel in bulk.

Every person operating any conveyance for the purpose of hauling, transporting or delivering motor vehicle fuel in bulk shall, before entering upon the public highways of the city with such conveyance, have and possess during the entire time of the hauling or transporting of such motor vehicle fuel an invoice, bill of sale or other written statement showing the number of gallons, the true name and address of the seller or consignor, and the true name and address of the buyer or consignee, if any, of the same.

The person hauling such motor vehicle fuel shall, at the request of any officer authorized by law to inquire into or investigate such matters, produce and offer for inspection the invoice, bill of sale or other statement. (Ord. 453 § 15, 2004)


3.35.160 Exemption of export fuel.

(1) The license tax imposed by VMC 3.35.020 shall not be imposed on motor vehicle fuel:

(a) Exported from the city by a dealer; or

(b) Sold by a dealer in individual quantities of 500 gallons or less for export by the purchaser to an area or areas outside the city in containers other than the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, but every dealer shall be required to report such exports and sales to the city in such detail as may be required. 

(2) In support of any exemption from license taxes claimed under this section other than in the case of stock transfers or deliveries in the dealer’s own equipment, every dealer must execute and file with the tax administrator an export certificate in such form as shall be prescribed, prepared and furnished by the tax administrator, containing a statement, made by some person having actual knowledge of the fact of such exportation, that the motor vehicle fuel has been exported from the city, and giving such details with reference to such shipment as the tax administrator may require. The tax administrator may demand of any dealer such additional data as is deemed necessary in support of any such certificate, and failure to supply such data will constitute a waiver of all right to exemption claimed by virtue of such certificate. The tax administrator may, in a case where the tax administrator believes no useful purpose would be served by filing of an export certificate, waive the filing of the certificate.

(3) Any motor vehicle fuel carried from the city in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle shall not be considered as exported from the city.

(4) No person shall, through false statement, trick or device, or otherwise, obtain motor vehicle fuel for export as to which the city tax has not been paid and fail to export the same, or any portion thereof, or cause the motor vehicle fuel or any portion thereof not to be exported, or divert or cause to be diverted the motor vehicle fuel or any portion thereof to be used, distributed or sold in the city and fail to notify the tax administrator and the dealer from whom the motor vehicle fuel was originally purchased of his/her act.

(5) No dealer or other person shall conspire with any person to withhold from export, or divert from export or to return motor vehicle fuel to the city for sale or use so as to avoid any of the fees imposed herein. 

(6) In support of any exemption from taxes on account of sales of motor vehicle fuel in individual quantities of 500 gallons or less for export by the purchaser, the dealer shall retain in his/her files for at least three years an export certificate executed by the purchaser in such form and containing such information as is prescribed by the tax administrator. This certificate shall be prima facie evidence of the exportation of the motor vehicle fuel to which it applies only if accepted by the dealer in good faith. (Ord. 453 § 16, 2004)


3.35.170 Sales to armed forces exempted.

The license tax imposed by VMC 3.35.020 and 3.35.030 shall not be imposed on any motor vehicle fuel sold to the armed forces of the United States for use in ships, aircraft or for export from the city; but every dealer shall be required to report such sales to the tax administrator in such detail as may be required. A certificate by an authorized officer of such armed forces shall be accepted by the dealer as sufficient proof that the sale is for the purpose specified in the certificate. (Ord. 453 § 17, 2004)


3.35.180 Fuel in vehicles coming into city not taxed.

Any person coming into the city in a motor vehicle may transport in the fuel tank of such vehicle, motor vehicle fuel for his/her own use only and for the purpose of operating such motor vehicle without securing a license or paying the tax provided in VMC 3.35.020 and 3.35.030 or complying with any of the provisions imposed upon dealers herein, but if the motor vehicle fuel so brought into the city is removed from the fuel tank of the vehicle or used for any purpose other than the propulsion of the vehicle, the person so importing the fuel into the city shall be subject to all the provisions herein applying to dealers. (Ord. 453 § 18, 2004)


3.35.190 Refunds.

Refunds will be made pursuant to applicable portions of Chapter 319 of the Oregon Revised laws. Claim forms for refunds may be obtained from the tax administrator’s office. (Ord. 453 § 19, 2004)


3.35.200 Examinations and investigations.

The tax administrator, or duly authorized agents, may make any examination of accounts, records, stocks, facilities and equipment of dealers, service stations and other persons engaged in storing, selling or distributing motor vehicle fuel or other petroleum product or products within this city, and such other investigations as it considers necessary in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. If the examinations or investigations disclose that any reports of dealers or other persons theretofore filed with the tax administrator pursuant to the requirements herein have shown incorrectly the amount of gallonage of motor vehicle fuel distributed or the tax accruing thereon, the tax administrator may make such changes in subsequent reports and payments of such dealers or other persons, or may make such refunds, as may be necessary to correct the errors disclosed by its examinations or investigation. The dealer shall reimburse the city for the reasonable costs of the examination or investigation if the action discloses that the dealer paid 95 percent or less of the tax owing for the period of the examination or investigation. In the event that such an examination or investigation results in an assessment by and an additional payment due to the city, such additional payment shall be subject to interest at the rate of 12 percent per year from the date the original tax payment was due. (Ord. 453 § 20, 2004)


3.35.210 Limitation on credit for or refund of overpayment and on assessment of additional tax.

(1) Except as otherwise provided in this code, any credit for erroneous overpayment of tax made by a dealer taken on a subsequent return or any claim for refund of tax erroneously overpaid and filed by a dealer must be so taken or filed within three years after the date on which the overpayment was made to the city.

(2) Except in the case of a fraudulent report or neglect to make a report, every notice of additional tax proposed to be assessed under this code shall be served on dealers within three years from the date upon which such additional taxes become due, and shall be subject to penalty as provided in VMC 3.35.100. (Ord. 453 § 21, 2004)


3.35.220 Examining books and accounts of carrier of motor vehicle fuel.

The tax administrator or duly authorized agents of the tax administrator may at any time during normal business hours examine the books and accounts of any carrier of motor vehicle fuel operating within the city for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this code. (Ord. 453 § 22, 2004)


3.35.230 Records to be kept by dealers.

Every dealer in motor vehicle fuel shall keep a record in such form as may be prescribed by the tax administrator of all purchases, receipts, sales and distribution of motor vehicle fuel. The records shall include copies of all invoices or bills of all such sales and shall at all times during the business hours of the day be subject to inspection by the tax administrator or authorized officers or agents of the tax administrator. (Ord. 453 § 23, 2004)


3.35.240 Records to be kept three years.

Every dealer shall maintain and keep, for a period of three years, all records of motor vehicle fuel used, sold and distributed within the city by such dealer, together with stock records, invoices, bills of lading and other pertinent papers as may be required by the tax administrator. In the event such records are not kept within the state of Oregon, the dealer shall reimburse the tax administrator for all travel, lodging, and related expenses incurred by the tax administrator in examining such records. The amount of such expenses shall be assessed in addition to the tax imposed by VMC 3.35.020. (Ord. 453 § 24, 2004)


3.35.250 Use of tax revenues.

(1) For the purpose of this section, “net revenue” shall mean the revenue from the tax and penalties imposed by this chapter remaining after providing for the cost of administration and any refunds and credits authorized herein.

(2) The net revenue shall be used only for the construction, reconstruction, improvement, repair, maintenance, operation, and use of public highways, roads and streets within the city. (Ord. 453 § 25, 2004)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



3.50.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the “transient room tax” and shall apply to all areas within the incorporated city limits of the city of Veneta. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.020 Definitions.

Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern this chapter.

(1) “Accrual accounting” means a system of accounting in which the operator enters on the operator’s records the rent due from a transient when the rent is earned, whether or not it is paid.

(2) “Cash accounting” means a system of accounting in which the operator does not enter on the operator’s records the rent due from a transient until the rent is paid.

(3) “City administrator” means the city administrator of the city of Veneta or the city administrator’s designee.

(4) “Council” means the city council of the city of Veneta.

(5) “Hotel” means any structure or portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for transient occupancy for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, house, cabin, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment, condominium, other dwelling unit, public or private dormitory, fraternity, sorority, public or private club, recreational vehicle park, or similar facility or structure or portion thereof so occupied, provided the occupancy is for less than a 30-day period.

(6) “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession, for lodging or sleeping purposes, of any portion of a hotel.

(7) “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of a hotel in any capacity and, where the operator performs the operator’s functions through a managing agent other than an employee, the managing agent shall have the same duties and liabilities as the managing agent’s principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall be considered to be compliance by both.

(8) “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private dormitory, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

(9) “Recreational vehicle park” means a development which is occupied or intended or designed for transient occupancy for 30 days or less, on which travel trailers, pickup campers, tent trailers, tents, and/or self-propelled motorized vehicles are parked or set up; the purpose of such development being to provide to the public a temporary location for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, but excluding recreational vehicle parks operated by the federal government.

(10) “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received by the operator, for the occupancy of space in a hotel whether or not valued in money, goods, labor, credits, property, or other consideration valued in money, without any deduction.

(11) “Rent package plan” means the consideration charged for both food and rent where a single rate is made for the total of both. The amount to rent for determination of the transient room tax under VMC 3.50.030 shall be the same charge made for rent when not a part of a package plan.

(12) “Tax” means either the tax payable by the transient, or the aggregate amount of taxes due from an operator during the period for which the operator is required to report the operator’s collections.

(13) “Tax administrator” means the finance director of the city of Veneta or the finance director’s designee.

(14) “Transient” means any individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a hotel for a period of less than 30 consecutive calendar days, counting portions of calendar days as full days. The day a transient checks out of the hotel shall not be included in determining the 30-day period if the transient is not charged rent for that day by the operator. Any individual so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired, unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. A person who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in the month, shall not be deemed a transient. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.030 Levy.

For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel located in the city of Veneta, each transient shall pay a tax of four percent of the rent charged by the operator for the occupancy. The tax shall constitute a debt owed by the transient to the city and shall be extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. The operator shall enter the tax on the operator’s records when the rent is collected, if the operator keeps the operator’s records on the cash accounting basis, and when earned, if the operator keeps the operator’s records on the accrual accounting basis. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid by the transient to the operator with each installment. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that the tax be paid directly to the city. In all cases the rent paid or charged for occupancy shall exclude amounts received for the sale of goods, services, or commodities; other than the furnishing of rooms, accommodations, and parking space in recreational vehicle parks. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.040 Collection.

(1) Every operator renting a room in the city of Veneta, the occupancy of which is not exempted under the terms of VMC 3.50.060, shall collect a tax from the occupant of the room. The tax collected or accrued by the operator constitutes a debt owing by the operator to the city.

(2) In all cases of credit or deferred payment of rent, the payment of the tax to the operator may be deferred until the rent is paid, and the operator shall not be liable for the tax until the credit is paid or the deferred payment is made.

(3) The tax administrator shall enforce this chapter and may adopt rules and regulations consistent with those sections and necessary to aid in the enforcement. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.050 Operator’s duties.

Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by VMC 3.50.030 on a transient at the same time as the operator collects rent from the transient. The amount of the tax shall be separately stated upon the operator’s records and on any receipt for the rent rendered by the operator to the transient. No operator shall advertise that the tax or any part of the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, when added, any part will be refunded. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.060 Exemptions.

No tax may be imposed upon:

(1) Any occupant for more than 30 successive calendar days;

(2) Any person who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in the month;

(3) Any occupant whose rent is of a value less than $2.00 per day;

(4) Any occupant whose rent is paid for a hospital room or to a medical clinic, convalescent home, or home for aged people;

(5) Any occupant whose rent is paid by a local agency, either directly or through a voucher, in response to a local disaster or declared emergency. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.070 Registration.

Every person engaging in business as an operator of a hotel in the city of Veneta shall register with the tax administrator on a form provided by the tax administrator within 15 calendar days after commencing operation of the hotel. Nonregistration under this section shall not relieve any person from the obligation to pay the tax. The registration shall set forth the name under which the operator transacts or intends to transact business, the location of the operator’s place or places of business, and such other information that the tax administrator requires to facilitate the collection of the tax. The registration shall be signed by the operator. The tax administrator shall, within 10 days after the registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to the registrant to collect the tax from the occupants of the hotel, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of the registrant. Such a certificate shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the tax administrator upon the cessation of business at the location named on the certificates or upon sale or transfer of the business. Each such certificate and duplicate thereof shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed so as to come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy in the hotel. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

(1) The name of the operator;

(2) The address of the hotel;

(3) The date when the certificate is issued;

(4) 

This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the transient room tax ordinance of the City of Veneta by registration with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the City’s transient room tax and remitting the tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, or to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of the City. This certificate does not constitute a permit.

(Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.080 Returns.

(1) The tax imposed by VMC 3.50.030 shall be paid by the transient to the operator when the transient pays rent to the operator. All such taxes collected by any operator are due and payable to the tax administrator on the fifteenth day of the month for the preceding month and are delinquent on the last day of the month in which they are due.

(2) On or before the fifteenth day of the month following each month of collection by an operator, he or she shall file a return for that month’s tax collections with the tax administrator. The return shall be filed in such form as the tax administrator prescribes.

(3) A return shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period for which the return is filed; the total rentals upon which the tax is collected or otherwise due; gross receipts of the operator for the period; the amount of any exempt rents; and an explanation of any discrepancies in the amounts included in the return.

(4) The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the amount of the tax due, to the tax administrator at the tax administrator’s office; either by personal delivery or by mail. If the return is mailed, the postmark shall be considered the date of delivery.

(5) The tax administrator may, for good cause, extend the time for making any return or paying any tax for a period not to exceed one month. No further extension may be granted, except by the city administrator. Any operator to whom an extension is granted shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month on the amount of tax due, without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed, and the tax and interest due is not paid by the end of the extension granted, then the interest shall become a part of the tax for computation of penalties prescribed in VMC 3.50.090.

(6) The tax administrator, if he or she deems it necessary in order to insure payment or facilitate collection by the city of the amount of taxes in any individual case, may require returns and payment of the amount of taxes for other than monthly periods. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.090 Penalties and interest.

(1) Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due and who fails to remit any tax imposed by VMC 3.50.030 prior to delinquency shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax due in addition to the amount of the tax.

(2) Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due, and who fails to pay any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first becomes delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 15 percent of the amount of the tax due plus the amount of the tax and the 10 percent penalty first imposed.

(3) If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under VMC 3.50.030 is due to fraud or intent to evade the provisions of this code, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added due in addition to the amount of tax due and the penalties stated in subsections (1) and (2) of this section.

(4) In addition to any penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by VMC 3.50.030 shall pay interest on the amount of tax due, exclusive of penalties, at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fractions thereof, without proration for portions of a month, from the date on which the remittance first becomes delinquent, until paid in full.

(5) Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall be merged with, and become a part of, the tax required to be paid. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.100 Deficiencies, fraud, evasion, delay.

(1) If the tax administrator determines that a tax return required by VMC 3.50.080 is incorrect, the tax administrator may compute and determine the amount required to be paid, upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or returns or upon the basis of any information within the tax administrator’s possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more periods, and the amount so determined shall be due and payable immediately upon service of notice as provided in this chapter and shall be subject to penalties for deficiencies as set forth in VMC 3.50.090.

(a) In making a deficiency determination the tax administrator may offset overpayments, if any, against any underpayment for a subsequent period or periods, or against penalties and interest on the underpayment. The interest on underpayment shall be computed in the manner set forth in VMC 3.50.090.

(b) The tax administrator shall give to the operator or occupant a notice of the tax administrator’s determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If served by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the operator at the operator’s address as it appears in the records of the tax administrator and service shall be deemed complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office, postage prepaid.

(c) Except in the case of fraud or intent to evade this chapter or any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice of the deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the last day of the month following the close of the monthly period for which the deficiency is alleged, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires later.

(d) Any deficiency shall become due and payable immediately upon service of notice by the tax administrator and a deficiency determination shall become final on the tenth calendar day after the date the tax administrator serves notice of the deficiency determination unless the tax administrator receives a written petition for redetermination before the tax administrator’s determination becomes final.

(2) If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax or to make any report required by this chapter, within the time required by this chapter, or to remit the tax or any portion thereof required to be remitted, or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise willfully attempts to evade the provisions of this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due and shall proceed to determine and assess against the operator the tax, interest, and penalties provided for by VMC 3.50.030 and 3.50.090. In the event such a determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice, in the manner prescribed by subsection (1)(b) of this section, of the amount so assessed. The determination and notice shall be made and mailed within three years after discovery by the tax administrator of any fraud, intent to evade, failure or refusal to collect the tax, or failure to file a required return. Any deficiency determination shall become due and payable immediately upon service of the notice and shall become final on the tenth calendar day after the tax administrator serves the notice of the deficiency determination unless the tax administrator receives a written petition for redetermination before the tax administrator’s determination becomes final.

(3) If the tax administrator believes that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the city by VMC 3.50.030 or any deficiency determination made under this section is jeopardized by delay, the tax administrator shall make a determination of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected, noting that fact upon the determination. The amount so determined as provided in this section shall be immediately due and payable, and the operator shall immediately pay the determined amount to the tax administrator after service of notice thereof. However, the operator may petition in writing for redetermination and refund, if the petition is filed within 10 calendar days from the date of service of notice by the tax administrator. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.110 Transient room tax – Redeterminations.

(1) Any person against whom a determination is made under VMC 3.50.100 or any person directly interested in the determination may petition for a redetermination, and refund if applicable, within the time required in VMC 3.50.100. If a petition for redetermination is not filed within the time required in VMC 3.50.100, the determination shall become final at the expiration of the allowable time.

(2) If a petition for redetermination is timely filed the tax administrator shall reconsider the determination, and, if requested in the petition, the tax administrator shall grant the petitioner hearing and shall give the petitioner at least 10 days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing. The tax administrator may continue the hearing from time to time as necessary.

(3) Following receipt of the petition, and the hearing if applicable, the tax administrator may decrease or increase the amount of the determination, and if an increase is determined, the increase shall be payable immediately upon service of the tax administrator’s redetermination.

(4) The decision of the tax administrator upon a petition for redetermination shall become final 10 calendar days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof, unless a written appeal of the tax administrator’s decision is filed with the city administrator prior to the expiration of the 10-day period.

(5) No petition for redetermination or appeal therefrom shall be effective for any purpose unless the operator first complies with the payment provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.120 Transient room tax – Security, collection, business registration revocation.

(1) The tax administrator, whenever he or she deems it necessary to insure compliance with this chapter, may require any operator subject to the transient room tax to deposit with the tax administrator such security in the form of cash, bond, or other assets as the tax administrator may require. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the tax administrator but shall not be greater than twice the operator’s estimated average monthly liability for the period for which the operator files returns, or $5,000, whichever amount is the lesser. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the tax administrator subject to the limitations of this section.

(2) At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, or at any time within three years after any determination by the tax administrator under this chapter becomes final, the tax administrator may bring an action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States, in the name of the city, to collect the amount of delinquent tax, together with any penalties and interest.

(3) At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, or at any time within three years after any determination by the tax administrator under this chapter becomes final, the tax administrator may contract with a collections agency to collect the amount of delinquent tax, together with any penalties and interest.

(4) At any time after a determination by the tax administrator under this chapter becomes final, the city administrator may revoke the city of Veneta business registration for nonpayment of delinquent tax. The business registration shall not be reinstated unless and until the city receives payment for the amount of delinquent tax, together with any penalties and interest. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.130 Transient room tax – Lien.

The tax imposed by VMC 3.50.030, together with the interest and penalties provided by VMC 3.50.090 and the filing fees paid to the department of deeds and records of Lane County, Oregon, and advertising costs which may be incurred when the tax becomes delinquent shall be, and until paid shall remain, a lien from the date of its recording with the department of deeds and records of Lane County, Oregon, and superior to all subsequent recorded liens on all tangible personal property used in the hotel of an operator within Veneta and may be foreclosed on and sold as necessary to discharge the lien. Notice of the lien may be issued by the tax administrator whenever the operator is in default in the payment of the tax, interest, or penalties, and shall be recorded with the department of deeds and records of Lane County, Oregon, with a copy mailed to the delinquent operator at the operator’s address as it appears in the records of the tax administrator. The personal property subject to the lien and seized by the tax administrator may be sold by the tax administrator at public auction after 10 days’ notice thereof published in a newspaper in the city. 

Any such lien shall, upon the payment in full to the city of the taxes, penalties, and interest for which the lien has been imposed, be released by the tax administrator. The operator or person making the payment shall receive a receipt stating that the full amount of the taxes, penalties, and interest has been paid and that the lien is thereby released and the record of lien satisfied. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.140 Transient room tax – Refunds.

Whenever the amount of any tax imposed under this chapter has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator, it may be refunded, provided a written verified claim stating the specific reason upon which the claim is founded is filed with the tax administrator within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be made on a form provided by the tax administrator. If the tax administrator approves the claim, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited against any amounts then due and payable from the operator from whom it was originally collected or by whom it was originally paid, and the balance may be refunded. All refunds shall be charged to the fund receiving room tax revenues. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.150 Transient room tax – Collection fee.

An operator liable for the collection and remittance of the tax imposed by VMC 3.50.030 may withhold five percent of the net tax due to cover the operator’s expenses related to the collection and remittance of the tax. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.160 Transient room tax – Administration.

(1) The tax administrator shall deposit all money collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter into the fund receiving room tax revenues.

(2) Every operator shall maintain records of rentals and accounting books and records of the rentals. The operator shall retain these records for three years and six months after they are created.

(3) The tax administrator or any person authorized in writing by the tax administrator may, after notification of the operator and during normal business hours, examine the books, papers, and accounting records relating to rentals of any operator liable for the tax, and may investigate the business of the operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid by the operator.

(4) The city shall keep records related to the payment of the tax confidential to the extent those records are exempt from disclosure by ORS 192.502(18). Nothing in this subsection shall prevent, however:

(a) The disclosure to, or the examination of records by another city of Veneta official, employee, or tax collecting agent for the sole purpose of administering or collecting the tax.

(b) The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to any such tax paid, any such tax unpaid or the amount of any such tax required to be collected, together with interest and penalties thereon provided the city attorney approves each such disclosure. The tax administrator may refuse to make any such disclosures referred to in this paragraph when in the tax administrator’s opinion the public interest would suffer thereby.

(c) The disclosure of the names and addresses of any persons to whom transient occupancy registration certificates have been issued.

(d) The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.170 Transient room tax – Appeal to city administrator.

Any person aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator may appeal the decision to the city administrator by filing a written appeal with the city administrator within 10 days of the date of service of the tax administrator’s decision. The city administrator shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal and shall give the appellant at least 10 days’ written notice of the time and place of the hearing. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.180 Transient room tax – Appeal to council.

Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city administrator under VMC 3.50.170 may appeal the city administrator’s decision to the council by filing a written appeal with the city administrator within 10 days of the date of service of the city administrator’s decision. The city administrator shall transmit the notice together with the file of the appealed matter, to the council, who shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal. The council shall give the appellant not less than 10 days’ written notice of the time and place of hearing of the appeal. The decision of the city administrator upon a petition for redetermination shall become final 10 calendar days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof, unless a written appeal of the city administrator’s decision is filed with the city prior to the expiration of the 10-day period. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.190 Transient room tax – Business registration.

Every person engaging in business as an operator of a hotel in the city of Veneta shall comply with the business registration requirements of Chapter 5.05 VMC. A hotel as defined in VMC 3.50.010 is not a property rental, apartment, or manufactured home park exempted from business registration by VMC 5.05.050. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


3.50.200 Transient room tax – Violations.

No operator or other person subject to the provisions of this chapter shall:

(1) Fail or refuse to register as required by VMC 3.50.070;

(2) Fail or refuse to furnish any return required to be made under this chapter or to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator;

(3) Render a false or fraudulent return under this chapter; or

(4) Render, sign, or verify any false or fraudulent report regarding the transient room tax. (Ord. 534 § 1, 2016)


Title 4 (Reserved)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

5.05    Business Registration

5.10    Secondhand Dealers and Antique Stores

5.15    Garage Sale

5.20    Social Games

5.25    Communications Provider Licensing

5.30    Tobacco Retail Licensing
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

5.05    Business Registration

5.10    Secondhand Dealers and Antique Stores

5.15    Garage Sale

5.20    Social Games

5.25    Communications Provider Licensing

5.30    Tobacco Retail Licensing
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



5.05.010 Definitions.

(1) “Business,” as used in this chapter, means and includes any manufacturing, trade, occupation, profession, pursuit or business, whether or not carried on or engaged in for profit, including permanent, temporary, or itinerant business. 

(2) “Permanent business” means professions, trades, occupations, shops, stores, and including all other businesses carried on at a permanent building or site located inside the city limits of Veneta.

(3) “Temporary business” means professions, trades, occupations, shops, and stores, including all types of businesses that sell or deliver from stock on hand, which operate for a period not to exceed 90 cumulative days in any calendar year, do business in much the same manner as a permanent business, and do not solicit door-to-door on private property. 

(4) “Itinerant business” means any business carried on within the city involving the canvassing, sale, or solicitation for sale of products or services by going from door to door on private property within the city either selling, offering for sale, or taking orders for any goods, services, wares, or merchandise for future delivery, or soliciting to do any work or labor upon any personal property. (Ord. 497 § 1, 2010)


5.05.020 Registration required – Fee.

No person shall engage in or carry on any business within the limits of the city without registering said business with the city and paying the registration fee, unless exempt under VMC 5.05.050. (Ord. 497 § 2, 2010)


5.05.030 Fee set by resolution – Expiration.

The registration fee shall be established by council resolution, and shall register said business through December 31st of that year, at which time said registration shall expire and a new registration fee shall be payable. Any permanent business which registers after June 30th of any year shall pay one-half the registration fee, which shall register such business for the remainder of that calendar year. In addition to the business registration fee, each business shall be required to reimburse the city in full for any and all administrative overhead and enforcement expenses incurred by city, including court costs and attorneys’ fees, to obtain that business’s compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 497 § 3, 2010)


5.05.040 Forms – Contents and conditions.

(1) Contents.

(a) Registration forms shall contain the name of the business, the names of its owners, its street location address, its mailing address, its telephone number, and the nature of such business. 

(b) Itinerant businesses shall provide the following additional information:

(i) A list of the names, street address, mailing address, and photo identification for all individuals working for the business within the city limits of Veneta. 

(ii) If vehicles are used by the itinerant business and by individuals working on behalf of the business within the city limits of Veneta, vehicle license plate numbers, proof of insurance, and driver’s license numbers of all operators. 

(iii) The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time said application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery. Post office box addresses shall not be accepted to meet this requirement.

(2) Conditions.

(a) Business registrations issued by the city of Veneta must be openly displayed in the place of business or in the case of an itinerant business a copy shall be kept on the person of each individual solicitor. 

(b) Temporary businesses not subject to obtaining a temporary use permit shall provide written proof of permission to operate from a specific location, signed by the owner of the building or property from which the temporary business will be operated. Temporary businesses lasting more than two days also require a temporary use permit.

(c) Business registrations are not transferable.

(d) Conduct of business operations shall conform to statements made in the application and with any special conditions of operation imposed upon the business by the city or other regulatory agency.

(e) Business operators and/or customers shall not obstruct traffic along any sidewalk, bike path, or street unless granted by the city through a right-of-way permit, land use permit, or other written approval.

(f) Neither the acceptance of the registration fee by the city nor the issuance of the applicable business registration shall be construed to constitute a permit to engage in any activity otherwise prohibited by federal, state, or local law, or a waiver of any regulatory licensing requirement imposed by federal, state, or local law.

(g) Employees working for itinerant businesses are:

(i) Limited to operating between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 

(ii) Prohibited from entering upon private property that has been posted “no trespassing” or “no soliciting.”

(iii) Prohibited from continuing to solicit a person who has declined a request. 

(h) The city officials responsible for administering the business registration process are directed and empowered to investigate and examine all places of registered businesses at any and all reasonable times for the purpose of determining whether such place of business is in compliance with all city codes and is safe, sanitary, and suitable for the business so registered or for which such application is made. In the event it is determined by such officers or their agents that such place of business is dangerous to public health or safety, likely to become a menace, or is in violation of city codes, a report of such determination and the reasons therefor shall be made in writing to the city administrator. Such investigation shall not be used in the initial approval or denial of a business registration license, although the report shall be considered in the evaluation of a business license renewal application, to the extent the report bears upon the accuracy of the application contents. (Ord. 512 § 1, 2014; Ord. 497 § 4, 2010)


5.05.050 Exemptions.

This chapter shall not apply to the following:

(1) Insurers, their agents and other representatives; 

(2) Persons or businesses whom the city is prohibited from licensing or taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United States, the Constitution or laws of the state or Oregon, or the charter of the city;

(3) Nonprofit or charitable, religious or educational organizations which have received a tax exempt certificate from the Internal Revenue Service, and which devote the net proceeds from the sale of goods or services to the purpose of the organization;

(4) Pari-mutuel betting establishments;

(5) Any city, county, state agency, public utility, special district, school district, or other government agency;

(6) City-sponsored activities and events;

(7) Garage sales permitted under Chapter 5.15 VMC;

(8) Domestic help and care providers;

(9) Newspaper carriers;

(10) Wholesale selling or delivering of goods to merchants of the city for the purpose of resale. This exception pertains only if the wholesaler does not maintain a place of business within the city and also does not engage in retail trade within the city;

(11) Persons or companies engaged in the delivery of goods or services from points outside the city, providing sales contacts and actual sales take place outside the city or are solicited by a registered business or resident of the city by phone, Internet, or other means;

(12) Individuals such as repairmen or carpet cleaners hired on a casual basis by a household or business to supply labor and/or service only and whose place of business is not located within the city limits of Veneta;

(13) Building or electrical contractor or subcontractor licensed by the state of Oregon and whose place of business is not located within the city limits of Veneta;

(14) Businesses operating under a city franchise;

(15) A warehouse used in conjunction with a registered business but at a separate location or additional locations for a registered business operated by the same owner or franchisee;

(16) Temporary businesses operating for two calendar days a year or less;

(17) Property rentals, apartments, and manufactured home parks; and

(18) Any unincorporated business activity carried on by individuals under the age of 18. (Ord. 497 § 5, 2010)


5.05.060 Violation – Penalty.

Violation of this chapter is a violation as defined in Chapter 1.10 VMC. (Ord. 497 § 7, 2010)


Chapter 5.10       SECONDHAND DEALERS AND ANTIQUE STORES

Sections:

5.10.010    Record of purchase required.

5.10.020    Prohibited purchases or acquisitions.

5.10.030    Segregation of purchases – Time period.

5.10.040    Violation – Penalty.


5.10.010      Record of purchase required.

Any person, firm, or corporation conducting as a part or all of its business the collection, purchase, exchange or sale of used personal property shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.

(1) A record of purchase form shall be completed at the time of purchase or acquisition of goods immediately upon delivery of said goods to the business premises. The forms shall be completed in a legible manner, providing all of the information called for on the form. The person, firm or corporation shall keep them in an orderly manner, open for the inspection of and delivery to police officers upon their demand.

(2) The city recorder is hereby authorized and directed to prepare record of purchase forms in tabulated form, to be filled out in ink by such person, firm or corporation giving the following information which is necessary for the ready identification of all goods purchased or acquired by or through said business: name of business; date of the transaction; time of the transaction; name of the employee or owner transacting the business; amount to pay for the goods; a detailed description and quantity of each article, including but not limited to brand, name, color, model, and serial number; name and address of the seller; a physical description and birth date of the seller; reference to valid identification of the seller; and the signature of the seller.

(3) Said person, firm or corporation shall require of those persons pawning or selling merchandise to sign the record of purchase form. (Ord. 115 § 1, 1976)


5.10.020      Prohibited purchases or acquisitions.

No purchase or acquisition of items subject to VMC 5.10.010 may be made from any person under the age of 18 years of age. No such purchase or acquisition may be made from any person incapable of intelligently dealing or under the influence of narcotic drugs or intoxicating liquor. (Ord. 115 § 2, 1976)


5.10.030      Segregation of purchases – Time period.

All used personal property purchased or acquired by the person, firm or corporation shall be segregated in a manner as to permit their ready identification by the record required in VMC 5.10.010, for a period of seven days after acquisition thereof. A police officer may at any time order said business to hold any goods for a period not to exceed 10 days when said police officer has a reasonable suspicion to believe the goods to be stolen. (Ord. 115 § 3, 1976)


5.10.040      Violation – Penalty.

Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.10 VMC. (Ord. 115 § 4, 1976)


Chapter 5.15 GARAGE SALE

Sections:

5.15.010    Definition.

5.15.020    Regulation of garage sales.

5.15.030    Exceptions.

5.15.040    Advertising signs.

5.15.050    Violation – Penalty.


5.15.010 Definition.

For the purpose of this chapter, “garage sale” shall mean general sales open to the public which are conducted from or on residential premises within a residential district for the purpose of disposing of personal property, commonly known as garage sale, but also known as moving, lawn, attic, porch, backyard, patio or basement sales. (Ord. 327 § 1, 1991)


5.15.020 Regulation of garage sales.

No person shall:

(1) Conduct a garage sale exceeding three days in duration or any time other than during daylight hours;

(2) Participate in more than four garage sales in any one calendar year. (Ord. 327 § 2, 1991)


5.15.030 Exceptions.

Notwithstanding the above, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following persons or sales:

(1) Sales pursuant to a duly authorized home occupation or a valid city business license;

(2) Sales commonly referred to as rummage sales, conducted by members of fraternal, civic, patriotic, religious, service, charitable, educational, or eleemosynary organizations with a chapter, lodge, post, congregation or other unit existing within the city;

(3) Sales of one item by public display with a sign indicating the item is for sale and the sale of more than one item so long as the item is not offered for sale by public display or signs concerning their sale or place of sale. (Ord. 327 § 3, 1991)


5.15.040 Advertising signs.

Only the following specified signs may be displayed in relation to a pending garage sale:

(1) Two signs of not more than six square feet shall be permitted to be displayed on the property of the residence or location where the garage sale is being conducted.

(2) Two signs of not more than three square feet each are permitted, provided written permission to erect said signs is received from the property owners upon whose property such signs are to be placed.

(3) None of the aforementioned signs shall be placed in any public right-of-way.

(4) No sign or other form of advertising shall be exhibited for more than two days prior to the day such sale is to commence.

(5) All signs must be removed within 24 hours of the termination of such garage sale. (Ord. 327 § 4, 1991)


5.15.050 Violation – Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a violation and shall be fined an amount not to exceed $500.00. (Ord. 486 § 6, 2009; Ord. 327 § 5, 1991)


Chapter 5.20 SOCIAL GAMES

Sections:

5.20.010    Definitions.

5.20.020    Authorization.

5.20.030    License required for social card game.

5.20.040    Application for license.

5.20.050    Standards for issuance of license.

5.20.060    Term of license.

5.20.070    Responsibility of the licensee.

5.20.080    Bet limits.

5.20.090    Subsequent revocation.

5.20.100    Penalties.


5.20.010 Definitions.

(1) The definitions set out in ORS 167.117 are hereby adopted by reference.

(2) “Social card game” shall mean any form of social game which is played using a standard deck of 52 playing cards or a standard deck of playing cards with two or fewer “jokers.”

(3) “City” means city of Veneta. (Ord. 456 § 1, 2005)


5.20.020 Authorization.

Social card games shall be permitted in the city of Veneta as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 456 § 2, 2005)


5.20.030 License required for social card game.

Any person(s), business, private club, or place of public accommodation desiring to permit patrons or invitees to engage in social card games in the city of Veneta shall have a valid license from the city. Licenses shall be granted only upon application to the city and upon approval of the city council. The license fee shall be established by the city council by resolution. (Ord. 456 § 3, 2005)


5.20.040 Application for license.

Application for the initial license shall be made on blank forms prepared by the city. (Ord. 456 § 4, 2005)


5.20.050 Standards for issuance of license.

The city council shall either approve the application and grant the license applied for or deny the application and refuse to grant the license. The license shall not be granted, or it shall be revoked, if any applicant or any person who has interest in the business or who owns or controls gambling equipment and apparatus has done the following:

(1) Supplied any false or misleading information in the application or omitted any requested information from the application.

(2) Has pleaded no contest to or been convicted of any felony within three years.

(3) Had a license in his/her name which was revoked or suspended three times by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, either of which was in the last five years.

(4) Been convicted and is currently on parole for any crime involving or related to gambling.

(5) Had two or more convictions within the past five years for gambling-related activities which demonstrate undesirable traits and behavior. (Ord. 456 § 5, 2005)


5.20.060 Term of license.

All licenses issued hereunder shall be for a period of one year or until the next July 1st of each year, whichever is shorter. Licenses are nontransferable and must be reapplied for at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the license. All renewal licenses shall be approved by the city administrator. (Ord. 456 § 6, 2005)


5.20.070 Responsibility of the licensee.

It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to ensure that:

(1) No form of unlawful gambling is permitted upon the licensed premises.

(2) All social card games are open to public inspection during all hours of operation.

(3) There are no off-premises signs advertising gambling, card playing, social games, or social card games.

(4) All social card games shall be arranged so as to provide equal access and visibility to any interested party.

(5) No person under the age of 18 years is permitted to participate in a social card game.

(6) No charge is collected from any player for the privilege of participating in a social card game.

(7) No participant in a social card game shall be charged a price for any consumer goods which is higher or lower than the price charged nonparticipants.

(8) All social card games shall be played with cash or with chips. The value of the chips shall be shown on a chart which is clearly visible to all players or the chips shall be clearly marked to show their value.

(9) Social card game licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place near the table where the game is being played.

(10) The room or enclosure where social card game or games is held shall be open to free and immediate access by the city of Veneta police department authorized personnel. Doors leading into the room or enclosure shall remain unlocked during all hours of operation.

(11) Social card games shall not be played between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. (Ord. 456 § 7, 2005)


5.20.080 Bet limits.

The city council shall set bet limits on social card games in an appropriate resolution of the city council. (Ord. 456 § 8, 2005)


5.20.090 Subsequent revocation.

A license is subject to revocation at any time for violation of this chapter or any of the provisions of the Oregon Revised Statutes relating to gambling. If at any time facts arise or become known to the city council which are sufficient to show violation of this chapter or the Oregon Revised Statutes, the city council shall notify the licensee through the city administrator of such facts and forthwith revoke the license. Any license so revoked shall not be returned, unless the licensee applies to the city council in writing for return of the license within 15 days of the date of revocation. In such case, the city council shall hear the objection to the revocation at its first regular session following the filing of the objection. The city council decision in connection with the revocation shall be final. (Ord. 456 § 9, 2005)


5.20.100 Penalties.

In addition to the suspension or revocation of any license hereunder, any licensee, firm, corporation, or person(s) associated with licensee who violates any provision of this chapter, may upon conviction, be fined in an amount not to exceed $300.00 for each violation. Each day that a violation is permitted to occur is considered a separate violation. (Ord. 456 § 10, 2005)


Chapter 5.25 COMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER LICENSING

Sections:

5.25.010    Findings.

I. Communications Operations License

5.25.020    Definitions.

5.25.030    Communications utility license required.

5.25.040    License application.

5.25.050    Determination by the city.

5.25.060    Effect of utility license.

5.25.070    Nonexclusive grant.

5.25.080    Rights granted.

5.25.090    Term of grant.

5.25.100    Coordination of activities.

5.25.110    Amendment of license.

5.25.120    Renewal applications.

5.25.130    Renewal determinations.

5.25.140    Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.

II. Utility License – Fees and Compensation

5.25.150    Purpose.

5.25.160    Application and review fee.

5.25.170    Other city costs.

5.25.180    Compensation for city property.

5.25.190    Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax.

5.25.200    Penalties and interest for late payment.

III. Communications Utility License Fee

5.25.210    Communications provider fee imposed.

5.25.220    Minimum fee.

5.25.230    Returns.

5.25.240    Gross revenue.

5.25.250    Exemptions and credits.

5.25.260    Penalties and interest.

5.25.270    Lien.


5.25.010 Findings.

(1) The Veneta City Charter grants to the city all powers that the constitutions, statutes and common law of the United States and of the state of Oregon now or hereafter expressly or impliedly grant or allow.

(2) Among the powers granted to the city is the power to impose license requirements and charges. Such licenses may include charges for the privilege of conducting business within the city and for the use of the city rights-of-way.

(3) Numerous utilities rely on the existence of the city to enable them to provide goods and services to citizens of the city, including, without limitation, telephone, cable television, and other information and telecommunications services.

(4) Communication providers also seek to provide services which require, for their effective delivery, connection to, interaction with, or other use of facilities placed in the public ways by themselves and others.

(5) The city desires to facilitate making communication services available to citizens by itself working to provide amenities that make Veneta a better place to do business. For most utilities this includes, but is not limited to, the city permitting use of the public ways for the support of utility services, so long as such use is consistent with and does not unduly burden or interfere with the principal purpose of the public ways, which is to facilitate the free movement of persons and goods in commerce.

(6) The city holds the health, safety, quality of life and opportunities to prosper, as well as such physical assets as the public ways, in trust for all of its citizens, and has a responsibility to assure that any use of the city amenities, and especially its public ways, are used in a manner that benefits all of the citizens. Where it is deemed appropriate, the city should provide for the recovery of a fair and reasonable compensation for the use of the city and the city’s assets for the purpose of doing business.

(7) Many communications providers use only the public ways to provide services. Other communications providers make no use of the public ways, or only an indirect or limited use of the public ways, yet still these providers prosper in the city because of the amenities made possible by the city. Where those providers make franchise fee payments that provide compensation based on all the services provided, the franchise serves as an adequate replacement for other charges. Franchises are, however, often used as a means to install infrastructure, ostensibly for one purpose, which can then be used for multiple services. Where a provider provides services not covered by a franchise within the city, it is appropriate that the provider be subject to the charges set forth in this chapter, so that the payments accurately reflect the range of advantages derived from the opportunity to provide services within the city, and, where appropriate, especially the use of the rights-of-way of the city. The intent of this chapter is to treat all providers in an equal manner, subjecting all providers and all types of service that make use of the city’s amenities and assets to the same charges and fees. (Ord. 516 § 1, 2014; Ord. 482 § 1, 2008)

I. Communications Operations License


5.25.020 Definitions.

Terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Affiliate” means a person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person.

(2) “Cable Acts” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and as hereafter amended.

(3) “Cable operator” means an entity providing or offering to provide “cable service” within the city as that term is defined in the Cable Acts.

(4) “Cable service” shall have the same meaning as defined in the Cable Acts.

(5) “FCC or Federal Communications Commission” means the federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee communications carriers, services and providers on a national level.

(6) “Licensee” means any entity granted a license hereunder.

(7) “Overhead facilities” means utility poles, utility facilities and communications facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.

(8) “Person” means any individual or entity engaging in activities regulated by this chapter.

(9) “Public street” means any highway, street, alley or other public right-of-way dedicated for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the city.

(10) “Public utility easement” means any easement granted to the city, acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for access for public utility facilities for construction, operations, and maintenance purposes.

(11) “Right-of-way” includes all public streets owned by the city and public utility easements granted to the city, but only to the extent of the city’s right, title, interest or authority to grant permission to occupy and use such streets and easements.

(12) “License fee administrator” means the city administrator of the city or designee.

(13) “Communications carrier” includes every person or entity that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plant, equipment or property within the city, used or to be used for the purpose of offering communications service.

(14) “Communications facilities or system” means the plant, equipment and property including, but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennas, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer communications service.

(15) “Communications provider” means any provider of communications services and includes, but is not limited to, every person or entity that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages communications facilities within the city.

(16) “Communications service” means the providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming or any other information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium. “Communications service” includes all forms of telephone services and voice, video, data or information transport, but does not include (a) private communications system services provided without using the public rights-of-way, (b) over-the-air radio or television broadcasting to the public at large from facilities licensed by the Federal Communications Commission; and (c) direct to home satellite service within the meaning of Section 602 of the Telecommunications Act.

(17) “Underground facilities” means utility and communications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for overhead facilities.

(18) “Utility” means any telecommunications utility as defined in ORS 759.005(1), and communications carrier, communications provider or other entity providing communications services, including data and Internet services.

(19) “Utility facilities” means the plant, equipment and property including, but not limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the public ways of the city and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility services. The term shall include all such things owned by the utility and all such things as the utility shall have a property interest in, including things held by the utility or on its behalf under a lease, rental agreement or indefeasible right of use for a term of years.

(20) “Utility services” means all services provided by a utility to customers located within the city limits of the city of Veneta or provided to customers wherever located using facilities physically located within the city limits of the city of Veneta.

(21) “Private communications network” means a system, including the construction maintenance or operation of the system, for the provision of a service or any portion of a service which is owned or operated exclusively by a person or entity for their use and not for resale, directly or indirectly. Includes services provided by the state of Oregon pursuant to ORS 190.240 and 283.140.

(22) “Person” means any individual, firm, sole proprietorship, corporation, company, partnership, co-partnership, joint-stock company, trust, limited liability company, association or other organization, including any natural person or any other legal entity. (Ord. 516 § 2.01, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.01, 2008)


5.25.030 Communications utility license required.

A communications utility license shall be required of any utility who desires to provide communications service to persons in the city or to persons or areas outside the city using facilities located in the city. No utility shall provide services within the city nor shall such utility provide services outside the city using facilities located within the city unless licensed as provided herein. Utilities who utilize facilities of another licensed utility for the distribution of their services shall be required to have a separate license. The purpose of licensing under this chapter is to:

(1) Provide the city with accurate and current information concerning the utilities who offer communications services within the city, or that own or operate utility facilities within the city;

(2) Assist the city in enforcement of this chapter;

(3) Assist the city in the collection and enforcement of any municipal taxes, franchise fees, license, permit or other fees or charges that may be due the city;

(4) Assist the city in monitoring compliance with local and, to the extent authorized by law, with state and federal laws. (Ord. 516 § 2.02, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.02, 2008)


5.25.040 License application.

Any utility that is required to have a communications utility license shall file an application, using the form provided for such purpose, with the city, which shall include the following information:

(1) The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.

(2) A description of the communications services that are or will be offered or provided by licensee.

(3) Information to establish that the applicant has obtained or has applied for all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the services. Such approvals include, without limitation, any land use decisions. In the event any other required government approval is not obtained any license granted hereunder shall be subject to modification to reflect the absence of such approval upon the city’s discovery of, or notice of the absence of required information.

(4) Identification of any adverse circumstances affecting the use of the public way, and a description of efforts to mitigate such circumstances.

(5) All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 516 § 2.03, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.03, 2008)


5.25.050 Determination by the city.

Within 120 days after receiving a complete application under VMC 5.25.040, the city shall, if the application conforms with the requirements of law, issue the license.

If the application is denied, the denial shall be in writing and state the reasons for denial. (Ord. 516 § 2.04, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.04, 2008)


5.25.060 Effect of utility license.

(1) The license granted hereunder shall authorize and permit the licensee, subject to other provisions of Veneta ordinances and other applicable provisions of state or federal law, to operate in the city and provide the communications services covered by the license. In addition to a grant of authority to operate within the city, and subject to other requirements of law regarding the activities involved in the placement of facilities in the public ways of the city, and to a franchise granted by the city, if applicable, the license shall authorize the licensee to maintain facilities in, and occupy, the public ways of the city for so long as the licensee shall comply with the provisions of this code, and continue to hold any and all licenses and permits required by state or federal law for the provision of such services as covered by this license; provided, however that all work, construction, placement or operation of such facilities shall be in compliance with the provisions of Veneta ordinances, including the standard construction specifications of the applicable building codes. Nothing in such license shall authorize the licensee to use the facilities or property of another, which use, if any, shall be subject to agreement with the owner of such facility or property and any applicable provisions of law. Nothing in such license shall operate or be construed as an approval of such business or a regulation of the practices of such business.

(2) The city reserves the right, in every event, without limitation, to:

(a) Construct, install, maintain and operate any public improvement, work or facility in, on, over or under the public ways; or

(b) Perform or authorize or direct the performance of any work that the city may find desirable or convenient in, on, over or under any public way; or

(c) Vacate, alter, or close any public way; provided, however, that no vacation shall obligate a utility to remove or abandon any facility located within such public way; or

(d) Require, in the public interest, the removal or relocation, temporarily or permanently, of facilities maintained by the utility in the public ways of the city. The utility shall remove and relocate such facilities within 120 days after receiving notice in writing to do so from the city. Such removal or relocation shall be without cost or expense to the city, provided, however, that when such removal or relocation is required for the convenience or benefit of any private person, or non-governmental agency or instrumentality, utility shall be entitled to reimbursement for the reasonable cost thereof from such person, agency or instrumentality, to the extent permitted by law.

(3) Whenever the city shall perform or cause or permit to be performed, any work in the public way or the vicinity of the public way where such work may disturb or interfere with a utility’s facilities, the city shall, or shall require its permittee, to notify, in writing, the utility sufficiently in advance of such contemplated work to enable utility to take such measures, including removal or relocation of such facilities, as may be deemed necessary to protect such facilities, at its own expense.

(4) The possession of a utility license from the city shall not provide the licensee with any right or privilege to alter or avoid any charge or cost allocation for the relocation of utility facilities, nor shall a license provide a different or greater claim for compensation, than otherwise apportioned by law or agreement. (Ord. 516 § 2.05, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.05, 2008)


5.25.070 Nonexclusive grant.

No license granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to conduct business in the city, or to occupy or use the public ways of the city for delivery of utility services or any other purposes. (Ord. 516 § 2.06, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.06, 2008)


5.25.080 Rights granted.

No license granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to conduct authorized activities within the city to offer communications services and, where appropriate, to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no license shall be construed as any warranty of title. In the event that a conflict arises or is discovered between the terms or requirements of this chapter and the terms or requirements of any other ordinance adopted by the city of Veneta, the most recently adopted ordinance shall prevail insofar as there is an actual conflict, and the adoption of that ordinance shall be considered an amendment to the conflicting provisions of the otherwise conflicting ordinance. (Ord. 516 § 2.07, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.07, 2008)


5.25.090 Term of grant.

Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a communications license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five years. (Ord. 516 § 2.08, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.08, 2008)


5.25.100 Coordination of activities.

Wherever possible, all holders of a license are directed to coordinate their activities affecting the public ways and shall be obliged to participate in coordination meetings to be held by the city for the purpose of facilitating such cooperation and coordination. (Ord. 516 § 2.09, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.09, 2008)


5.25.110 Amendment of license.

A new license application and grant shall be required of any utility that desires to extend additional or different services in the city which are not included in a license previously granted under this chapter. (Ord. 516 § 2.10, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.10, 2008)


5.25.120 Renewal applications.

A licensee that desires to renew its license under this chapter shall, not more than 180 days nor less than 90 days before expiration of the current license, file an application with the city for renewal of its license which shall include the information required for initial licensing. (Ord. 516 § 2.11, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.11, 2008)


5.25.130 Renewal determinations.

Within 90 days after receiving a complete application under VMC 5.25.120, the city shall issue a written determination applying the following standards, as applicable, and, if the application conforms with the requirements of law, grant the application:

(1) Demonstrated legal qualifications, financial and technical ability of the applicant.

(2) Compliance with requirements of applicable state and federal laws and regulations.

(3) The applicant’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other Veneta ordinances.

If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal. (Ord. 516 § 2.12, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.12, 2008)


5.25.140 Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.

No license shall be renewed until any existing violations or defaults in the licensee’s performance of the requirements of this chapter have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the licensee has been approved by the city. Ord. 516 § 2.13, 2014; (Ord. 482 § 2.13, 2008)

II. Utility License – Fees and Compensation 


5.25.150 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this section to provide for the payment and recovery of all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the city related to the enforcement and administration of this chapter and other city practices and policies that make possible the conditions that allow licensees to operate within the city of Veneta. Any revenues received in excess of the cost of administering the ordinance shall be used to improve the public safety of the city of Veneta. Public safety services are one of the most important services provided to the businesses and their customers in Veneta. (Ord. 516 § 3.01, 2014; Ord. 482 § 3.01, 2008)


5.25.160 Application and review fee.

(1) Any applicant for a license, including a renewal or amendment of an existing license, pursuant to Article I of this chapter shall pay a fee of $100.00.

(2) The application and review fee shall be deposited with the city as part of the application filed pursuant to Article I of this chapter.

(3) An applicant whose license or franchise application has been withdrawn, abandoned or denied within 60 days of its application and review fee written request shall be refunded its deposit under this section. (Ord. 516 § 3.02, 2014; Ord. 482 § 3.02, 2008)


5.25.170 Other city costs.

In addition to the application and review fee, all license or franchise grantees shall, within 30 days after written demand therefor, reimburse the city for all direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with any issuance, modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the license or franchise or any license or franchise agreement to the extent permitted by law. (Ord. 516 § 3.03, 2014; Ord. 482 § 3.03, 2008)


5.25.180 Compensation for city property.

If the right is granted, by lease, license, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy city property other than the public ways for the installation of facilities, the compensation to be paid shall be fixed by the city and shall be separate and distinct from any fees imposed herein. (Ord. 516 § 3.04, 2014; Ord. 482 § 3.04, 2008)


5.25.190 Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax.

The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any compensation charged and paid for city property provided for in VMC 5.25.180, are separate from, and additional to, any and all federal, state, local and city taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a utility, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of utility services. (Ord. 516 § 3.05, 2014; Ord. 482 § 3.05, 2008)


5.25.200 Penalties and interest for late payment.

If any fee provided for herein shall not be timely paid, a penalty in the amount of 10 percent of such fee shall be assessed and due as of the date the underlying fee was due. Interest on fees and penalties shall accrue at the rate of one and one-half percent per month, commencing with the fifteenth day after the fee or penalty shall be due. (Ord. 516 § 3.06, 2014; Ord. 482 § 3.06, 2008)

III. Communications Utility License Fee


5.25.210 Communications provider fee imposed.

There is hereby imposed a fee in the amount of five percent of gross revenue upon the privilege of conducting a utility business and providing communications services required to be licensed under VMC 5.25.020, upon any communications provider required to be licensed, as defined herein, in consideration of the authority of such provider to conduct such business and to take advantage of the business conditions provided by the city of Veneta, including the use of the rights-of-way. (Ord. 516 § 4.01, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.01, 2008)


5.25.220 Minimum fee.

In no event shall the fee due for any calendar year be less than:

(1) In the case of a communications provider providing services within the city of Veneta, $500.00.

(2) In the case of a communications provider not providing services within the city of Veneta, but occupying the public rights-of-way within the city, the greater of (a) a charge of $2.00 for each linear foot of public ways occupied by the facilities of the provider, or (b) $350.00. If the communications provider can show that this minimum amount creates a hardship, the city may grant an exemption.

(3) Licensees who can show that their gross annual revenues for services provided within the city of Veneta are less than $10,000 may apply for an exemption from the payment of the license fee. Where the license fee administrator can determine from the evidence provided that the applicant for an exemption is providing less than the threshold amount of services within the city, and where the evidence shows that the applicant is receiving a concomitantly small advantage derived from doing business within the city, and where the administrative costs to the city of processing the license fee payments would exceed the benefit to the city, the license fee administrator may grant an exemption. Such an exemption shall be good only for the calendar year granted. The license fee administrator may waive the minimum fee requirement of this section, if it is determined to be in the best interests of the city, as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 516 § 4.02, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.02, 2008)


5.25.230 Returns.

(1) For purposes of calculating fees dues under this section, every communications provider subject to licensing and fees shall pay such fee on the basis of a calendar year, and shall file, quarterly, before the forty-fifth day following the end of a calendar quarter, a return certified by an officer of the provider showing the amount of fee due and accompanied by the amount due.

(2) Such return shall show the amount of gross revenue of the utility within the city for the period covered by the payment computed on the basis set out in this section, and shall show any offsets, deductions or credits against the revenue or the amount of fee due. The compensation for the period covered by the statement shall be computed on the basis of the gross revenue so reported. If the licensee fails to pay the entire amount of compensation due the city through error or otherwise, the difference due the city shall be paid by the licensee within 15 days from discovery of the error or determination of the correct amount, with interest at the rate of 10 percent per annum, compounded monthly. Any overpayment to the city through error or otherwise shall be offset against the next payment due from the licensee.

(3) In the event a licensee files a return claiming the minimum fee provided by VMC 5.25.220 shall be due, the licensee shall nonetheless file a return as provided in subsection (2) of this section and shall, if claiming under VMC 5.25.220(2), file a report duly certified by an engineer, licensed to practice within the state of Oregon, setting forth the calculation of the number of linear feet of public way occupied by the licensee. After the first such report, the licensee claiming under VMC 5.25.220(2) may substitute for the engineer’s report a statement from a person knowledgeable about such matters, attesting that no additional installations have been made, if such a statement can be made.

(4) The city may audit any return filed by the licensee, and require the licensee to submit such information as shall reasonably be required to establish the accuracy of any payment of fee or return documenting the amount of fee due. In the event such audit shall disclose a discrepancy in favor of the city in excess of five percent of the amount paid, there is hereby imposed a penalty in the amount of 10 percent of the difference between the amount paid and the amount found, upon audit, to be due.

(5) Acceptance by the city of any payment due under this section shall not be deemed to be a waiver by the city of any rights to conduct such audit, nor shall the acceptance by the city of any such payments preclude the city from later establishing that a larger amount was actually due, or from collecting any balance due to the city. (Ord. 516 § 4.03, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.03, 2008)


5.25.240 Gross revenue.

For purposes of this article, “gross revenue” shall mean any and all revenue, of any kind, nature or form, without deduction for expense; all inflows or enhancements of assets or settlements of its liabilities (or a combination of both) of whatsoever kind and nature derived by the licensee and any affiliates, subsidiaries or parent of the licensee on account of goods or services from the licensee’s ongoing operations delivered within the city of Veneta. Gross revenue shall include any and all subsidies, discounts, rebates or other considerations or forbearances by the licensee associated with the delivery of such goods and services within the city of Veneta. In determining gross revenues for the calculation of fees, the city shall consider mobile communications services to occur within the city if they are used by a customer whose place of primary use is within the city. As used in this section, “place of primary use” means the residential street address or the primary business street address of the customer. The city shall apply this provision consistently with the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 USC 116 to 126. (Ord. 516 § 4.04, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.04, 2008)


5.25.250 Exemptions and credits.

If any licensee is a party to a franchise, public way use agreement, or other contract with the city which requires the payment of a fee for the use of the public ways of the city, any payments made under such agreement during the filing year shall be credited against any fee due hereunder to the extent the revenue upon which such payments are based is subject to fees required hereunder. Revenues not included in the franchise or other agreement but otherwise earned because of transactions in the city shall remain subject to the license fee.

(1) If a licensee asserts that any other provisions of local, state or federal law impose a limit upon the revenue subject to fees or charges that can be imposed in connection with the use of public ways, such licensee shall file a return which:

(a) Itemizes the gross revenue subject to fees under this article;

(b) Itemizes the portion of such revenue that is subject to the limitation claimed to exist under other provisions of local, state or federal law.

(2) The license fee liability of a licensee claiming a limitation on revenue subject to fees shall be the sum of:

(a) The fee due hereunder on that portion of the licensee revenue not subject to the limitation; and

(b) On the portion of revenue subject to a limitation, the lesser of:

(i) The fee due under this article; or

(ii) The license fee due under the other provision of local, state or federal law.

(3) Any licensed utility shall be allowed, as a credit against fees due hereunder, the reasonable value of any and all services rendered to or goods provided to the city without fee, if any, during the preceding calendar year. (Ord. 516 § 4.05, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.05, 2008)


5.25.260 Penalties and interest.

(1) Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a violation punishable in accordance with city ordinances. Any person found to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter or the license shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues. The city may use all enforcement methods available to the city in accordance to city ordinances and state law.

(2) In addition to other penalties, if any payment due hereunder shall not be timely made, there is imposed a penalty in the amount of 10 percent of the amount due.

(3) Interest on any payment not timely made, and upon all penalties imposed, shall accrue at the annual rate of 10 percent, compounded daily, for each day beyond the due date, until the date paid. (Ord. 516 § 4.06, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.06, 2008)


5.25.270 Lien.

The fee imposed by VMC 5.25.210, together with the interest and penalties provided by VMC 5.25.260 and the filing fees paid to the Department of Records of Lane County, Oregon, and auditing or other costs which may be incurred when the fee becomes delinquent under VMC 5.25.230 shall be, and until paid remain, a lien from the date of its recording with the Department of Records of Lane County, Oregon, and superior to all subsequent recorded liens on all real property or tangible personal property of the licensee located within the city of Veneta and may be foreclosed on and sold as necessary to discharge the lien, if the lien has been so recorded. Notice of lien may be issued by the license fee administrator whenever the operator is in default in the payment of the fee, interest and penalty, and shall be recorded with the Department of Records and a copy sent to the delinquent licensee. The personal property subject to the lien and seized by any deputy of the license fee administrator may be sold by the license fee administrator at public auction after 10 days’ notice thereof published in a newspaper in the city.

Any such lien as shown on the records of the Department of Records shall, upon the payment of the fees, penalty and interest for which the lien has been imposed, be released by the license fee administrator when the full amount has been paid to the city. The person making the payment shall receive a receipt therefor stating that the full amount of the fees, penalties, and interest have been paid and that the lien is thereby released and the record of lien satisfied. (Ord. 516 § 4.07, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.07, 2008)


Chapter 5.25 COMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER LICENSING

Sections:

5.25.010    Findings.

I. Communications Operations License

5.25.020    Definitions.

5.25.030    Communications utility license required.

5.25.040    License application.

5.25.050    Determination by the city.

5.25.060    Effect of utility license.

5.25.070    Nonexclusive grant.

5.25.080    Rights granted.

5.25.090    Term of grant.

5.25.100    Coordination of activities.

5.25.110    Amendment of license.

5.25.120    Renewal applications.

5.25.130    Renewal determinations.

5.25.140    Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.

II. Utility License – Fees and Compensation

5.25.150    Purpose.

5.25.160    Application and review fee.

5.25.170    Other city costs.

5.25.180    Compensation for city property.

5.25.190    Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax.

5.25.200    Penalties and interest for late payment.

III. Communications Utility License Fee

5.25.210    Communications provider fee imposed.

5.25.220    Minimum fee.

5.25.230    Returns.

5.25.240    Gross revenue.

5.25.250    Exemptions and credits.

5.25.260    Penalties and interest.

5.25.270    Lien.


5.25.010 Findings.

(1) The Veneta City Charter grants to the city all powers that the constitutions, statutes and common law of the United States and of the state of Oregon now or hereafter expressly or impliedly grant or allow.

(2) Among the powers granted to the city is the power to impose license requirements and charges. Such licenses may include charges for the privilege of conducting business within the city and for the use of the city rights-of-way.

(3) Numerous utilities rely on the existence of the city to enable them to provide goods and services to citizens of the city, including, without limitation, telephone, cable television, and other information and telecommunications services.

(4) Communication providers also seek to provide services which require, for their effective delivery, connection to, interaction with, or other use of facilities placed in the public ways by themselves and others.

(5) The city desires to facilitate making communication services available to citizens by itself working to provide amenities that make Veneta a better place to do business. For most utilities this includes, but is not limited to, the city permitting use of the public ways for the support of utility services, so long as such use is consistent with and does not unduly burden or interfere with the principal purpose of the public ways, which is to facilitate the free movement of persons and goods in commerce.

(6) The city holds the health, safety, quality of life and opportunities to prosper, as well as such physical assets as the public ways, in trust for all of its citizens, and has a responsibility to assure that any use of the city amenities, and especially its public ways, are used in a manner that benefits all of the citizens. Where it is deemed appropriate, the city should provide for the recovery of a fair and reasonable compensation for the use of the city and the city’s assets for the purpose of doing business.

(7) Many communications providers use only the public ways to provide services. Other communications providers make no use of the public ways, or only an indirect or limited use of the public ways, yet still these providers prosper in the city because of the amenities made possible by the city. Where those providers make franchise fee payments that provide compensation based on all the services provided, the franchise serves as an adequate replacement for other charges. Franchises are, however, often used as a means to install infrastructure, ostensibly for one purpose, which can then be used for multiple services. Where a provider provides services not covered by a franchise within the city, it is appropriate that the provider be subject to the charges set forth in this chapter, so that the payments accurately reflect the range of advantages derived from the opportunity to provide services within the city, and, where appropriate, especially the use of the rights-of-way of the city. The intent of this chapter is to treat all providers in an equal manner, subjecting all providers and all types of service that make use of the city’s amenities and assets to the same charges and fees. (Ord. 516 § 1, 2014; Ord. 482 § 1, 2008)

I. Communications Operations License


5.25.020 Definitions.

Terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Affiliate” means a person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person.

(2) “Cable Acts” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and as hereafter amended.

(3) “Cable operator” means an entity providing or offering to provide “cable service” within the city as that term is defined in the Cable Acts.

(4) “Cable service” shall have the same meaning as defined in the Cable Acts.

(5) “FCC or Federal Communications Commission” means the federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee communications carriers, services and providers on a national level.

(6) “Licensee” means any entity granted a license hereunder.

(7) “Overhead facilities” means utility poles, utility facilities and communications facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.

(8) “Person” means any individual or entity engaging in activities regulated by this chapter.

(9) “Public street” means any highway, street, alley or other public right-of-way dedicated for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the city.

(10) “Public utility easement” means any easement granted to the city, acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for access for public utility facilities for construction, operations, and maintenance purposes.

(11) “Right-of-way” includes all public streets owned by the city and public utility easements granted to the city, but only to the extent of the city’s right, title, interest or authority to grant permission to occupy and use such streets and easements.

(12) “License fee administrator” means the city administrator of the city or designee.

(13) “Communications carrier” includes every person or entity that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plant, equipment or property within the city, used or to be used for the purpose of offering communications service.

(14) “Communications facilities or system” means the plant, equipment and property including, but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennas, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer communications service.

(15) “Communications provider” means any provider of communications services and includes, but is not limited to, every person or entity that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages communications facilities within the city.

(16) “Communications service” means the providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming or any other information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium. “Communications service” includes all forms of telephone services and voice, video, data or information transport, but does not include (a) private communications system services provided without using the public rights-of-way, (b) over-the-air radio or television broadcasting to the public at large from facilities licensed by the Federal Communications Commission; and (c) direct to home satellite service within the meaning of Section 602 of the Telecommunications Act.

(17) “Underground facilities” means utility and communications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for overhead facilities.

(18) “Utility” means any telecommunications utility as defined in ORS 759.005(1), and communications carrier, communications provider or other entity providing communications services, including data and Internet services.

(19) “Utility facilities” means the plant, equipment and property including, but not limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the public ways of the city and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility services. The term shall include all such things owned by the utility and all such things as the utility shall have a property interest in, including things held by the utility or on its behalf under a lease, rental agreement or indefeasible right of use for a term of years.

(20) “Utility services” means all services provided by a utility to customers located within the city limits of the city of Veneta or provided to customers wherever located using facilities physically located within the city limits of the city of Veneta.

(21) “Private communications network” means a system, including the construction maintenance or operation of the system, for the provision of a service or any portion of a service which is owned or operated exclusively by a person or entity for their use and not for resale, directly or indirectly. Includes services provided by the state of Oregon pursuant to ORS 190.240 and 283.140.

(22) “Person” means any individual, firm, sole proprietorship, corporation, company, partnership, co-partnership, joint-stock company, trust, limited liability company, association or other organization, including any natural person or any other legal entity. (Ord. 516 § 2.01, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.01, 2008)


5.25.030 Communications utility license required.

A communications utility license shall be required of any utility who desires to provide communications service to persons in the city or to persons or areas outside the city using facilities located in the city. No utility shall provide services within the city nor shall such utility provide services outside the city using facilities located within the city unless licensed as provided herein. Utilities who utilize facilities of another licensed utility for the distribution of their services shall be required to have a separate license. The purpose of licensing under this chapter is to:

(1) Provide the city with accurate and current information concerning the utilities who offer communications services within the city, or that own or operate utility facilities within the city;

(2) Assist the city in enforcement of this chapter;

(3) Assist the city in the collection and enforcement of any municipal taxes, franchise fees, license, permit or other fees or charges that may be due the city;

(4) Assist the city in monitoring compliance with local and, to the extent authorized by law, with state and federal laws. (Ord. 516 § 2.02, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.02, 2008)


5.25.040 License application.

Any utility that is required to have a communications utility license shall file an application, using the form provided for such purpose, with the city, which shall include the following information:

(1) The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.

(2) A description of the communications services that are or will be offered or provided by licensee.

(3) Information to establish that the applicant has obtained or has applied for all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the services. Such approvals include, without limitation, any land use decisions. In the event any other required government approval is not obtained any license granted hereunder shall be subject to modification to reflect the absence of such approval upon the city’s discovery of, or notice of the absence of required information.

(4) Identification of any adverse circumstances affecting the use of the public way, and a description of efforts to mitigate such circumstances.

(5) All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 516 § 2.03, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.03, 2008)


5.25.050 Determination by the city.

Within 120 days after receiving a complete application under VMC 5.25.040, the city shall, if the application conforms with the requirements of law, issue the license.

If the application is denied, the denial shall be in writing and state the reasons for denial. (Ord. 516 § 2.04, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.04, 2008)


5.25.060 Effect of utility license.

(1) The license granted hereunder shall authorize and permit the licensee, subject to other provisions of Veneta ordinances and other applicable provisions of state or federal law, to operate in the city and provide the communications services covered by the license. In addition to a grant of authority to operate within the city, and subject to other requirements of law regarding the activities involved in the placement of facilities in the public ways of the city, and to a franchise granted by the city, if applicable, the license shall authorize the licensee to maintain facilities in, and occupy, the public ways of the city for so long as the licensee shall comply with the provisions of this code, and continue to hold any and all licenses and permits required by state or federal law for the provision of such services as covered by this license; provided, however that all work, construction, placement or operation of such facilities shall be in compliance with the provisions of Veneta ordinances, including the standard construction specifications of the applicable building codes. Nothing in such license shall authorize the licensee to use the facilities or property of another, which use, if any, shall be subject to agreement with the owner of such facility or property and any applicable provisions of law. Nothing in such license shall operate or be construed as an approval of such business or a regulation of the practices of such business.

(2) The city reserves the right, in every event, without limitation, to:

(a) Construct, install, maintain and operate any public improvement, work or facility in, on, over or under the public ways; or

(b) Perform or authorize or direct the performance of any work that the city may find desirable or convenient in, on, over or under any public way; or

(c) Vacate, alter, or close any public way; provided, however, that no vacation shall obligate a utility to remove or abandon any facility located within such public way; or

(d) Require, in the public interest, the removal or relocation, temporarily or permanently, of facilities maintained by the utility in the public ways of the city. The utility shall remove and relocate such facilities within 120 days after receiving notice in writing to do so from the city. Such removal or relocation shall be without cost or expense to the city, provided, however, that when such removal or relocation is required for the convenience or benefit of any private person, or non-governmental agency or instrumentality, utility shall be entitled to reimbursement for the reasonable cost thereof from such person, agency or instrumentality, to the extent permitted by law.

(3) Whenever the city shall perform or cause or permit to be performed, any work in the public way or the vicinity of the public way where such work may disturb or interfere with a utility’s facilities, the city shall, or shall require its permittee, to notify, in writing, the utility sufficiently in advance of such contemplated work to enable utility to take such measures, including removal or relocation of such facilities, as may be deemed necessary to protect such facilities, at its own expense.

(4) The possession of a utility license from the city shall not provide the licensee with any right or privilege to alter or avoid any charge or cost allocation for the relocation of utility facilities, nor shall a license provide a different or greater claim for compensation, than otherwise apportioned by law or agreement. (Ord. 516 § 2.05, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.05, 2008)


5.25.070 Nonexclusive grant.

No license granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to conduct business in the city, or to occupy or use the public ways of the city for delivery of utility services or any other purposes. (Ord. 516 § 2.06, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.06, 2008)


5.25.080 Rights granted.

No license granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to conduct authorized activities within the city to offer communications services and, where appropriate, to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no license shall be construed as any warranty of title. In the event that a conflict arises or is discovered between the terms or requirements of this chapter and the terms or requirements of any other ordinance adopted by the city of Veneta, the most recently adopted ordinance shall prevail insofar as there is an actual conflict, and the adoption of that ordinance shall be considered an amendment to the conflicting provisions of the otherwise conflicting ordinance. (Ord. 516 § 2.07, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.07, 2008)


5.25.090 Term of grant.

Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a communications license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five years. (Ord. 516 § 2.08, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.08, 2008)


5.25.100 Coordination of activities.

Wherever possible, all holders of a license are directed to coordinate their activities affecting the public ways and shall be obliged to participate in coordination meetings to be held by the city for the purpose of facilitating such cooperation and coordination. (Ord. 516 § 2.09, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.09, 2008)


5.25.110 Amendment of license.

A new license application and grant shall be required of any utility that desires to extend additional or different services in the city which are not included in a license previously granted under this chapter. (Ord. 516 § 2.10, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.10, 2008)


5.25.120 Renewal applications.

A licensee that desires to renew its license under this chapter shall, not more than 180 days nor less than 90 days before expiration of the current license, file an application with the city for renewal of its license which shall include the information required for initial licensing. (Ord. 516 § 2.11, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.11, 2008)


5.25.130 Renewal determinations.

Within 90 days after receiving a complete application under VMC 5.25.120, the city shall issue a written determination applying the following standards, as applicable, and, if the application conforms with the requirements of law, grant the application:

(1) Demonstrated legal qualifications, financial and technical ability of the applicant.

(2) Compliance with requirements of applicable state and federal laws and regulations.

(3) The applicant’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other Veneta ordinances.

If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal. (Ord. 516 § 2.12, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.12, 2008)


5.25.140 Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.

No license shall be renewed until any existing violations or defaults in the licensee’s performance of the requirements of this chapter have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the licensee has been approved by the city. Ord. 516 § 2.13, 2014; (Ord. 482 § 2.13, 2008)

II. Utility License – Fees and Compensation 


5.25.150 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this section to provide for the payment and recovery of all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the city related to the enforcement and administration of this chapter and other city practices and policies that make possible the conditions that allow licensees to operate within the city of Veneta. Any revenues received in excess of the cost of administering the ordinance shall be used to improve the public safety of the city of Veneta. Public safety services are one of the most important services provided to the businesses and their customers in Veneta. (Ord. 516 § 3.01, 2014; Ord. 482 § 3.01, 2008)


5.25.160 Application and review fee.

(1) Any applicant for a license, including a renewal or amendment of an existing license, pursuant to Article I of this chapter shall pay a fee of $100.00.

(2) The application and review fee shall be deposited with the city as part of the application filed pursuant to Article I of this chapter.

(3) An applicant whose license or franchise application has been withdrawn, abandoned or denied within 60 days of its application and review fee written request shall be refunded its deposit under this section. (Ord. 516 § 3.02, 2014; Ord. 482 § 3.02, 2008)


5.25.170 Other city costs.

In addition to the application and review fee, all license or franchise grantees shall, within 30 days after written demand therefor, reimburse the city for all direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with any issuance, modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the license or franchise or any license or franchise agreement to the extent permitted by law. (Ord. 516 § 3.03, 2014; Ord. 482 § 3.03, 2008)


5.25.180 Compensation for city property.

If the right is granted, by lease, license, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy city property other than the public ways for the installation of facilities, the compensation to be paid shall be fixed by the city and shall be separate and distinct from any fees imposed herein. (Ord. 516 § 3.04, 2014; Ord. 482 § 3.04, 2008)


5.25.190 Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax.

The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any compensation charged and paid for city property provided for in VMC 5.25.180, are separate from, and additional to, any and all federal, state, local and city taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a utility, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of utility services. (Ord. 516 § 3.05, 2014; Ord. 482 § 3.05, 2008)


5.25.200 Penalties and interest for late payment.

If any fee provided for herein shall not be timely paid, a penalty in the amount of 10 percent of such fee shall be assessed and due as of the date the underlying fee was due. Interest on fees and penalties shall accrue at the rate of one and one-half percent per month, commencing with the fifteenth day after the fee or penalty shall be due. (Ord. 516 § 3.06, 2014; Ord. 482 § 3.06, 2008)

III. Communications Utility License Fee


5.25.210 Communications provider fee imposed.

There is hereby imposed a fee in the amount of five percent of gross revenue upon the privilege of conducting a utility business and providing communications services required to be licensed under VMC 5.25.020, upon any communications provider required to be licensed, as defined herein, in consideration of the authority of such provider to conduct such business and to take advantage of the business conditions provided by the city of Veneta, including the use of the rights-of-way. (Ord. 516 § 4.01, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.01, 2008)


5.25.220 Minimum fee.

In no event shall the fee due for any calendar year be less than:

(1) In the case of a communications provider providing services within the city of Veneta, $500.00.

(2) In the case of a communications provider not providing services within the city of Veneta, but occupying the public rights-of-way within the city, the greater of (a) a charge of $2.00 for each linear foot of public ways occupied by the facilities of the provider, or (b) $350.00. If the communications provider can show that this minimum amount creates a hardship, the city may grant an exemption.

(3) Licensees who can show that their gross annual revenues for services provided within the city of Veneta are less than $10,000 may apply for an exemption from the payment of the license fee. Where the license fee administrator can determine from the evidence provided that the applicant for an exemption is providing less than the threshold amount of services within the city, and where the evidence shows that the applicant is receiving a concomitantly small advantage derived from doing business within the city, and where the administrative costs to the city of processing the license fee payments would exceed the benefit to the city, the license fee administrator may grant an exemption. Such an exemption shall be good only for the calendar year granted. The license fee administrator may waive the minimum fee requirement of this section, if it is determined to be in the best interests of the city, as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 516 § 4.02, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.02, 2008)


5.25.230 Returns.

(1) For purposes of calculating fees dues under this section, every communications provider subject to licensing and fees shall pay such fee on the basis of a calendar year, and shall file, quarterly, before the forty-fifth day following the end of a calendar quarter, a return certified by an officer of the provider showing the amount of fee due and accompanied by the amount due.

(2) Such return shall show the amount of gross revenue of the utility within the city for the period covered by the payment computed on the basis set out in this section, and shall show any offsets, deductions or credits against the revenue or the amount of fee due. The compensation for the period covered by the statement shall be computed on the basis of the gross revenue so reported. If the licensee fails to pay the entire amount of compensation due the city through error or otherwise, the difference due the city shall be paid by the licensee within 15 days from discovery of the error or determination of the correct amount, with interest at the rate of 10 percent per annum, compounded monthly. Any overpayment to the city through error or otherwise shall be offset against the next payment due from the licensee.

(3) In the event a licensee files a return claiming the minimum fee provided by VMC 5.25.220 shall be due, the licensee shall nonetheless file a return as provided in subsection (2) of this section and shall, if claiming under VMC 5.25.220(2), file a report duly certified by an engineer, licensed to practice within the state of Oregon, setting forth the calculation of the number of linear feet of public way occupied by the licensee. After the first such report, the licensee claiming under VMC 5.25.220(2) may substitute for the engineer’s report a statement from a person knowledgeable about such matters, attesting that no additional installations have been made, if such a statement can be made.

(4) The city may audit any return filed by the licensee, and require the licensee to submit such information as shall reasonably be required to establish the accuracy of any payment of fee or return documenting the amount of fee due. In the event such audit shall disclose a discrepancy in favor of the city in excess of five percent of the amount paid, there is hereby imposed a penalty in the amount of 10 percent of the difference between the amount paid and the amount found, upon audit, to be due.

(5) Acceptance by the city of any payment due under this section shall not be deemed to be a waiver by the city of any rights to conduct such audit, nor shall the acceptance by the city of any such payments preclude the city from later establishing that a larger amount was actually due, or from collecting any balance due to the city. (Ord. 516 § 4.03, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.03, 2008)


5.25.240 Gross revenue.

For purposes of this article, “gross revenue” shall mean any and all revenue, of any kind, nature or form, without deduction for expense; all inflows or enhancements of assets or settlements of its liabilities (or a combination of both) of whatsoever kind and nature derived by the licensee and any affiliates, subsidiaries or parent of the licensee on account of goods or services from the licensee’s ongoing operations delivered within the city of Veneta. Gross revenue shall include any and all subsidies, discounts, rebates or other considerations or forbearances by the licensee associated with the delivery of such goods and services within the city of Veneta. In determining gross revenues for the calculation of fees, the city shall consider mobile communications services to occur within the city if they are used by a customer whose place of primary use is within the city. As used in this section, “place of primary use” means the residential street address or the primary business street address of the customer. The city shall apply this provision consistently with the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 USC 116 to 126. (Ord. 516 § 4.04, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.04, 2008)


5.25.250 Exemptions and credits.

If any licensee is a party to a franchise, public way use agreement, or other contract with the city which requires the payment of a fee for the use of the public ways of the city, any payments made under such agreement during the filing year shall be credited against any fee due hereunder to the extent the revenue upon which such payments are based is subject to fees required hereunder. Revenues not included in the franchise or other agreement but otherwise earned because of transactions in the city shall remain subject to the license fee.

(1) If a licensee asserts that any other provisions of local, state or federal law impose a limit upon the revenue subject to fees or charges that can be imposed in connection with the use of public ways, such licensee shall file a return which:

(a) Itemizes the gross revenue subject to fees under this article;

(b) Itemizes the portion of such revenue that is subject to the limitation claimed to exist under other provisions of local, state or federal law.

(2) The license fee liability of a licensee claiming a limitation on revenue subject to fees shall be the sum of:

(a) The fee due hereunder on that portion of the licensee revenue not subject to the limitation; and

(b) On the portion of revenue subject to a limitation, the lesser of:

(i) The fee due under this article; or

(ii) The license fee due under the other provision of local, state or federal law.

(3) Any licensed utility shall be allowed, as a credit against fees due hereunder, the reasonable value of any and all services rendered to or goods provided to the city without fee, if any, during the preceding calendar year. (Ord. 516 § 4.05, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.05, 2008)


5.25.260 Penalties and interest.

(1) Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a violation punishable in accordance with city ordinances. Any person found to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter or the license shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues. The city may use all enforcement methods available to the city in accordance to city ordinances and state law.

(2) In addition to other penalties, if any payment due hereunder shall not be timely made, there is imposed a penalty in the amount of 10 percent of the amount due.

(3) Interest on any payment not timely made, and upon all penalties imposed, shall accrue at the annual rate of 10 percent, compounded daily, for each day beyond the due date, until the date paid. (Ord. 516 § 4.06, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.06, 2008)


5.25.270 Lien.

The fee imposed by VMC 5.25.210, together with the interest and penalties provided by VMC 5.25.260 and the filing fees paid to the Department of Records of Lane County, Oregon, and auditing or other costs which may be incurred when the fee becomes delinquent under VMC 5.25.230 shall be, and until paid remain, a lien from the date of its recording with the Department of Records of Lane County, Oregon, and superior to all subsequent recorded liens on all real property or tangible personal property of the licensee located within the city of Veneta and may be foreclosed on and sold as necessary to discharge the lien, if the lien has been so recorded. Notice of lien may be issued by the license fee administrator whenever the operator is in default in the payment of the fee, interest and penalty, and shall be recorded with the Department of Records and a copy sent to the delinquent licensee. The personal property subject to the lien and seized by any deputy of the license fee administrator may be sold by the license fee administrator at public auction after 10 days’ notice thereof published in a newspaper in the city.

Any such lien as shown on the records of the Department of Records shall, upon the payment of the fees, penalty and interest for which the lien has been imposed, be released by the license fee administrator when the full amount has been paid to the city. The person making the payment shall receive a receipt therefor stating that the full amount of the fees, penalties, and interest have been paid and that the lien is thereby released and the record of lien satisfied. (Ord. 516 § 4.07, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.07, 2008)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



5.30.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Arm’s length transaction” means a sale in good faith and for valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between two informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners, or a sale for which a significant purpose is avoiding the regulations of this chapter is not an arm’s length transaction.

(2) “Business” means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, company, association, or other entity formed for purposes that include profit-making.

(3) “City” means the city of Veneta or designated person. 

(4) “Electronic smoking device (ESD)” means any electronic product that delivers nicotine or any other substance to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, vape pen or e-hookah. “Electronic smoking device” includes any component, part, or accessory of such a product, whether or not sold separately. “Electronic smoking device” does not include drugs, devices, or combination products approved for sale by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, as those terms are defined in the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.

(5) “Employee” means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, or any person who volunteers services for an employer.

(6) “Employer” means any business or nonprofit entity that retains the service of one or more employees.

(7) “Independent contractor” means any person who is retained with a contract by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit.

(8) “Nominal cost” means the cost of any item imposed for the transfer from one person to another for less than the total of: (a) 25 percent of the fair market value of the item exclusive of taxes and government fees; plus (b) all taxes and government fees previously paid and all taxes and government fees still due on the item at the time of transfer.

(9) “Nonsale distribution” means to give, furnish, or cause or allow to be given or furnished, wholly or for sampling, a tobacco product at no cost or at nominal cost to a person who is not a tobacco retailer.

(10) “Person” means any natural person, business, employer, nonprofit entity, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity including a government agency.

(11) “Proprietor” means a person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest is deemed to exist when a person has a 10 percent or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest is deemed to exist when a person can or does have or share ultimate control over the day-to-day operations of a business.

(12) “Self-service display” means the open display or storage of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general public without the assistance of the tobacco retailer or employee of the tobacco retailer and a direct person-to-person transfer between the purchaser and the tobacco retailer or employee of the tobacco retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display.

(13) “Smoke” and “smoking” mean inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant, or other tobacco like product or substance in any manner or in any form. “Smoke” and “smoking” also include the use of an electronic smoking device which creates an aerosol, in any manner or in any form. A lighted smoking instrument includes an activated or “switched on” electronic smoking device.

(14) “Tobacco paraphernalia” means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, cigarette rolling machines, electronic smoking device and any other item specifically designed for the consumption or preparation of tobacco products. “Tobacco paraphernalia” does not include such items sold at a state-licensed medical or recreational marijuana facility.

(15) “Tobacco product” means any product that is tobacco, made from tobacco or derived from tobacco, which is intended for human consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, snus, or an electronic smoking device. “Tobacco product” does not include drugs, devices, or combination products approved for sale by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, as those terms are defined in the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.

(16) “Tobacco retailer” means any person who sells, offers for sale, or exchanges or offers to exchange for any form of consideration tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia. “Tobacco retailing” means the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange. (Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.30.020 Requirements and prohibitions.

(1) A person commits a violation of these tobacco retail licensing and sale regulations if the person knowingly engages in the following conduct:

(a) Selling, offering for sale, or exchanging or offering to exchange for any form of consideration tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer license under this chapter for each location at which that activity is to occur. Tobacco retailing without a valid tobacco retailer license is a nuisance as a matter of law.

(b) Violating any local, state, or federal law applicable to tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or tobacco retailing in the course of tobacco retailing or in the operation of the business or maintenance of the location for which a license was issued.

(c) Failing to ensure that employees know how to comply with tobacco control laws. Tobacco retailers can be held responsible for violations committed by employees.

(d) Failing to prominently display a tobacco retailer license in a publicly visible location at the licensed location.

(e) Failing to examine the identification and confirm that the holder is at least 18 years of age, before selling or transferring tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia to a natural person who appears to be under 27 years of age.

(f) Selling, giving, or furnishing, or causing to be sold, given or furnished, a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia to a natural person who is younger than 18 years of age.

(g) Permitting a natural person who is younger than 18 years of age or younger than the minimum age established by state law for the purchase or possession of tobacco products to sell, offer for sale, or exchange or offer to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia.

(h) Engaging in tobacco retailing by means of a self-service display.

(i) Displaying tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia to public view without a valid tobacco retailer license. The public display of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in violation of this subsection constitutes tobacco retailing without a valid license under VMC 5.30.130.

(j) Displaying any advertisement relating to tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia that promotes the sale or distribution of such products from the tobacco retailer’s location or that could lead a reasonable consumer to believe that such products can be obtained at that location without a valid tobacco retailer license. 

(k) Engaging in the nonsale distribution of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia.

(l) Failing to conspicuously post an approved tobacco health warning in an area visible to all customers.

(m) Failing to conspicuously post signage provided by the city that discloses current referral information about the Oregon Tobacco Quitline, 1-800-QUIT-NOW.

(n) Engaging in tobacco retailing within 1,000 feet of any school, except as permitted by VMC 5.30.030.

(2) By resolution, the council may provide for an incentive program reducing the annual license fee by $75.00 if a tobacco retailer: (a) has no tobacco retail violations in the previous year and (b) uses a cash register that reads the magnetic strip on drivers’ licenses to verify age. (Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.30.030 Limits on eligibility for a tobacco retailer license.

(1) No license will be issued to a tobacco retailer located within 1,000 feet of any school as follows:

(a) Except as provided in subsection (1)(b) of this section, no tobacco retailer license will be issued to a tobacco retailer located within 1,000 feet of a school as measured by a straight line from the nearest point of the property line of the lot or parcel on which the school is located to the nearest point of the property line of the parcel on which the applicant’s business is located. For the purposes of this chapter, “school” means a public kindergarten, elementary, middle, junior high or high school.

(b) A tobacco retailer that has been in operation at a location consistently since the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or that is located within the city’s highway commercial (HC) zone is exempt from the requirements of subsection (1)(a) of this section. 

(2) No license will be issued to a tobacco retailer not located at a fixed location. For example, tobacco retailing by persons on foot or from vehicles or mobile units is prohibited. (Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.30.040 Nonretaliation.

Persons, tobacco retailers, and employers are prohibited from intimidating, threatening any reprisal, or effecting any reprisal for the purpose of retaliating against another person that seeks to attain compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.30.050 Application procedure.

Application for a tobacco retailer license must be submitted in the name of each proprietor proposing to conduct retail tobacco sales and will be signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent thereof.

(1) It is the responsibility of each proprietor to be informed regarding all laws applicable to tobacco retailing, including those laws affecting the issuance of a tobacco retailer license. The proprietor will also train all employees in the applicable laws, and is required to provide proof of training with annual recertification.

(2) No proprietor may rely on the issuance of a license as a determination that the proprietor has complied with all laws applicable to tobacco retailing. A license issued contrary to VMC 5.30.060, contrary to any other law, or on the basis of false or misleading information supplied by a proprietor will be revoked pursuant to VMC 5.30.120. Nothing in this chapter will be construed to vest in any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer license any status or right to act as a tobacco retailer in contravention of any provision of law.

(3) All applications will be submitted on a form supplied by the city and will contain the following information:

(a) The name, address, and telephone number of each proprietor of the business seeking a license.

(b) The business name, address, and telephone number of the single fixed location for which a license is sought.

(c) A single name and mailing address authorized by each proprietor to receive all communications and notices (the “authorized address”) required by, authorized by, or convenient to the enforcement of this chapter. If an authorized address is not supplied, each proprietor will be understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified in subsection (3)(b) of this section.

(d) Whether or not any proprietor or any agent of the proprietor has admitted violating, or has been found to have violated, this chapter and, if so, the dates and locations of all such violations within the previous five years.

(4) Such other information as the city deems necessary for the administration or enforcement of this chapter as specified on the application form required by this section.

(5) A licensed tobacco retailer must inform the city in writing of any change in the information submitted on an application for a tobacco retailer license within 10 business days of a change.

(6) All information specified in an application pursuant to this section is subject to disclosure under the Oregon Public Records Act or any other applicable law, subject to the law’s exemptions. (Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.30.060 Issuance of license.

Upon the receipt of a complete application for a tobacco retailer license and the license fee required by VMC 5.30.100, the city will issue a license to the applicant unless:

(1) The information presented in the application is inaccurate or false. Intentionally supplying inaccurate or false information will be a violation punishable under the provisions of this chapter.

(2) The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at a location for which VMC 5.30.030 prohibits issuance of tobacco retailer licenses.

(3) The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing for a proprietor to whom this chapter prohibits a license to be issued.

(4) The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is prohibited or unlawful pursuant to this code or that is unlawful pursuant to any other law. (Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.30.070 License renewal and expiration.

(1) A tobacco retailer license is invalid if the appropriate fee is not timely paid in full or if the term of the license has expired. The term of a tobacco retailer license is one year. Each tobacco retailer will apply for the renewal of the tobacco retailer license and submit the license fee no later than 30 days prior to expiration of the term.

(2) A tobacco retailer license that is not timely renewed expires at the end of its term. To renew a license not timely renewed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, the proprietor must: 

(a) Submit the license fee and application renewal form; and

(b) Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the proprietor:

(i) Has not sold and will not sell or display any tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia after the license expiration date and before the license is renewed; or

(ii) Has waited the period of time required by VMC 5.30.130 for tobacco retailing without a valid license before seeking renewal of the license. (Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.30.080 Licenses nontransferable.

(1) A tobacco retailer license may not be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another. A new tobacco retailer license is required whenever a tobacco retailing location has a change in proprietor(s).

(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, prior violations at a location will continue to be counted against a location and license ineligibility periods will continue to apply to a location unless:

(a) The location has been transferred to new proprietor(s) in an arm’s length transaction; and

(b) The new proprietor(s) provide the city with clear and convincing evidence that the new proprietor(s) have acquired or are acquiring the location in an arm’s length transaction. (Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.30.090 License conveys a limited, conditional privilege.

Nothing in this chapter grants any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer license any status or right other than the limited conditional privilege to act as a tobacco retailer at the location in the city identified on the face of the license. Nothing in this chapter renders inapplicable, supersedes, or applies in lieu of any other provision of applicable law, including but not limited to any provision of this code, or any condition or limitation on smoking in an enclosed place of employment under ORS 433.847 and OAR 333-015-0068 or other federal or local ordinances. Obtaining a tobacco retailer license does not make the tobacco retailer a certified smoke shop under ORS 433.847 and OAR 333-015-0068. (Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.30.100 Fee for license.

The fee to issue or to renew a tobacco retailer license will be set by resolution of the city council. The fee will be calculated so as to recover the cost of both the administration and enforcement of this code, including the cost of issuing the license, administering the license program, tobacco retailer education, tobacco retailer inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, adjudications, convictions, and prosecution of violators. All fees are nonrefundable except as required by law and are permitted to be used exclusively to fund the costs outlined in this chapter. Fees will not be prorated. (Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.30.110 Compliance monitoring.

(1) The city will monitor compliance with this chapter and may designate any number of additional persons to assist monitoring compliance. In addition, any peace officer may enforce the penal provisions of this chapter.

(2) The city will endeavor to inspect each licensed tobacco retailer at least one time per 12-month period. Nothing in this section creates a right of action in any licensee or other person against the city or its agents.

(3) The city will not enforce any law establishing a minimum age for tobacco purchases or possession against a natural person serving as a youth decoy. A youth decoy is a natural person under the age of 18 who: 

(a) Is participating in an inspection supervised by a peace officer, code enforcement official, or the person designated by the city to monitor compliance with VMC 5.30.020;

(b) Is acting as an agent of a person designated by the city to monitor compliance with VMC 5.30.020; or

(c) Is participating in an inspection funded in part, either directly or indirectly through subcontracting, by the city or the Oregon Health Authority. (Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.30.120 Suspension or revocation of license.

(1) In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco retailer license will be suspended or revoked if any court of competent jurisdiction determines, or the city finds based on a preponderance of the evidence, after the licensee is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, that the licensee, or any of the licensee’s agents or employees, has violated any of the requirements, conditions, or prohibitions of this chapter or has pleaded guilty, “no contest” or its equivalent, or admitted to a violation of any law designated in this chapter.

(a) Upon a finding by the city of a first violation of this chapter at a location within any 24-month period, the license will be suspended for 10 days or a $1,650 fine imposed.

(b) Upon a finding by the city of a second violation of this chapter at a location within any 24-month period, the license will be suspended for 30 days or a $4,950 fine imposed.

(c) Upon a finding by the city of a third violation of this chapter at a location within any 24-month period, the license will be suspended for 30 days.

(d) Upon a finding by the city of four or more violations of this chapter at a location within any 24-month period, the license will be revoked.

(2) A decision of the city to suspend or revoke a license is appealable to the city manager and any appeal must be filed in writing with the city manager within 10 days of mailing of the city’s decision. If such an appeal is timely made, it will stay enforcement of the appealed action. An appeal to the city manager is not available for a revocation made pursuant to subsection (3) of this section.

(3) A tobacco retailer license will be revoked if the city finds, after the licensee is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, that one or more of the bases for denial of a license under VMC 5.30.060 existed at the time application was made or at any time before the license issued. The decision by the city will be final. Such a revocation will be without prejudice to the filing of a new license application. (Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.30.130 Tobacco retailing without a valid license.

(1) In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, if a court of competent jurisdiction determines, or the city finds based on a preponderance of evidence, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, that any person has engaged in tobacco retailing at a location without a valid tobacco retailer license, either directly or through the person’s agents or employees, the person will be ineligible to apply for, or to be issued, a tobacco retailer license as follows:

(a) After a first violation of this section at a location within any 24-month period, no new license may be issued for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm’s length transaction) until 30 days have passed from the date of the violation.

(b) After a second violation of this section at a location within any 24-month period, no new license may be issued for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm’s length transaction) until 90 days have passed from the date of the violation.

(c) After a third or subsequent violation of this section at a location within any 24-month period, no new license may be issued for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm’s length transaction) until two years have passed from the date of the violation.

(2) Tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia offered for sale or exchange in violation of this chapter are subject to seizure by the city or any peace officer and will be forfeited after the licensee and any other owner of the tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia seized is given reasonable notice and an opportunity to demonstrate that the tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia were not offered for sale or exchange in violation of this chapter. The decision by the city may be appealed under VMC 5.30.120. Forfeited tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia will be destroyed after all internal appeals have been exhausted and the time in which to seek judicial review pursuant to Oregon law has expired without the filing of a lawsuit or, if such a suit is filed, after judgment in that suit becomes final.

(3) For the purposes of the civil remedies provided in VMC 5.30.140, the following constitute separate violations:

(a) Each day on which a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia is offered for sale in violation of this chapter; or

(b) Each instance in which an individual retail tobacco product or item of tobacco paraphernalia is distributed, sold, or offered for sale in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.30.140 Penalties and additional remedies.

(1) The remedies provided by this section are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.

(2) Violations of this chapter are punishable by a fine per violation as follows:

(a) After a first violation, a $1,650 fine or suspension of license; 

(b) After a second violation, a $4,950 fine or suspension of license; and

(c) After a third violation, a suspension of license as described in VMC 5.30.120. 

Persons found in violation of this chapter will be responsible for all costs associated with the prosecution of those violations.

(3) In addition to all applicable penalties under this chapter, any employee involved in tobacco product sales to anyone under 18 years of age is subject to civil action pursuant to ORS 163.575, Endangering the welfare of a minor, punishable by a civil fine per violation of not less than $100.00 nor exceeding $500.00.

(4) Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable in accordance with subsection (2) of this section.

(5) Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances.

(6) In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action including, for example, through administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. (Ord. 538 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


Chapter 5.25 COMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER LICENSING


Chapter 5.25 COMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER LICENSING

Sections:

5.25.010    Findings.

I. Communications Operations License

5.25.020    Definitions.

5.25.030    Communications utility license required.

5.25.040    License application.

5.25.050    Determination by the city.

5.25.060    Effect of utility license.

5.25.070    Nonexclusive grant.

5.25.080    Rights granted.

5.25.090    Term of grant.

5.25.100    Coordination of activities.

5.25.110    Amendment of license.

5.25.120    Renewal applications.

5.25.130    Renewal determinations.

5.25.140    Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.

II. Utility License – Fees and Compensation

5.25.150    Purpose.

5.25.160    Application and review fee.

5.25.170    Other city costs.

5.25.180    Compensation for city property.

5.25.190    Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax.

5.25.200    Penalties and interest for late payment.

III. Communications Utility License Fee

5.25.210    Communications provider fee imposed.

5.25.220    Minimum fee.

5.25.230    Returns.

5.25.240    Gross revenue.

5.25.250    Exemptions and credits.

5.25.260    Penalties and interest.

5.25.270    Lien.


5.25.010 Findings.

(1) The Veneta City Charter grants to the city all powers that the constitutions, statutes and common law of the United States and of the state of Oregon now or hereafter expressly or impliedly grant or allow.

(2) Among the powers granted to the city is the power to impose license requirements and charges. Such licenses may include charges for the privilege of conducting business within the city and for the use of the city rights-of-way.

(3) Numerous utilities rely on the existence of the city to enable them to provide goods and services to citizens of the city, including, without limitation, telephone, cable television, and other information and telecommunications services.

(4) Communication providers also seek to provide services which require, for their effective delivery, connection to, interaction with, or other use of facilities placed in the public ways by themselves and others.

(5) The city desires to facilitate making communication services available to citizens by itself working to provide amenities that make Veneta a better place to do business. For most utilities this includes, but is not limited to, the city permitting use of the public ways for the support of utility services, so long as such use is consistent with and does not unduly burden or interfere with the principal purpose of the public ways, which is to facilitate the free movement of persons and goods in commerce.

(6) The city holds the health, safety, quality of life and opportunities to prosper, as well as such physical assets as the public ways, in trust for all of its citizens, and has a responsibility to assure that any use of the city amenities, and especially its public ways, are used in a manner that benefits all of the citizens. Where it is deemed appropriate, the city should provide for the recovery of a fair and reasonable compensation for the use of the city and the city’s assets for the purpose of doing business.

(7) Many communications providers use only the public ways to provide services. Other communications providers make no use of the public ways, or only an indirect or limited use of the public ways, yet still these providers prosper in the city because of the amenities made possible by the city. Where those providers make franchise fee payments that provide compensation based on all the services provided, the franchise serves as an adequate replacement for other charges. Franchises are, however, often used as a means to install infrastructure, ostensibly for one purpose, which can then be used for multiple services. Where a provider provides services not covered by a franchise within the city, it is appropriate that the provider be subject to the charges set forth in this chapter, so that the payments accurately reflect the range of advantages derived from the opportunity to provide services within the city, and, where appropriate, especially the use of the rights-of-way of the city. The intent of this chapter is to treat all providers in an equal manner, subjecting all providers and all types of service that make use of the city’s amenities and assets to the same charges and fees. (Ord. 516 § 1, 2014; Ord. 482 § 1, 2008)

I. Communications Operations License


5.25.020 Definitions.

Terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Affiliate” means a person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person.

(2) “Cable Acts” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and as hereafter amended.

(3) “Cable operator” means an entity providing or offering to provide “cable service” within the city as that term is defined in the Cable Acts.

(4) “Cable service” shall have the same meaning as defined in the Cable Acts.

(5) “FCC or Federal Communications Commission” means the federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee communications carriers, services and providers on a national level.

(6) “Licensee” means any entity granted a license hereunder.

(7) “Overhead facilities” means utility poles, utility facilities and communications facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.

(8) “Person” means any individual or entity engaging in activities regulated by this chapter.

(9) “Public street” means any highway, street, alley or other public right-of-way dedicated for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the city.

(10) “Public utility easement” means any easement granted to the city, acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for access for public utility facilities for construction, operations, and maintenance purposes.

(11) “Right-of-way” includes all public streets owned by the city and public utility easements granted to the city, but only to the extent of the city’s right, title, interest or authority to grant permission to occupy and use such streets and easements.

(12) “License fee administrator” means the city administrator of the city or designee.

(13) “Communications carrier” includes every person or entity that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plant, equipment or property within the city, used or to be used for the purpose of offering communications service.

(14) “Communications facilities or system” means the plant, equipment and property including, but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennas, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer communications service.

(15) “Communications provider” means any provider of communications services and includes, but is not limited to, every person or entity that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages communications facilities within the city.

(16) “Communications service” means the providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming or any other information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium. “Communications service” includes all forms of telephone services and voice, video, data or information transport, but does not include (a) private communications system services provided without using the public rights-of-way, (b) over-the-air radio or television broadcasting to the public at large from facilities licensed by the Federal Communications Commission; and (c) direct to home satellite service within the meaning of Section 602 of the Telecommunications Act.

(17) “Underground facilities” means utility and communications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for overhead facilities.

(18) “Utility” means any telecommunications utility as defined in ORS 759.005(1), and communications carrier, communications provider or other entity providing communications services, including data and Internet services.

(19) “Utility facilities” means the plant, equipment and property including, but not limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the public ways of the city and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility services. The term shall include all such things owned by the utility and all such things as the utility shall have a property interest in, including things held by the utility or on its behalf under a lease, rental agreement or indefeasible right of use for a term of years.

(20) “Utility services” means all services provided by a utility to customers located within the city limits of the city of Veneta or provided to customers wherever located using facilities physically located within the city limits of the city of Veneta.

(21) “Private communications network” means a system, including the construction maintenance or operation of the system, for the provision of a service or any portion of a service which is owned or operated exclusively by a person or entity for their use and not for resale, directly or indirectly. Includes services provided by the state of Oregon pursuant to ORS 190.240 and 283.140.

(22) “Person” means any individual, firm, sole proprietorship, corporation, company, partnership, co-partnership, joint-stock company, trust, limited liability company, association or other organization, including any natural person or any other legal entity. (Ord. 516 § 2.01, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.01, 2008)


5.25.030 Communications utility license required.

A communications utility license shall be required of any utility who desires to provide communications service to persons in the city or to persons or areas outside the city using facilities located in the city. No utility shall provide services within the city nor shall such utility provide services outside the city using facilities located within the city unless licensed as provided herein. Utilities who utilize facilities of another licensed utility for the distribution of their services shall be required to have a separate license. The purpose of licensing under this chapter is to:

(1) Provide the city with accurate and current information concerning the utilities who offer communications services within the city, or that own or operate utility facilities within the city;

(2) Assist the city in enforcement of this chapter;

(3) Assist the city in the collection and enforcement of any municipal taxes, franchise fees, license, permit or other fees or charges that may be due the city;

(4) Assist the city in monitoring compliance with local and, to the extent authorized by law, with state and federal laws. (Ord. 516 § 2.02, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.02, 2008)


5.25.040 License application.

Any utility that is required to have a communications utility license shall file an application, using the form provided for such purpose, with the city, which shall include the following information:

(1) The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.

(2) A description of the communications services that are or will be offered or provided by licensee.

(3) Information to establish that the applicant has obtained or has applied for all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the services. Such approvals include, without limitation, any land use decisions. In the event any other required government approval is not obtained any license granted hereunder shall be subject to modification to reflect the absence of such approval upon the city’s discovery of, or notice of the absence of required information.

(4) Identification of any adverse circumstances affecting the use of the public way, and a description of efforts to mitigate such circumstances.

(5) All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 516 § 2.03, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.03, 2008)


5.25.050 Determination by the city.

Within 120 days after receiving a complete application under VMC 5.25.040, the city shall, if the application conforms with the requirements of law, issue the license.

If the application is denied, the denial shall be in writing and state the reasons for denial. (Ord. 516 § 2.04, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.04, 2008)


5.25.060 Effect of utility license.

(1) The license granted hereunder shall authorize and permit the licensee, subject to other provisions of Veneta ordinances and other applicable provisions of state or federal law, to operate in the city and provide the communications services covered by the license. In addition to a grant of authority to operate within the city, and subject to other requirements of law regarding the activities involved in the placement of facilities in the public ways of the city, and to a franchise granted by the city, if applicable, the license shall authorize the licensee to maintain facilities in, and occupy, the public ways of the city for so long as the licensee shall comply with the provisions of this code, and continue to hold any and all licenses and permits required by state or federal law for the provision of such services as covered by this license; provided, however that all work, construction, placement or operation of such facilities shall be in compliance with the provisions of Veneta ordinances, including the standard construction specifications of the applicable building codes. Nothing in such license shall authorize the licensee to use the facilities or property of another, which use, if any, shall be subject to agreement with the owner of such facility or property and any applicable provisions of law. Nothing in such license shall operate or be construed as an approval of such business or a regulation of the practices of such business.

(2) The city reserves the right, in every event, without limitation, to:

(a) Construct, install, maintain and operate any public improvement, work or facility in, on, over or under the public ways; or

(b) Perform or authorize or direct the performance of any work that the city may find desirable or convenient in, on, over or under any public way; or

(c) Vacate, alter, or close any public way; provided, however, that no vacation shall obligate a utility to remove or abandon any facility located within such public way; or

(d) Require, in the public interest, the removal or relocation, temporarily or permanently, of facilities maintained by the utility in the public ways of the city. The utility shall remove and relocate such facilities within 120 days after receiving notice in writing to do so from the city. Such removal or relocation shall be without cost or expense to the city, provided, however, that when such removal or relocation is required for the convenience or benefit of any private person, or non-governmental agency or instrumentality, utility shall be entitled to reimbursement for the reasonable cost thereof from such person, agency or instrumentality, to the extent permitted by law.

(3) Whenever the city shall perform or cause or permit to be performed, any work in the public way or the vicinity of the public way where such work may disturb or interfere with a utility’s facilities, the city shall, or shall require its permittee, to notify, in writing, the utility sufficiently in advance of such contemplated work to enable utility to take such measures, including removal or relocation of such facilities, as may be deemed necessary to protect such facilities, at its own expense.

(4) The possession of a utility license from the city shall not provide the licensee with any right or privilege to alter or avoid any charge or cost allocation for the relocation of utility facilities, nor shall a license provide a different or greater claim for compensation, than otherwise apportioned by law or agreement. (Ord. 516 § 2.05, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.05, 2008)


5.25.070 Nonexclusive grant.

No license granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to conduct business in the city, or to occupy or use the public ways of the city for delivery of utility services or any other purposes. (Ord. 516 § 2.06, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.06, 2008)


5.25.080 Rights granted.

No license granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to conduct authorized activities within the city to offer communications services and, where appropriate, to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no license shall be construed as any warranty of title. In the event that a conflict arises or is discovered between the terms or requirements of this chapter and the terms or requirements of any other ordinance adopted by the city of Veneta, the most recently adopted ordinance shall prevail insofar as there is an actual conflict, and the adoption of that ordinance shall be considered an amendment to the conflicting provisions of the otherwise conflicting ordinance. (Ord. 516 § 2.07, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.07, 2008)


5.25.090 Term of grant.

Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a communications license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five years. (Ord. 516 § 2.08, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.08, 2008)


5.25.100 Coordination of activities.

Wherever possible, all holders of a license are directed to coordinate their activities affecting the public ways and shall be obliged to participate in coordination meetings to be held by the city for the purpose of facilitating such cooperation and coordination. (Ord. 516 § 2.09, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.09, 2008)


5.25.110 Amendment of license.

A new license application and grant shall be required of any utility that desires to extend additional or different services in the city which are not included in a license previously granted under this chapter. (Ord. 516 § 2.10, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.10, 2008)


5.25.120 Renewal applications.

A licensee that desires to renew its license under this chapter shall, not more than 180 days nor less than 90 days before expiration of the current license, file an application with the city for renewal of its license which shall include the information required for initial licensing. (Ord. 516 § 2.11, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.11, 2008)


5.25.130 Renewal determinations.

Within 90 days after receiving a complete application under VMC 5.25.120, the city shall issue a written determination applying the following standards, as applicable, and, if the application conforms with the requirements of law, grant the application:

(1) Demonstrated legal qualifications, financial and technical ability of the applicant.

(2) Compliance with requirements of applicable state and federal laws and regulations.

(3) The applicant’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other Veneta ordinances.

If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal. (Ord. 516 § 2.12, 2014; Ord. 482 § 2.12, 2008)


5.25.140 Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.

No license shall be renewed until any existing violations or defaults in the licensee’s performance of the requirements of this chapter have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the licensee has been approved by the city. Ord. 516 § 2.13, 2014; (Ord. 482 § 2.13, 2008)

II. Utility License – Fees and Compensation 


5.25.150 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this section to provide for the payment and recovery of all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the city related to the enforcement and administration of this chapter and other city practices and policies that make possible the conditions that allow licensees to operate within the city of Veneta. Any revenues received in excess of the cost of administering the ordinance shall be used to improve the public safety of the city of Veneta. Public safety services are one of the most important services provided to the businesses and their customers in Veneta. (Ord. 516 § 3.01, 2014; Ord. 482 § 3.01, 2008)


5.25.160 Application and review fee.

(1) Any applicant for a license, including a renewal or amendment of an existing license, pursuant to Article I of this chapter shall pay a fee of $100.00.

(2) The application and review fee shall be deposited with the city as part of the application filed pursuant to Article I of this chapter.

(3) An applicant whose license or franchise application has been withdrawn, abandoned or denied within 60 days of its application and review fee written request shall be refunded its deposit under this section. (Ord. 516 § 3.02, 2014; Ord. 482 § 3.02, 2008)


5.25.170 Other city costs.

In addition to the application and review fee, all license or franchise grantees shall, within 30 days after written demand therefor, reimburse the city for all direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with any issuance, modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the license or franchise or any license or franchise agreement to the extent permitted by law. (Ord. 516 § 3.03, 2014; Ord. 482 § 3.03, 2008)


5.25.180 Compensation for city property.

If the right is granted, by lease, license, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy city property other than the public ways for the installation of facilities, the compensation to be paid shall be fixed by the city and shall be separate and distinct from any fees imposed herein. (Ord. 516 § 3.04, 2014; Ord. 482 § 3.04, 2008)


5.25.190 Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax.

The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any compensation charged and paid for city property provided for in VMC 5.25.180, are separate from, and additional to, any and all federal, state, local and city taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a utility, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of utility services. (Ord. 516 § 3.05, 2014; Ord. 482 § 3.05, 2008)


5.25.200 Penalties and interest for late payment.

If any fee provided for herein shall not be timely paid, a penalty in the amount of 10 percent of such fee shall be assessed and due as of the date the underlying fee was due. Interest on fees and penalties shall accrue at the rate of one and one-half percent per month, commencing with the fifteenth day after the fee or penalty shall be due. (Ord. 516 § 3.06, 2014; Ord. 482 § 3.06, 2008)

III. Communications Utility License Fee


5.25.210 Communications provider fee imposed.

There is hereby imposed a fee in the amount of five percent of gross revenue upon the privilege of conducting a utility business and providing communications services required to be licensed under VMC 5.25.020, upon any communications provider required to be licensed, as defined herein, in consideration of the authority of such provider to conduct such business and to take advantage of the business conditions provided by the city of Veneta, including the use of the rights-of-way. (Ord. 516 § 4.01, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.01, 2008)


5.25.220 Minimum fee.

In no event shall the fee due for any calendar year be less than:

(1) In the case of a communications provider providing services within the city of Veneta, $500.00.

(2) In the case of a communications provider not providing services within the city of Veneta, but occupying the public rights-of-way within the city, the greater of (a) a charge of $2.00 for each linear foot of public ways occupied by the facilities of the provider, or (b) $350.00. If the communications provider can show that this minimum amount creates a hardship, the city may grant an exemption.

(3) Licensees who can show that their gross annual revenues for services provided within the city of Veneta are less than $10,000 may apply for an exemption from the payment of the license fee. Where the license fee administrator can determine from the evidence provided that the applicant for an exemption is providing less than the threshold amount of services within the city, and where the evidence shows that the applicant is receiving a concomitantly small advantage derived from doing business within the city, and where the administrative costs to the city of processing the license fee payments would exceed the benefit to the city, the license fee administrator may grant an exemption. Such an exemption shall be good only for the calendar year granted. The license fee administrator may waive the minimum fee requirement of this section, if it is determined to be in the best interests of the city, as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 516 § 4.02, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.02, 2008)


5.25.230 Returns.

(1) For purposes of calculating fees dues under this section, every communications provider subject to licensing and fees shall pay such fee on the basis of a calendar year, and shall file, quarterly, before the forty-fifth day following the end of a calendar quarter, a return certified by an officer of the provider showing the amount of fee due and accompanied by the amount due.

(2) Such return shall show the amount of gross revenue of the utility within the city for the period covered by the payment computed on the basis set out in this section, and shall show any offsets, deductions or credits against the revenue or the amount of fee due. The compensation for the period covered by the statement shall be computed on the basis of the gross revenue so reported. If the licensee fails to pay the entire amount of compensation due the city through error or otherwise, the difference due the city shall be paid by the licensee within 15 days from discovery of the error or determination of the correct amount, with interest at the rate of 10 percent per annum, compounded monthly. Any overpayment to the city through error or otherwise shall be offset against the next payment due from the licensee.

(3) In the event a licensee files a return claiming the minimum fee provided by VMC 5.25.220 shall be due, the licensee shall nonetheless file a return as provided in subsection (2) of this section and shall, if claiming under VMC 5.25.220(2), file a report duly certified by an engineer, licensed to practice within the state of Oregon, setting forth the calculation of the number of linear feet of public way occupied by the licensee. After the first such report, the licensee claiming under VMC 5.25.220(2) may substitute for the engineer’s report a statement from a person knowledgeable about such matters, attesting that no additional installations have been made, if such a statement can be made.

(4) The city may audit any return filed by the licensee, and require the licensee to submit such information as shall reasonably be required to establish the accuracy of any payment of fee or return documenting the amount of fee due. In the event such audit shall disclose a discrepancy in favor of the city in excess of five percent of the amount paid, there is hereby imposed a penalty in the amount of 10 percent of the difference between the amount paid and the amount found, upon audit, to be due.

(5) Acceptance by the city of any payment due under this section shall not be deemed to be a waiver by the city of any rights to conduct such audit, nor shall the acceptance by the city of any such payments preclude the city from later establishing that a larger amount was actually due, or from collecting any balance due to the city. (Ord. 516 § 4.03, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.03, 2008)


5.25.240 Gross revenue.

For purposes of this article, “gross revenue” shall mean any and all revenue, of any kind, nature or form, without deduction for expense; all inflows or enhancements of assets or settlements of its liabilities (or a combination of both) of whatsoever kind and nature derived by the licensee and any affiliates, subsidiaries or parent of the licensee on account of goods or services from the licensee’s ongoing operations delivered within the city of Veneta. Gross revenue shall include any and all subsidies, discounts, rebates or other considerations or forbearances by the licensee associated with the delivery of such goods and services within the city of Veneta. In determining gross revenues for the calculation of fees, the city shall consider mobile communications services to occur within the city if they are used by a customer whose place of primary use is within the city. As used in this section, “place of primary use” means the residential street address or the primary business street address of the customer. The city shall apply this provision consistently with the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 USC 116 to 126. (Ord. 516 § 4.04, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.04, 2008)


5.25.250 Exemptions and credits.

If any licensee is a party to a franchise, public way use agreement, or other contract with the city which requires the payment of a fee for the use of the public ways of the city, any payments made under such agreement during the filing year shall be credited against any fee due hereunder to the extent the revenue upon which such payments are based is subject to fees required hereunder. Revenues not included in the franchise or other agreement but otherwise earned because of transactions in the city shall remain subject to the license fee.

(1) If a licensee asserts that any other provisions of local, state or federal law impose a limit upon the revenue subject to fees or charges that can be imposed in connection with the use of public ways, such licensee shall file a return which:

(a) Itemizes the gross revenue subject to fees under this article;

(b) Itemizes the portion of such revenue that is subject to the limitation claimed to exist under other provisions of local, state or federal law.

(2) The license fee liability of a licensee claiming a limitation on revenue subject to fees shall be the sum of:

(a) The fee due hereunder on that portion of the licensee revenue not subject to the limitation; and

(b) On the portion of revenue subject to a limitation, the lesser of:

(i) The fee due under this article; or

(ii) The license fee due under the other provision of local, state or federal law.

(3) Any licensed utility shall be allowed, as a credit against fees due hereunder, the reasonable value of any and all services rendered to or goods provided to the city without fee, if any, during the preceding calendar year. (Ord. 516 § 4.05, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.05, 2008)


5.25.260 Penalties and interest.

(1) Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a violation punishable in accordance with city ordinances. Any person found to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter or the license shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues. The city may use all enforcement methods available to the city in accordance to city ordinances and state law.

(2) In addition to other penalties, if any payment due hereunder shall not be timely made, there is imposed a penalty in the amount of 10 percent of the amount due.

(3) Interest on any payment not timely made, and upon all penalties imposed, shall accrue at the annual rate of 10 percent, compounded daily, for each day beyond the due date, until the date paid. (Ord. 516 § 4.06, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.06, 2008)


5.25.270 Lien.

The fee imposed by VMC 5.25.210, together with the interest and penalties provided by VMC 5.25.260 and the filing fees paid to the Department of Records of Lane County, Oregon, and auditing or other costs which may be incurred when the fee becomes delinquent under VMC 5.25.230 shall be, and until paid remain, a lien from the date of its recording with the Department of Records of Lane County, Oregon, and superior to all subsequent recorded liens on all real property or tangible personal property of the licensee located within the city of Veneta and may be foreclosed on and sold as necessary to discharge the lien, if the lien has been so recorded. Notice of lien may be issued by the license fee administrator whenever the operator is in default in the payment of the fee, interest and penalty, and shall be recorded with the Department of Records and a copy sent to the delinquent licensee. The personal property subject to the lien and seized by any deputy of the license fee administrator may be sold by the license fee administrator at public auction after 10 days’ notice thereof published in a newspaper in the city.

Any such lien as shown on the records of the Department of Records shall, upon the payment of the fees, penalty and interest for which the lien has been imposed, be released by the license fee administrator when the full amount has been paid to the city. The person making the payment shall receive a receipt therefor stating that the full amount of the fees, penalties, and interest have been paid and that the lien is thereby released and the record of lien satisfied. (Ord. 516 § 4.07, 2014; Ord. 482 § 4.07, 2008)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



6.05.010 Animal control – Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases, unless the context otherwise requires, shall mean:

(1) “Abandoned animal” means any animal which appears to have been neglected; left without proper food and water for a period of over 24 hours; any sick or injured animal which appears to have been left without care or treatment for over 24 hours; any barking dogs which appear to have been without supervision for a period of over 24 hours; or any unlicensed dog running at large.

(2) “Animal” means any nonhuman mammal, reptile, bird, amphibian, or fish.

(3) “Animal control authority” means the animal control enforcement authority appointed by this city and empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

(4) “Animal control officer” means any person or government entity employed or contracted by this city’s animal control authority.

(5) “Animal keeper” means any person who owns or harbors an animal or who has the animal in the person’s care, possession, custody, or control, or who knowingly permits an animal, other than a wild animal, to remain on premises occupied by the person. Except for the purposes of VMC 6.05.020, 6.05.030, 6.05.040, 6.05.060, 6.05.070, 6.05.100, 6.05.110, 6.05.120, 6.05.140 and 6.05.160, a “keeper” does not include veterinarians or commercial kennel operators temporarily maintaining animals on their premises for a period of not more than 30 days.

(6) “Barking dog” means a dog which persistently barks or howls and thereby unreasonably deprives any person of peace and quiet, as defined by resolution adopted by the city council.

(7) “Cattery” means a place of business, establishment, premises, or residence used for the care of cats, including but not limited to the boarding, grooming, breeding, show breeding, training, or selling of cats, but not including an animal hospital, veterinary clinic, or animal shelter.

(8) “City” means the city of Veneta, Lane County, Oregon.

(9) “Commercial dog kennel” means a place of business, establishment, premises, or residence used for the care of dogs, including but not limited to the boarding, grooming, breeding, show breeding, training, or selling of dogs, but not including an animal hospital, veterinary clinic, or animal shelter.

(10) “Dangerous animal” means any animal, including a dog, which has the propensity to bite or attack any person without provocation and the capacity to inflict serious harm on that person. It shall be presumed that any animal which has injured a human being on one occasion without provocation is a dangerous animal. “Dangerous animal” also includes any animal used as a weapon in the commission of a crime.

(11) “Domestic animal” means an animal typically kept as a pet.

(12) “Estrus” means the time during the reproductive cycle in animals when the female displays interest in mating. In most cases the animal is about to or has just ovulated, and is therefore impregnable.

(13) “Euthanasia” means the act of destroying or putting an animal to death in a humane manner by a licensed veterinarian or a certified euthanasia technician.

(14) “Exotic animal” means (a) any lion, tiger, leopard, cheetah, cougar, or other wild large cat species; (b) any nonhuman primate; (c) any wolf, except animals declared by their keeper to be wolf-dog hybrids; or (d) any other animal defined by the Oregon Revised Statutes as being exotic.

(15) “Feral cat” means a wild and untamed offspring of a domestic or stray cat that has not been neutered or spayed.

(16) “Game animal” means any animal regulated as a “game bird” or “game mammal” by the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife pursuant to ORS Chapter 496.

(17) “Habitually” means happening on two or more occasions, within a one-week period.

(18) “Impound” means to take into possession, seize and hold in the custody of the city or city agents.

(19) “Leash” means any humane device constructed of rope, leather strap, chain or other sturdy material not exceeding 20 feet in length, held by a person capable of controlling the animal to which the device is attached.

(20) “Livestock” means cattle, sheep, horses, goats, swine, fowl, poultry, and any fur or feather-bearing animal bred and maintained commercially or otherwise within pens, cages, or hutches.

(21) “Menace” means lunging, growling, snarling or other behavior by a dog that would cause a reasonable person to fear for that person’s safety.

(22) “Muzzle” means a device constructed of strong, soft material or metal, used to cover an animal’s mouth. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent it from biting any person or animal.

(23) “Neutered” means the removal of the ovaries and uterus, ovarian hysterectomy, in female dogs, also known as “spaying”; the removal of the male gonads in male dogs.

(24) “Noncommercial dog kennel” means an establishment or premises where three or more dogs over four months of age are boarded, kept, or maintained for the hobby of the householder, but not including an animal hospital.

(25) “Nuisance dog” means any dog which habitually chases vehicles or persons, damages or destroys property of persons other than the keeper of the dog, scatters garbage, has been cited for barking or running at large on more than three occasions, or is a female in heat and running at large.

(26) “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, association, or corporation.

(27) “Physical injury” means impairment of physical condition or substantial pain.

(28) Run at Large. An animal “runs at large” when the animal is off or outside the premises from which the keeper may lawfully exclude others and is not under the keeper’s control by adequate leash. Any animal fully enclosed within a vehicle shall not be considered to be at large.

(29) “Secure enclosure” means an enclosure, not including a residence, in which an animal is confined in such a way that the animal does not have access to humans or other animals. The enclosure shall not be less than eight feet long, four feet wide, and five feet tall. If the floor is not concrete, the outside walls must extend into the ground not less than one foot to prohibit the digging out of the animal. The top of the enclosure must be covered.

(30) “Serious physical injury” means physical injury which creates a substantial risk of death or which causes serious and protracted disfigurement, protracted impairment of health, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily organ.

(31) “Stray animal” means an animal that was once a domesticated pet but then became lost or abandoned.

(32) “Watchdog” means a dog for which a permit has been issued pursuant to VMC 6.05.050(6)(c) and which is trained to attack intruders or which is confined at a business or commercial establishment to protect merchandise, inventory, or equipment.

(33) “Wild animal” means any animal living in a natural, undomesticated state but does not include feral cats or stray animals. (Ord. 521 § 2, 2015; Ord. 502 § 1(A), 2011; Ord. 500 § 1, 2011)


6.05.020 Animals running at large prohibited.

No animal keeper shall permit an animal, other than a cat, to run at large. (Ord. 500 § 2, 2011)


6.05.030 Barking and nuisance dogs prohibited.

(1) No person shall keep a barking or howling dog. The city council shall adopt complaint procedures and penalties for the keeping of barking or howling dogs by resolution.

(2) No person shall keep a nuisance dog. (Ord. 500 § 3, 2011)


6.05.040 Animal waste matter.

It shall be unlawful for an animal keeper, other than a cat keeper, to allow the animal to deposit solid waste matter on any improved property other than premises from which the keeper may lawfully exclude others, unless the animal keeper immediately and completely removes the solid waste. (Ord. 500 § 4, 2011)


6.05.050 Licenses, fees, and exceptions.

(1) Dog Licenses.

(a) Every keeper of a dog which has a set of permanent canine teeth or which has attained the age of six months, whichever event occurs first, shall immediately obtain a license for the dog. If the dog keeper moves into this city of Veneta, the keeper must obtain a city license not later than 30 days after moving into this city or the expiration of a valid license previously issued to the dog by another jurisdiction in this state.

(b) Licenses shall be valid for one, two or three years from the date of issuance or until the person who obtained the license ceases to be the dog’s keeper, whichever occurs first.

(c) No license shall be issued until a certificate of vaccination for rabies, valid for the term of the license, is presented to the animal control authority.

(d) Dog keepers shall renew the dog license before it becomes delinquent for as long as they keep the dog.

(e) A license tag issued to a dog keeper shall be attached securely to a collar or harness on the dog for which it was issued. If the license tag is lost, the keeper may obtain a duplicate license upon satisfactory proof of loss and payment of the required fee.

(f) Except as provided in subsections (3) and (4) of this section, no dog keeper shall be entitled to obtain licenses for more than three dogs, and no more than three dogs of licensing age may be kept or maintained at any one residence, regardless of who is the keeper of the dogs; provided, however, that the dog keepers shall be entitled to obtain licenses for up to five dogs, if all such dogs are kept on property which is not less than one acre in size and which is zoned as rural residential property in accordance with the Veneta land development ordinance. No more than five dogs of licensing age may be kept on any such property.

(g) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1)(f) of this section, any dog keeper shall be entitled to obtain licenses for all dogs properly licensed as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. However, if the total number of dogs kept by a keeper or at any one residence exceeds the number permitted by subsection (1)(f) of this section, neither the dog keeper nor any other person residing on said premises shall be permitted to keep or license individually any dogs other than those which were kept on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, until such time as the total number of dogs kept upon such premises drops below the maximum number of dogs allowed under subsection (1)(f) of this section.

(2) Cats.

(a) Cats must be licensed if the city so requires by resolution. If a resolution is not in effect for cats, a keeper may voluntarily purchase a license for their cat under subsection (1) of this section as a way to help identify their cat if it becomes lost.

(b) No person shall keep more than three cats over the age of four months, nor shall more than three cats over the age of four months be kept at any one residence, regardless of who is the keeper of the cats; provided, however, that up to five cats may be kept if they are maintained on property which is not less than one acre in size and which is zoned rural residential in accordance with the Veneta land development ordinance.

(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2)(b) of this section, all cats kept at any one residence upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may, if licensed within 90 days of the effective date of any city resolution requiring cats to be licensed, continue to be kept until their deaths or until the cats cease to be kept by the person in possession of the residence. However, if the total number of cats kept at any one residence exceeds the number permitted by subsection (2)(b) of this section, neither the cat keeper nor any other person residing on such premises shall be permitted to keep any cats other than those kept upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, until such time as the total number of cats kept upon such premises drops below the maximum number permitted in subsection (2)(b) of this section.

(d) No person shall operate a cattery without a cattery license. A license under this section shall not permit any cats kept, maintained, or boarded on the premises licensed for the cattery to be at large.

(e) Cattery licenses will be issued only for premises which are not less than one acre in size and zoned rural residential property in accordance with the Veneta land development ordinance, and such licenses may be revoked in accordance with the procedure set forth in subsection (3)(d) of this section.

(3) Commercial Kennel License.

(a) No person shall operate a commercial kennel without a commercial kennel license. Commercial kennel licenses shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance.

(b) Commercial kennel licenses function in lieu of individual dog licenses. Dogs licensed under this subsection (3) must at all times be confined to the kennel premises so as not to be at large.

(c) No commercial kennel license will be issued under this subsection (3) to anyone not in conformity with applicable zoning statutes and ordinances. Commercial kennel licenses will be issued only for property which is not less than one acre in size and in accordance with the Veneta land development ordinance.

(d) The following provisions shall govern revocation of kennel licenses:

(i) Three or more violations of this chapter within a period of 12 calendar months shall result in revocation of licenses granted under this subsection (3).

(ii) Such revocation may occur only after a hearing before the municipal court judge and after the licensee has been mailed a notice of a time to appear at least five days in advance of the hearing. The notice shall include a general statement of the reasons for the revocation proceedings.

(iii) If the license is revoked, the licensee shall have 10 days in which to file a written appeal, on a form to be provided by the animal control authority, to this city council. Should no appeal be made, the revocation is effective upon the expiration of the appeal period.

(4) Noncommercial Kennel License. Noncommercial kennel licenses are not permitted in the city of Veneta.

(5) Fees. The dog and cat license fees which are due and payable upon the issuance of a license, and the other fees required to be paid under the provisions of this chapter shall be set by separate resolution adopted by the council.

(6) License Fees – Exceptions.

(a) No license fee shall be required for any dog kept by a disabled person who uses the dog as a guide or aide. A license shall be issued for such dog upon proper proof of rabies vaccination and upon filing of an affidavit by the blind person showing such dog comes within this exemption. Such affidavit shall be filed with the animal control authority.

(b) One-half price individual dog and cat licenses will be provided for animals which have been spayed or neutered. Dog and cat keepers applying for this reduced fee must present to the animal control authority a certificate from a licensed veterinarian stating that the animal to be licensed has been spayed or neutered.

(c) After application upon a form to be provided by the animal control authority, a permit may be issued to the keeper of a dog to use that dog as a watchdog. The fee for such permit shall be in addition to the individual dog license fee.

(d) An additional 50 percent discount off the reduced fee for individual dog and cat licenses will be provided for any dog or cat kept by a person 65 years of age or older upon proof of rabies vaccination, proof the dog has been spayed or neutered, and proof of person’s age.

(7) Late Fee. A late fee established by resolution of the council will be charged if the license is not renewed within 30 days of the expiration date of the license. (Ord. 500 § 5, 2011)


6.05.060 Abandoned animals.

No animal keeper shall permit an animal for which the keeper is responsible to be neglected or abandoned. Any law enforcement officer or animal control officer may:

(1) Provide food or water to abandoned animals. The fee for such services shall be set by separate resolution of the city council.

(2) Impound any abandoned animal. As soon as practical, notice of impoundment under this section shall be posted at the house or be mailed to the keeper or, if the keeper is unknown, to the address at which the animal is found and impounded. (Ord. 521 § 1, 2015; Ord. 500 § 6, 2011)


6.05.070 Sick or injured animals.

(1) Any sick or injured animal found by a law enforcement officer or animal control officer off the premises of its keeper shall be delivered to its keeper if it is feasible to do so. Any sick or injured animal whose keeper is either unknown or cannot be reached after reasonable attempts to do so may be impounded. If the animal control officer or law enforcement officer determines that the animal is too severely injured to move, the animal control officer or law enforcement officer may elect to destroy or have the animal immediately destroyed by any humane method permitted under state law. If the method of destruction is to be euthanasia, this will be performed by a licensed veterinarian or technician. If the animal control officer believes that the animal should not be destroyed and that treatment is necessary, the animal may be delivered to a veterinarian for medical treatment. If the veterinarian determines that treatment should be given, such treatment may be given; provided, however, the animal may be euthanized if not claimed by its keeper within 72 hours after being delivered to the veterinarian.

(2) The city may contract for veterinarian services to be provided under this section.

(3) The keeper of any animal treated under this section shall pay the cost of such veterinary treatment, together with all costs of moving, euthanizing, or disposing of an animal in accordance with this section. (Ord. 521 § 1, 2015; Ord. 500 § 7, 2011)


6.05.080 Impoundment of animals.

(1) Any law enforcement officer, animal control officer, or city employee may impound any animal which is in violation of this chapter.

(2) The animal control authority shall impound an animal if the keeper of the animal has not paid a fine for a violation of this chapter imposed by the municipal judge. The notice and disposition of an animal seized pursuant to this subsection shall be as described in VMC 6.05.090 and 6.05.100.

(3) Any person whose property has been trespassed upon by any animal in violation of this chapter may immediately apprehend that animal upon his property and hold the animal until delivery to an animal control officer, city employee, or to any law enforcement officer. Any person who so impounds an animal shall immediately notify the animal control authority of such impoundment.

(4) If an animal control officer or a law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that any animal which is in an unoccupied motor vehicle may be in danger of harm or death, the animal control officer or law enforcement officer may enter the motor vehicle and impound the animal. (Ord. 521 § 1, 2015; Ord. 500 § 8, 2011)


6.05.090 Impounding regulations and disposition of impounded animals.

(1) Except as provided in VMC 6.05.070, the animal control authority shall keep any animal impounded for the period of time specified in this subsection (1). A daily record of animals impounded by the animal control authority shall be kept at the place of impoundment and shall be made available to the public upon request. Unless the animal’s keeper files an appeal with the municipal court pursuant to subsection (3) of this section, the animal control authority shall dispose of such animals in accordance with the following provisions:

(a) Unlicensed animals or animals for which the keeper is unknown and which have not been redeemed within 72 hours after impoundment may be sold, released to a new keeper, or euthanized.

(b) A licensed animal or animal for which the keeper is known which has not been redeemed within 120 hours of notification of the keeper by telephone contact, mailing of impoundment notice, or delivery of impoundment notice to the keeper’s residence may be sold, released to a new keeper or euthanized.

(2) Except as provided in VMC 6.05.070 or in subsection (1)(a) of this section, the animal control authority shall notify the keeper by telephone, by mailing an impoundment notice to the keeper’s residence, or by delivering an impoundment notice to the keeper’s residence as soon as practicable after impoundment. If the keeper’s residence and telephone number are unknown or the city is unsuccessful in contacting the keeper by telephone after not less than two attempts, notice of impoundment shall be posted at Veneta City Hall. The impoundment notice shall advise the keeper of the place where the animal is kept, the procedures required for the redemption of the animal, the fees for the impoundment, daily care and redemption, and the consequences of failure to redeem the animal.

(3) Except as provided in VMC 6.05.070, an animal keeper whose animal is impounded, within the period described in subsection (1)(a) or (b) of this section, whichever is applicable, may appeal the seizure and impounding by applying to the municipal judge for the release of the animal, and the municipal judge shall thereupon set a time and place for hearing the appeal and shall notify the impounding officer; and upon a summary hearing at such time and place, the municipal judge shall have full power to determine whether the animal has been wrongfully impounded and whether the animal shall be returned to its keeper, and upon what terms. Payment of the impoundment fee shall not prejudice an animal keeper’s right to appeal from an allegedly wrongful impoundment. (Ord. 500 § 9, 2011)


6.05.100 Impoundment – Redemption and sale.

(1) No animal accused of chasing, killing, wounding or injuring livestock, biting or attempting to bite a human being, or carrying any dangerous disease, shall be redeemed except upon order of the municipal court entered after hearing pursuant to VMC 6.05.090(3). The municipal court may impose conditions of redemption to prevent any further violation of this chapter, including but not limited to requirements that the animal be confined, quarantined, de-fanged, de-clawed, examined, muted, or trained.

(2) Redemption of an impounded animal shall be made by the keeper of the animal who exhibits satisfactory proof that the person is the animal’s keeper and pays the following required fees and charges, which shall be set by separation resolution of the city council:

(a) Impoundment fee.

(b) Daily care fee.

(c) License and rabies vaccination fees, if required.

(d) Medical care fees, if required.

(3) The animal control authority or municipal court may require that an impounded animal be vaccinated for rabies and licensed as a condition of redemption.

(4) No impoundment charge shall be made for an animal released because the municipal court determines that no violation occurred.

(5) Impounded animals may be sold after the amount of time specified in VMC 6.05.090(1) has passed. When an animal is sold by the animal control authority, the purchaser shall pay any required license and rabies vaccination fees.

(6) No live animal shall be sold by the animal control authority for surgical or medical demonstration or vivisection.

(7) Except as otherwise provided, 72 hours after impoundment the animal may be sold, released to a new keeper, or euthanized. (Ord. 500 § 10, 2011)


6.05.110 Killing and chasing livestock, pets or wildlife.

(1) No animal keeper shall permit his animal, while off the premises owned or under the control of the animal keeper, to chase, kill, wound or injure livestock, pets or wildlife not belonging to the animal keeper.

(2) If any animal, not under the control of its keeper, is found chasing or feeding upon the warm carcass of livestock, pets or wildlife not the property of such keeper, it shall be deemed (prima facie) as engaged in killing, wounding, or injuring livestock.

(3) Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, any animal, whether licensed or not, which, while off the premises owned by or under control of its keeper, kills, wounds, or injures any livestock, pet or wildlife not belonging to the keeper of such animal is a public nuisance and may be killed immediately by any person. However, nothing in this section applies to any animal acting under the legal direction of its keeper, or the agents or employees of such keeper, as long as such direction is not in violation of any state statute or city ordinance.

(4) No person shall kill any animal wherever located for killing, wounding, injuring, or chasing chickens within the corporate limits of this city.

(5) No person shall keep any animal with knowledge that it has killed or wounded livestock, pets or wildlife.

(6) No keeper shall permit an animal to be at large and to chase, kill, wound, or injure livestock, pets or wildlife not belonging to the animal keeper.

(7) An animal found to have chased, killed, wounded or injured livestock, pets or wildlife in violation of this section may be impounded and disposed of in accordance with VMC 6.05.090 and 6.05.100. (Ord. 500 § 11, 2011)


6.05.120 Dangerous animals and behavior.

It is the intent of the city to promote a safe coexistence between pet owners and citizens and to apply restrictions only in those instances where there is a need to protect public safety, health and welfare. The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure whereby dogs and other animals that pose a reasonably significant threat of causing serious injury to humans, domestic animals, or property are identified and subjected to reasonable restrictions. For the purpose of this section, “animal” means dogs, domestic animals or livestock, not including cats.

(1) Level 1 dangerous behavior is established if an animal at large, without provocation, is found to have menaced, displayed threatening or aggressive behavior, or otherwise threatened or endangered the safety of any domestic animal or livestock.

(2) Level 2 dangerous behavior is established if an animal at large, without provocation, is found to have menaced, displayed threatening or aggressive behavior, or otherwise threatened or endangered the safety of any person.

(3) Level 3 dangerous behavior is established if an animal, without provocation, is found to have:

(a) While at large, bitten or caused physical injury to any domestic animal which is not livestock;

(b) Bitten any person;

(c) While at large, killed any domestic animal; or

(d) While at large, bitten or caused physical injury to livestock; or

(e) Whether or not at large, caused serious injury to or the death of any person.

(4) Notwithstanding subsections (1) through (3) of this section, the animal control officer shall have discretionary authority to refrain from prosecuting a violation, even if the animal has engaged in the behaviors specified in subsections (1) through (3) of this section, if the animal control officer determines that the behavior was a result of the victim abusing or tormenting the animal or other extenuating circumstances.

(5) No violation shall be found under subsections (1) through (3) of this section if:

(a) The behavior in question was directed against a trespasser on the property of a business with a licensed watchdog; or

(b) The behavior in question was directed against a trespasser that has illegally entered any residence.

(6) A dangerous animal may be impounded by any law enforcement officer, animal control officer, or city employee, and disposed of in accordance with VMC 6.05.090 and 6.05.100.

(7) A dangerous animal running at large which, because of its disposition or diseased condition, reasonably appears to be hazardous to apprehend may be destroyed by any humane method permitted under state law by any law enforcement officer, animal control officer, or city employee. A dangerous animal running at large may be destroyed by any humane method permitted under state law by any other person upon property owned or controlled by such person if such person reasonably believes such action is necessary to prevent imminent physical harm to any person. (Ord. 521 § 3, 2015; Ord. 500 § 12, 2011)


6.05.125 Dangerous behavior restrictions.

(1) For the purpose of this section, “animal” means dogs, domestic animals, and livestock, not including cats.

(2) In addition to the other penalties and requirements of these animal control regulations, the court may impose one or more of the following restrictions on an owner of a dangerous animal:

(a) Level 1 dangerous behavior pursuant to VMC 6.05.120(1): (i) restrict animal with a physical device or structure that prevents the animal from reaching any public right-of-way or adjoining property; (ii) not permit the animal to be off the owner’s property unless the animal is restrained by an adequate leash, not to exceed six feet in length, and under the control of a capable person over the age of 18.

(b) Level 2 dangerous behavior pursuant to VMC 6.05.120(2) or Level 3 dangerous behavior pursuant to VMC 6.05.120(3)(a): (i) comply with subsection (2)(a) of this section; (ii) confine the animal within a secure enclosure or inside the home; and (iii) post warning signs on the property where the animal is kept.

(c) Level 3 dangerous behavior pursuant to VMC 6.05.120(3)(b): (i) comply with subsections (2)(a) and (2)(b) of this section; and (ii) not permit the animal to be off the owner’s property unless the animal is muzzled and restrained by an adequate leash, not to exceed six feet in length, and under the control of a capable person over the age of 18.

(d) Level 3 dangerous behavior pursuant to VMC 6.05.120(3)(c) through (e): euthanasia.

(e) Level 3 dangerous behavior pursuant to VMC 6.05.120(3)(e): suspend, for a period of time, the animal owner’s right to possess any animal within the city of Veneta, including animals currently owned by that person.

(3) To ensure correct identification, all animals that have engaged in dangerous behavior described in VMC 6.05.120 shall be required to wear an identifying collar and ID tag, to be issued by the city, in addition to any other license fees and other requirements.

(4) In addition to the normal licensing fees established in VMC 6.05.050, there shall be an additional licensing and supervision fee for dogs that have been determined to have engaged in dangerous behavior pursuant to VMC 6.05.120 in amounts provided by resolution of the city council. This additional fee shall first be payable at the time that determination is made. Renewals are due upon the anniversary of the determination. (Ord. 521 § 4, 2015)


6.05.130 Reporting of biting dogs or other animals.

(1) The keeper of an animal which bites a human being shall immediately notify the animal control authority of such bite, the time and circumstances of such bite, and the name and address of the person bitten, if known.

(2) Any person who is bitten by an animal shall forthwith notify the animal control authority of such bite, giving a description of the animal, the time and circumstances of the bite, and the name and address of the keeper, if known.

(3) When a doctor, veterinarian, hospital employee, emergency medical technician, or other person, has information that a person has been bitten by an animal, such person shall forthwith notify the animal control authority. (Ord. 500 § 13, 2011)


6.05.140 Biting and rabid animals – Quarantine.

(1) When either the animal control authority or the Department of Public Health and Human Services or Department of Public Safety of Lane County has grounds to suspect that an animal is infected with the disease of rabies, there shall be delivered to the keeper of the animal a written notice thereof, if the keeper’s name and address are known to the animal control authority. Upon receipt of the notice, the keeper shall be required to quarantine the animal for 10 days, or such other time period as the animal control authority may designate, at a location designated by the animal control authority. The biting of any person by an animal shall constitute adequate grounds for suspecting the animal to be infected with rabies, even if the animal has a current rabies vaccination. The delivery of the notice to the keeper’s residence or usual place of abode, or the premises where the animal is usually kept, shall be considered delivery of notice to the keeper. If the animal is quarantined in a veterinary hospital, kennel, or other institution, the keeper shall pay a fee for the quarantine which shall be set by separate resolution of the city council.

(2) Any animal which has been bitten by another animal proved to be rabid shall be destroyed by any humane method permitted under state law.

(3) If an animal exhibits symptoms of rabies while it is under quarantine, the Director of Public Health may order in writing that it be euthanized and that its head be submitted to the Oregon State Public Health Laboratory. (Ord. 500 § 14, 2011)


6.05.145 Restrictions imposed after quarantine.

(1) The purpose of this section is to establish optional restrictions which the Veneta municipal judge may impose upon owners and keepers of animals that have been cited into Veneta municipal court for a violation of VMC 6.05.120(1), (2) or (3) prior to their court arraignment date on the issued citation.

(2) The municipal judge shall have the authority to determine whether any animal has engaged in the behaviors for which the citation was issued, based upon affidavit testimony provided by city staff, officers, or other witnesses who personally observed the behavior.

(3) Based upon the municipal judge’s independent investigation conducted pursuant to subsection (2) of this section, as a precautionary measure prior to a court arraignment, the municipal judge may impose one or more of the following restrictions:

(a) The animal shall be confined by a physical device or structure that prevents the animal from reaching any public right-of-way or adjoining property.

(b) The animal shall be on a leash not to exceed six feet in length whenever off the owner’s property and under control of a capable person over the age of 18.

(c) The animal shall be confined within a secure enclosure or inside the home.

(d) The animal shall not be allowed off the owner’s property unless the animal is muzzled.

(e) The owner shall post warning signs on the property where the animal is kept.

(f) The owner and dog shall attend and complete a dog behavior class approved by the court.

(g) The owner shall spay or neuter the dog.

(h) The owner shall not sell, destroy or remove the animal from city limits without prior approval from the court.

(4) The municipal judge shall provide written notice to the animal’s owner or keeper of the precautionary restrictions placed upon the animal by certified mail or personal service, identifying the citation, as well as the specific behavior meriting the precautionary restrictions. The notice shall also inform the owner or keeper that he or she may contest the behavior in question in court, on the day provided on the issued citation.

(5) If the keeper of the animal fails to comply with the restrictions imposed by the court under this section, any law enforcement officer, animal control officer, or city employee may impound the animal. (Ord. 521 § 5, 2015)


6.05.150 Dead animals – Removal of carcasses.

No person shall knowingly permit an animal carcass owned by him to remain on public property or to be exposed on private property for more than 24 hours. (Ord. 500 § 15, 2011)


6.05.160 Exotic animals.

No person shall keep an exotic animal within the city limits of Veneta. (Ord. 500 § 16, 2011)


6.05.165 Feeding of game animals.

No person shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence place or allow to be placed in any manner food or other substance which attracts game animals. (Ord. 502 § 1(B), 2011)


6.05.170 Entry on sidewalk or street.

No animal shall be picketed or tied in such a manner that it may go onto a public sidewalk or into a public street. (Ord. 500 § 17, 2011)


6.05.180 Entry onto private land.

Any law enforcement officer, animal control officer, or city employee may enter onto private property in order to enforce the terms of this chapter. This privilege shall be exercised by the officer or employee within applicable legal authorizations. (Ord. 521 § 1, 2015; Ord. 500 § 18, 2011)


6.05.190 Enforcement authority.

Officers of any animal control authority contracted or appointed by the city, and all city employees, are hereby empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and said officers shall enforce such ordinance by citing alleged violators to appear in Veneta municipal court. (Ord. 500 § 19, 2011)


6.05.200 Exemption for law enforcement animals.

An animal owned by a law enforcement agency is exempt from the provisions of this chapter, so long as the animal is under the care and control of a law enforcement officer. (Ord. 500 § 20, 2011)


6.05.210 Penalties.

(1) A person violating any section of this chapter or an order issued under authority of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed either $500.00 or the applicable amount set forth by separate resolution setting the fees and fines for violations of this chapter. Each day during which violation of this chapter continues or occurs shall constitute a separate violation.

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, if the conduct violating this chapter also violates provisions of a state statute identical to the provisions of this chapter and to which a lesser penalty attaches under state law, punishment of the violation shall be limited to the lesser penalty prescribed by state law. (Ord. 500 § 21, 2011)


Title 7   (Reserved)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



Title 8     HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:

8.05  Nuisances

8.10  Tree Cutting, Destruction and Removal
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



Chapter 8.05 NUISANCES

Sections:

I. Definitions

8.05.010    Definitions.

II. Nuisances Affecting Public Health

8.05.020    Nuisances affecting public health.

8.05.030    Rodent control – Conditions attracting rats prohibited.

III. Nuisances Affecting Public Safety

8.05.040    Creating a hazard.

8.05.050    Attractive nuisances.

8.05.060    Noxious vegetation.

8.05.070    Scattering rubbish.

8.05.080    Trees.

8.05.090    Fences.

8.05.095    Sidewalks.

8.05.100    Surface waters – Drainage.

IV. Nuisances Affecting Public Peace

8.05.110    Radio and television interference.

8.05.120    Junk.

V. Unenumerated Nuisances

8.05.130    Unenumerated nuisances.

VI. Abatement Procedure

8.05.140    Notice.

8.05.150    Abatement by the person responsible.

8.05.160    Joint responsibility.

8.05.170    Abatement by the city.

8.05.175    Abatement of prohibited camping-related activity.

8.05.180    Assessment of costs.

VII. General

8.05.190    Summary abatement.

8.05.200    Penalties.

8.05.210    Separate violations.

I. Definitions


8.05.010 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall mean:

(1) “Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.

(2) “Person in charge of property” means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser or other person having possession or control of the property or the supervision of any construction project.

(3) Person Responsible. The “person responsible” for abating a nuisance shall include:

(a) The owner;

(b) The person in charge of property, as defined in subsection (2) of this section;

(c) The person who caused to come into or continue in existence a nuisance as defined in this chapter or another ordinance of this city.

(4) “Public place” means a building, way, place or accommodation, whether publicly or privately owned, open and available to the general public.

(5) Rodentproof. Any building, structure, or part thereof is “rodentproof” when it is constructed of concrete, metal or some equally impermeable material in a manner that excludes rats, mice, or other rodents and vermin therefrom. (Ord. 421 § 1, 2000)

II. Nuisances Affecting Public Health


8.05.020 Nuisances affecting public health.

No person shall cause, or permit on property owned or controlled by that person, a nuisance affecting public health. The following are nuisances affecting public health and may be abated as provided in this chapter.

(1) Privies. Open vaults, privies, or other facilities intended or used for the disposal of sewage, constructed and maintained within the city. This chapter does not extend to privies constructed or maintained in accordance with health division regulations and used in connection with construction projects, temporary public events of no more than five days, and public parks.

(2) Debris. Accumulations of debris, rubbish, manure and other refuse that are not removed within a reasonable time and that affect the health of the city.

(3) Stagnant Water. Stagnant water which affords a breeding place for mosquitoes and other insect pests.

(4) Water Pollution. Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream or drainage ditch by sewage, industrial wastes or other substances placed in or near the water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water.

(5) Food. Decayed or unwholesome food which is offered for human consumption.

(6) Odor. Premises which are in such a state or condition as to cause an offensive odor, or which are in an unsanitary condition.

(7) Surface Drainage. Drainage of liquid wastes from private premises, including stormwater runoff from cuts, fills, immature landscaping, or logging activities into drainageways or onto adjacent properties.

(8) Cesspools. Cesspools or septic tanks which are in an unsanitary condition or which cause an offensive odor.

(9) Slaughterhouses, etc. Slaughterhouses, tanneries or pigsties. 

(10) Prohibited Camping. Any camping that is not authorized by or does not comply with city code is prohibited camping. (Ord. 545 § 1, 2018; Ord. 421 § 2, 2000)


8.05.030 Rodent control – Conditions attracting rats prohibited.

(1) No owner or person in charge of property shall allow conditions to exist thereon or therein, which attract or are likely to attract, feed or harbor rats, mice, or other vermin.

(2) All portions of every building or other structure in which handling, storing or keeping any substance on which rats, mice, or other vermin can feed shall be rodentproof.

(3) All food for chickens, horses, mules, cows, goats, pigs or other domestic animals shall be kept and stored either in a building, structure, part thereof, or container that is rodentproof.

(4) All garbage or refuse consisting of waste material upon which rats, mice, or other vermin may feed shall be placed in covered rodentproof containers of a type prescribed by the city administrator or the administrator’s designee, until collected by garbage haulers.

(5) All premises improved or unimproved, and all open lots, streets, sidewalks, alleys and other areas in the city shall be kept clean and free from all rubbish, as well as from loose material that might serve as a harbor for rats, mice, or other vermin. All lumber, boxes, barrels, loose iron and material that might harbor vermin shall be placed upon supports in a such manner as to provide no refuge for rats, mice, or other vermin.

(6) All improvements, repairs, construction and maintenance of a building or structure, or any equipment or fixtures therein shall comply with this section.

(7) The city administrator or the administrator’s designee is hereby authorized and empowered to make inspection of the exterior, interior, and underneath any building or structure or premises in the city. It shall be unlawful for a person responsible to fail to permit such inspection when requested to do so in accordance with law. (Ord. 421 § 3, 2000)

III. Nuisances Affecting Public Safety


8.05.040 Creating a hazard.

No person shall create a hazard by:

(1) Maintaining or leaving in a place accessible to children a container with a compartment of more than one and one-half cubic feet capacity and a door or lid which locks or fastens automatically when closed and which cannot be easily opened from the inside; or

(2) Being the owner or otherwise having possession of property upon which there is a well, cistern, cesspool, excavation, or other hole of a depth of four feet or more and a top width of 12 inches or more, and failing or refusing to cover or fence said hole with a suitable protective cover. (Ord. 421 § 4, 2000)


8.05.050 Attractive nuisances.

(1) No owner or person in charge of property shall permit thereon:

(a) Unguarded machinery, equipment or other devices which are attractive, dangerous and accessible to children;

(b) Lumber, logs or piling placed, or stored, in a manner so as to be attractive, dangerous and accessible to children;

(c) An open pit, quarry, cistern or other excavation without safeguards or barriers to prevent such places from being used by children.

(2) This section shall not apply to authorized construction projects with reasonable safeguards to prevent injury or death to playing children. (Ord. 421 § 5, 2000)


8.05.060 Noxious vegetation.

(1) The term “noxious vegetation” does not include vegetation that constitutes an agricultural crop nor vegetation on a parcel in excess of one acre unless that vegetation is a health hazard, a fire hazard or a traffic hazard within the meaning of subsection (2) of this section or is within 50 feet of a dwelling unit.

(2) The term “noxious vegetation” does include, at any time between June 1st and September 30th of any year:

(a) Weeds more than 10 inches high;

(b) Grass more than 10 inches high and not within the exception stated in subsection (1) of this section;

(c) Poison oak;

(d) Poison ivy;

(e) Blackberry bushes that extend into a public thoroughfare or across a property line;

(f) Vegetation that is:

(i) A health hazard;

(ii) A fire hazard, as determined by the chief of the fire department, the director of public works or any other city official;

(iii) A traffic hazard because it impairs the view of a public thoroughfare or otherwise makes use of the thoroughfare hazardous.

(3) Between June 1st and September 30th of any year, no owner or person in charge of property shall allow noxious vegetation to be on the property or in the right-of-way of a public thoroughfare abutting on the property. An owner or person in charge of property shall cut down or destroy grass, shrubbery, brush, bushes, weeds, or other noxious vegetation as often as needed to prevent them from becoming unsightly, from becoming a fire hazard, or, in the case of weeds or other noxious vegetation, from maturing or from going to seed.

(4) Between April 15th and June 1st of each year the city recorder may cause to be published three times in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a copy of subsection (3) of this section as a notice to all owners and persons in charge of property of the duty to keep their property free from noxious vegetation. The notice shall state that the city is willing to abate the nuisance on a particular parcel of property at the request of the owner or person in charge of the property for a fee sufficient to cover the city’s abatement costs. The notice shall also state that, even in the absence of such request, the city intends to abate all such nuisances 10 or more days after the final publication of the notice and to charge the cost of doing so on a particular parcel of property to the owner or the person in charge of the property, or the property itself.

(5) If the notice provided for in subsection (4) of this section is used, it shall be in lieu of the notice required by VMC 8.05.140. (Ord. 421 § 6, 2000)


8.05.070 Scattering rubbish.

No person shall deposit upon public or private property any kind of rubbish, trash, debris, refuse or any substances that would mar the appearance, create a stench or fire hazard, detract from the cleanliness or safety of the property or would be likely to injure a person, animal or vehicle traveling upon a public way. (Ord. 421 § 7, 2000)


8.05.080 Trees.

(1) No owner or person in charge of property that abuts upon a street or public sidewalk shall permit trees, bushes, or other vegetation on that person’s property to interfere with street or sidewalk traffic. It shall be the duty of an owner or person in charge of the property that abuts upon a street or public sidewalk to keep all trees and bushes on that person’s premises, including the adjoining parking strip, trimmed to a height of not less than eight feet above the sidewalk and not less than 10 feet from the roadway.

(2) No owner or person in charge of property shall allow to stand a dead or decaying tree that is a hazard to the public or to persons or property on or near the property. Prior to the removal of more than three such dead or decaying trees, notice shall be given to the city, to allow the city to inspect the trees and insure no permit is required. (Ord. 421 § 8, 2000)


8.05.090 Fences.

(1) No owner or person in charge of property shall construct or maintain a barbed-wire fence thereon, or permit barbed wire to remain as part of a fence along a sidewalk or public way; except such wire may be placed above the top of other fencing not less than six feet, six inches high.

(2) No owner or person in charge of property shall construct, maintain or operate an electric fence along a sidewalk or public way or along the adjoining property line of another person except in areas zoned rural residential. (Ord. 421 § 9, 2000)


8.05.095 Sidewalks.

No owner or person in charge of property shall allow a sidewalk abutting that owner’s or person’s property to fall into disrepair, in violation of applicable city sidewalk design standards and VMC 12.15.060. (Ord. 526 § 1, 2016)


8.05.100 Surface waters – Drainage.

(1) No owner or person in charge of a building or structure shall suffer or permit rainwater, ice or snow to fall from the building or structure onto a street or public sidewalk or to flow across the sidewalk.

(2) The owner or person in charge of property shall install and maintain in proper state of repair adequate drainpipes or a drainage system, so that any overflow water accumulating on the roof or about the building is not carried across or upon the sidewalk. (Ord. 421 § 10, 2000)

IV. Nuisances Affecting Public Peace


8.05.110 Radio and television interference.

(1) No person shall operate or use an electrical, mechanical or other device, apparatus, instrument or machine that causes reasonably preventable interference with radio or television reception by a radio or television receiver of good engineering design.

(2) This section does not apply to devices licensed, approved and operated under the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. (Ord. 421 § 11, 2000)


8.05.120 Junk.

(1) No person shall keep any junk outdoors on any street, lot or premises, or in a building that is not wholly or entirely enclosed with the exception of doors used for ingress and egress.

(2) The term “junk,” as used in this section, includes all old motor vehicles, old motor vehicle parts, abandoned automobiles, old machinery, old machinery parts, old appliances or parts thereof, old iron or other metal, glass, paper, lumber, wood or other waste or discarded material.

(3) This section shall not apply to junk kept in a duly licensed junkyard or automobile wrecking house. (Ord. 421 § 12, 2000)

V. Unenumerated Nuisances


8.05.130 Unenumerated nuisances.

(1) The acts, conditions or objects specifically enumerated and defined in VMC 8.05.020 through 8.05.120 are declared public nuisances, and such acts, conditions or objects may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in VMC 8.05.140 to 8.05.190.

(2) In addition to the nuisances specifically enumerated within this chapter, every other thing, substance or act which is determined by the council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the city is declared a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 421 § 13, 2000)

VI. Abatement Procedure


8.05.140 Notice.

(1) On determination by the city administrator that a nuisance exists, the city administrator shall cause a notice to be posted on the premises or at the site of the nuisance, directing the person responsible to abate the nuisance.

(2) At the time of posting, the city recorder shall cause a copy of the notice to be forwarded by registered or certified mail to the person responsible at the person’s last known address.

(3) The notice to abate shall contain:

(a) A description of the real property, by street address or otherwise, on which the nuisance exists;

(b) A direction to abate the nuisance within 10 days from the date of the notice;

(c) A description of the nuisance;

(d) A statement that, unless the nuisance is removed, the city may abate the nuisance and the cost of abatement will be charged to the person responsible;

(e) A statement that failure to abate a nuisance may warrant imposition of a fine or jail sentence;

(f) A statement that the person responsible may protest the order to abate by giving notice to the city recorder within 10 days from the date of the notice.

(4) If the person responsible is not the owner, an additional notice shall be sent to the owner, stating that the cost of abatement not paid by the person responsible may be assessed to and become a lien on the property.

(5) Upon completion of the posting and mailing, the persons posting and mailing shall execute and file certificates stating the date and place of the mailing and posting.

(6) An error in the name or address of the person responsible shall not make the notice void, and in such case the posted notice shall be sufficient. (Ord. 421 § 14, 2000)


8.05.150 Abatement by the person responsible.

(1) Within 10 days after the posting and mailing of such notice, as provided in VMC 8.05.140, the person responsible shall remove the nuisance or show that no nuisance exists.

(2) A person responsible, protesting that no nuisance exists, shall file with the city recorder a written statement which shall specify the basis for so protesting.

(3) The statement shall be referred to the city council as a part of its regular agenda at its next succeeding meeting. At the time set for consideration of the abatement, the person protesting may appear and be heard by the council; the council shall determine whether or not a nuisance in fact exists; and the determination shall be entered in the official minutes of the council. Council determination shall be required only in those cases where a written statement has been filed as provided above.

(4) If the council determines that a nuisance does in fact exist, the person responsible shall, within 10 days after the council determination, abate the nuisance. (Ord. 421 § 15, 2000)


8.05.160 Joint responsibility.

If more than one person is a person responsible, they shall be jointly and severally liable for abating the nuisance, or for the costs incurred by the city in abating the nuisance. (Ord. 421 § 16, 2000)


8.05.170 Abatement by the city.

(1) If, within the time allowed, the nuisance has not been abated by the person responsible, the council may cause the nuisance to be abated.

(2) The officer charged with abatement of the nuisance shall have the right at reasonable times to enter into or upon property to investigate or cause the removal of a nuisance.

(3) The city recorder shall keep an accurate record of the expense incurred by the city in physically abating the nuisance, and shall include therein a charge of $10.00 or 10 percent of those expenses (whichever is the greater) for administrative overhead. (Ord. 421 § 17, 2000)


8.05.175 Abatement of prohibited camping-related activity

(1) At the time that a 24-hour notice is posted, Lane County Sheriff’s Office, or designee, will inform local agenc(ies) or designated advocate that delivers social services to homeless individuals where the notice has been posted. The city may arrange for local agenc(ies) or designated advocate to visit the camp site where a notice has been posted to assess the need for social service assistance in arranging shelter and other assistance.

(a) All unclaimed personal property shall be given to the Lane County Sheriff’s Office or enforcement designee whether 24-hour notice is required or not.

(b) The property shall be stored for a minimum of 30 days during which it will be available to any individual claiming ownership. Any personal property that remains unclaimed for 30 days may be disposed of.

(c) Items that have no apparent utility or are in unsanitary condition may be immediately discarded upon removal of the campers from the camping site.

(d) Weapons, drug paraphernalia and items that appear to be either stolen or evidence of a crime shall be given to the Lane County Sheriff’s Office.

(2) Following the removal of camper(s) from a campground on public property, the Lane County Sheriff’s Office, enforcement designee, VHAB, and/or local agency officials and outreach workers determined as qualified by the city administrator, may meet to assess the notice and removal policy, to discuss whether the removals are occurring in a humane and just manner, and to determine if any changes are needed in the policy.

(3) The 24-hour notice required under subsection (4) of this section shall not apply:

(a) When there are grounds for the Lane County Sheriff’s Office or enforcement designee to believe that illegal activities other than camping are occurring.

(b) In the event of an exceptional emergency such as possible site contamination by hazardous materials or when there is immediate danger to human life or safety.

(c) A person authorized to issue a citation for unlawful camping under state law, administrative rule or city or county ordinance may not issue the citation if the citation would be issued within 200 feet of the notice described in this section and within two hours before or after the notice was posted. (Ord. 545 § 2, 2018)


8.05.180 Assessment of costs.

(1) The city recorder, by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, shall forward to the person responsible a notice stating:

(a) The total cost of abatement, including the administrative overhead;

(b) That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the property, unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice;

(c) That if the person responsible objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, he may file a notice of objection with the city recorder not more than 10 days from the date of the notice.

(2) Upon the expiration of 10 days after the date of the notice, the council, in the regular course of business, shall hear and determine the merit of any objections raised to the costs assessed.

(3) If the costs of the abatement are not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice, an assessment of the costs, as stated or as determined by the council, shall be made by resolution and shall thereupon be entered in the docket of city liens, and upon such entry being made shall constitute a lien upon the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated.

(4) The lien shall be enforced in the manner as liens for street improvements are enforced, and shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum. The interest shall commence to run from the date of the entry of the lien in the lien docket.

(5) An error in the name of the person responsible shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment render the assessment void, but it shall remain a valid lien against the property. (Ord. 421 § 18, 2000)

VII. General


8.05.190 Summary abatement.

The procedure provided by this chapter is not exclusive, but is in addition to any procedures provided by other ordinances. The city administrator or the administrator’s designee may proceed to summarily abate a nuisance which unmistakably exists, and which imminently endangers the environment, human life, health, safety or property. The cost of such abatement may be assessed as provided in VMC 8.05.180. (Ord. 421 § 19, 2000)


8.05.200 Penalties.

A person violating a provision of this chapter or an order issued under authority of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a violation and shall be fined an amount not to exceed $4,000. (Ord. 486 § 10, 2009; Ord. 421 § 20, 2000)


8.05.210 Separate violations.

(1) Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

(2) The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violating this chapter, but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person of the duty to abate the nuisance, however, abatement of a nuisance within 10 days of the date of notice to abate, or if a written protest has been filed, then abatement within 10 days of council determination that a nuisance exists, will relieve the person responsible from the imposition of any fine or imprisonment under VMC 8.05.200. (Ord. 421 § 21, 2000)


Chapter 8.10 TREE CUTTING, DESTRUCTION AND REMOVAL

Sections:

8.10.010    Purpose and declaration.

8.10.020    Definitions.

8.10.030    Tree removal permit required.

8.10.040    Exceptions.

8.10.050    Application for tree removal permit.

8.10.060    Application review procedure.

8.10.070    Type A permit.

8.10.080    Type B permit.

8.10.090    Type C permit.

8.10.100    Type D permit.

8.10.110    Amendments to approved permits.

8.10.120    Mitigation.

8.10.130    Tree protection during construction.

8.10.140    Notice and appeal.

8.10.150    Timing of removal, display of permit – Inspection.

8.10.155    Tree removal site requirements.

8.10.160    Violation – Enforcement.

8.10.170    Alternative enforcement.

8.10.180    Findings of fact.

8.10.190    Amendments.


8.10.010 Purpose and declaration.

Pursuant to ORS 527.722, the city has chosen to regulate noncommercial cutting, destruction, and removal of trees in place of the Oregon Forest Practices Act. This chapter is intended to preserve and enhance the urban forest within the city of Veneta through the prudent management of existing trees, and the continual replacement and establishment of new trees compatible with an urban environment. Specifically, the council finds the following:

(1) Trees and wooded areas, especially large native trees, are a large part of the aesthetic appeal of Veneta.

(2) Trees benefit the public health, safety, and welfare by protecting air and water quality, preventing erosion and flooding, reducing energy costs, increasing property values, and providing natural beauty and contrast to the built environment which contributes to the physical and mental well-being of residents.

(3) Trees enhance the local economy and increase property values by providing an attractive and aesthetically pleasing environment.

(4) Management of Douglas fir for commercial purposes is a historic use which should continue to be accommodated while preserving those trees that have the highest value as part of Veneta’s urban forest. (Ord. 483 § 1, 2008)


8.10.020 Definitions.

(1) “Building official” means the Veneta building and planning official or designee thereof.

(2) “Critical root zone” or “CRZ” means a circular area determined by either of the following methods. The method used shall be indicated on the plans.

(a) Method A. A circular area equal to one foot in radius for every inch of tree diameter at breast height measured from the outside trunk of the tree at four and one-half feet above ground level; or

(b) Method B. An area determined for an individual tree to be the necessary root area for the tree’s continued normal growth as demonstrated in a written report by a certified arborist and based on documented field investigations. Reasonable alteration of the shape based on factors such as existing infrastructures, tree lean or steep slopes may be considered.
[IMAGE]


(3) “Commercial wood lot” means parcels or lots which meet the following criteria on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter: 

(a) The site is at least two acres in size.

(b) Trees have been actively managed and maintained on the subject property for the purpose of harvesting.

(c) The owner has supplied the city with proof that the property has been in tax-deferred status under state law provisions such as forest land deferral or small woodlands deferral for a minimum of five consecutive years immediately prior to application.

(4) “Diameter at breast height” or “dbh” means the diameter of the tree measured in inches at four and one-half feet above ground level. For trees with multiple trunks, dbh shall be measured at the narrowest point between ground level and the point where the trunk diverges, or shall be the sum of the diameters of the two largest trunks at breast height, whichever is smaller. All measurements shall be rounded to the nearest inch.

(5) “Dead” means the tree is obviously lifeless without any live leaves, needles or buds.

(6) “Dying” means the tree is in an advanced state of decline because it is diseased, infested by insects or rotting and cannot be saved by reasonable treatment or pruning, or must be removed to prevent spread of the infestation or disease to other trees.

(7) “Hazardous tree” means the condition or location of the tree presents a clear public safety hazard or a foreseeable danger of property damage to an existing structure and such hazard or danger cannot reasonably be alleviated by treatment or pruning.

(8) “Heritage tree” means any of the following which are not hazardous trees as defined above.

	Oregon white oak	18" or more dbh

	Madrone	18" or more dbh

	Douglas fir	48" or more dbh

	Any other tree	36" or more dbh

(9) “Impacted tree” means a significant tree whose critical root zone will be impacted by proposed development. Impacts include, but are not limited to, fill, cuts, soil compaction, paving, placement of structures, stockpiling of soil, utility trenching and other activities that may impact the health and viability of the tree.

(10) “Remove” means:

(a) To cut down a tree, or to damage a tree so as to cause the tree to decline and/or die within a three-year period. Types of damage which may constitute removal include but are not limited to topping, damage inflicted upon a root system by application of toxic substances, and girdling. “Removal” does not include normal trimming or pruning of trees as defined by ANSI A300 pruning standards current on the day this definition was adopted.

(b) To perform activities which result in impacts to more than 30 percent of the critical root zone if the CRZ is determined by Method A in subsection (2) of this section.

(c) To perform activities which impact any of the CRZ if determined using Method B in subsection (2) of this section.

(11) “Significant tree” means any of the following as well as trees which have been planted or individually preserved as part of a previous tree removal permit.

	Any tree	18" or more dbh

	Douglas fir	18" or more dbh

	Big leaf maple	12" or more dbh

	Chinquapin	12" or more dbh

	Oregon ash	8" or more dbh

	Pacific dogwood	6" or more dbh

	Madrone	6" or more dbh

	Red alder	6" or more dbh

	Ponderosa pine	6" or more dbh

	Western red cedar	6" or more dbh

	California black oak	6" or more dbh

	Oregon white oak	6" or more dbh

(12) “Slash” means tree tops, branches, bark and other natural debris, left after tree removal.

(13) “Street tree” means any tree planted or preserved within a dedicated street right-of-way.

(14) “Topping” means the severe cutting back of a tree’s limbs to stubs within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the natural canopy and disfigure the tree.

(15) “Tree” means any significant tree. (Ord. 542 § 2, 2017; Ord. 483 § 2, 2008)


8.10.030 Tree removal permit required.

No person shall remove or transplant any tree without first obtaining a tree removal permit as required by this chapter. (Ord. 483 § 3, 2008)


8.10.040 Exceptions.

Notwithstanding VMC 8.10.030, the following activities are allowed without a tree removal permit, unless otherwise prohibited:

(1) Removal of dead or hazardous trees, subject to city’s approval of a certified arborist’s report confirming the tree’s condition. Said report shall be submitted to city by owner. Certified arborist determinations of dead or hazardous trees shall be supported by one or more photographs of the tree in question. When trees are removed due to hazardous conditions, the owner may qualify for assistance from the city tree fund to aid in replacement of the trees removed.

(2) Agriculture, Commercial Tree Farm or Orchard. Tree removal or transplanting occurring during use of land for commercial agriculture, orchard(s), or tree farm(s) for nursery or Christmas tree production. Removal of trees for timber production requires a Type D permit.

(3) Emergencies. Actions made necessary by an emergency, such as tornado, windstorm, flood, freeze, utility damage or other like disasters, in order to prevent imminent injury or damage to persons or property or restore order, and it is impractical due to circumstances to apply for a permit.

(4) Tree removal by the city or a utility within easements, rights-of-way, or on public lands.

(5) Abatement of a nuisance as defined in Chapter 8.05 VMC. The city is not required to apply for a tree removal permit to undertake nuisance abatement pursuant to this chapter. However, the owner of the property subject to nuisance abatement is subject to all the mitigation provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 542 § 3, 2017; Ord. 483 § 4, 2008)


8.10.050 Application for tree removal permit.

(1) A person seeking to remove one or more trees shall apply for a tree removal permit Type A, B, C, or D, depending on the applicable standards as provided in this chapter.

(a) By submission of an application, the applicant shall be deemed to have authorized city employees, representatives, or consultants to have access to applicant’s property after providing 24 hours’ notice as may be necessary to verify the information provided, to observe site conditions, and, if a permit is granted, to verify that terms and conditions of the permit are followed.

(2) Time of Application. Application for a tree removal permit shall be made before removing or transplanting significant trees except in emergency situations as provided in VMC 8.10.040(3). Where the site is proposed for development necessitating site plan or tentative plat review, application for a tree removal permit shall be made concurrent with subdivision, partition, site plan review, or other development application as specified in this chapter.

(3) Fees. A person applying for a tree removal permit shall pay an application fee, as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 483 § 5, 2008)


8.10.060 Application review procedure.

(1) Reviewing Authority.

(a) Type A, B, or D. Where site plan review or tentative plat approval by the planning commission is not required by city ordinance, the grant or denial of the tree removal permit application shall be the responsibility of the planning official.

(b) Type C. Where the site is proposed for development necessitating site plan review or plat approval by the planning commission, the tree removal permit shall be reviewed concurrently by the planning commission.

(2) Timeline and Notice – Review Period for Complete Applications.

(a) Type A and B permit applications shall be approved or denied within 10 calendar days.

(b) Type C permit applications shall be reviewed for completeness within 30 calendar days, and final action shall take place within 120 days as required by ORS 227.178. Notice of proposed action shall be given to surrounding property owners according to Land Development Ordinance 461 Article 2. A Type C permit shall follow the hearings procedures required for the accompanying land use application. If the accompanying land use application is denied or is withdrawn or expired, the tree removal permit shall similarly be denied, withdrawn, or expired.

(c) Type D permits shall be approved or denied within 45 calendar days.

(3) Conditional Approval. Whenever an application for a tree removal permit is granted, the reviewing authority may attach to the permit any reasonable conditions considered necessary to ensure compliance with applicable standards.

(4) Tree removal permits and tree surveys shall be valid for a period not to exceed three years. (Ord. 483 § 6, 2008)


8.10.070 Type A permit.

(1) A Type A permit application will be approved when all of the following conditions are met:

(a) A completed request for Type A permit has been filed on the forms provided by the city.

(b) The request is for removal of three or fewer trees within a single 12-month period.

(c) The trees subject to removal are not heritage trees or street trees.

(d) The trees subject to removal were not retained as part of a previous site development approval or planted as mitigation for a previous tree removal.

(e) The tree removal is not to be performed in conjunction with a land development which requires a land use approval including but not limited to site plan review or amendment, subdivision, or partition approval.

(2) Tree removals under a Type A permit do not require mitigation; however, replanting is generally recommended, and recipients of Type A permits who wish to replant may qualify for assistance from the city’s tree fund. (Ord. 483 § 7, 2008)


8.10.080 Type B permit.

(1) An applicant must apply for a Type B permit to remove trees when any of the following conditions are met:

(a) The applicant proposes to remove more than three trees within a 12-month period, independent of an application for site development review; or

(b) The applicant proposes to remove a tree or trees which were preserved as part of a previous land use permit or planted as mitigation for previous tree removal; or

(c) The applicant proposes to remove a heritage tree; or

(d) The proposed tree removal is for clearing of a home site on a lot subsequent to land division approval. All trees removed for home sites prior to occupancy shall be mitigated according to the standards of this chapter.

(2) Application for the Type B permit shall contain the following information unless specifically waived by the reviewing authority under subsection (2)(g) of this section:

(a) A brief statement explaining why tree removal is being requested, to ensure that another permit type or consolidated application is not more appropriate.

(b) An accurate map, drawn to scale, which shows: 

(i) The shape and dimensions of the property, and the location of any existing and proposed structures, improvements, easements and setbacks.

(ii) The location of all impacted trees on the site including critical root zones, species and/or common name, and diameter at breast height (dbh).

(c) Tree Protection. Tree protection measures in conformance with VMC 8.10.130 must be outlined to address protection of the tree trunks, canopy and soils within the critical root zones during and after the tree removal process. Examples of tree protection methods include mulching, irrigation, protective fencing, compaction reduction measures, erosion control, etc.

(d) Field Identification. All trees to be removed shall be identified by a method obvious to a site inspector, such as tagging, painting, or flagging, in addition to clear identification on construction or application documents.

(e) Mitigation Plan. A description of the proposed tree replacement program with a detailed explanation including the number, size, species, and any necessary activities to ensure viability including, but not limited to, mulching and irrigation.

(f) Existing Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&Rs). Where the applicant is proposing to remove trees on common areas governed by CC&Rs, the applicant shall provide a copy of the applicable CC&Rs, including any landscaping provisions.

(g) Waiver of Documentation. The reviewing authority may waive any of the above information requirements where the information has already been made available to the city, the information is not necessary to review the application, or alternate forms of information have been provided which provide sufficient detail to allow the reviewing official to review the application.

(3) Approval Criteria. Tree removal or transplanting pursuant to a Type B permit shall be limited to instances where the applicant has applied for a Type B permit in accordance with subsection (1) of this section, has provided complete and accurate information as required by this chapter, and where the proposal includes provisions for mitigation and tree protection in accordance with VMC 8.10.120 and 8.10.130. If the site is undeveloped and larger than one acre, the applicant shall preserve at least 25 percent of the total tree canopy area on the site. (Ord. 542 § 4, 2017; Ord. 483 § 8, 2008)


8.10.090 Type C permit.

(1) Approval to remove more than three trees on a single lot or parcel as part of a site plan review or amendment, subdivision, or partition application may be granted as a Type C permit in conformance with subsection (5) of this section.

(2) Type C permit applications shall be reviewed concurrent with the development review process. If a Type C permit or its associated development application is appealed, no trees shall be removed until the appeal has been resolved.

(3) Submittal Requirements. The applicant must provide 10 copies of a tree maintenance and protection plan completed by a certified arborist that contains a summary of existing conditions and a mitigation plan as follows:

(a) Summary of existing conditions including a topographical survey bearing the stamp and signature of a qualified, registered professional containing all the following information:

(i) Property Dimensions. The shape and dimensions of the property, and the location of any existing or proposed structures, utility installations, grading, or other improvements.

(ii) Tree Survey. The survey must include:

(A) An accurate drawing of the site based on accurate survey techniques at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet including: 

1. The location, dbh, and tree number of all impacted trees (see subsection (3)(a)(iv) of this section, Field Identification).

2. The critical root zone of impacted trees, and the extent of likely impacts.

3. The common name of impacted trees.

4. Heritage trees shall be clearly noted on the survey.

(B) Where a stand of 20 or more contiguous trees will be removed, the required tree survey may be simplified to accurately show the location of all heritage trees, and significant trees which are within 50 feet of the edge of the development envelope. Only these trees are required to be field tagged. Interior tree areas shall be depicted with clouds or other similar linework and the dbh, common name, and total number of all interior trees shall be accurately stated on the plans.

(C) Neighboring Properties. All impacted trees on neighboring properties shall be shown on the tree survey. If the applicant cannot obtain permission to survey the neighboring properties, the person or persons preparing the survey shall make a note to this effect on the survey and locate the trees and CRZs to the best of their ability. The survey shall show the percentage of CRZ for these trees which will be impacted by the proposed improvements.

1. When a proposal includes activities which will result in removal of trees on neighboring properties, the applicant shall include the removal of the neighboring trees in the permit application and mitigate for their removal.

(iii) Arborist Report. The report shall describe the health and condition of all heritage trees including species, common name, dbh, approximate height, and age. The report shall identify hazardous, dead, or dying trees. The report shall identify opportunities for preservation of groves or stands of trees and make recommendations regarding special tree protection and maintenance practices necessary to restore preserved trees to full health.

(iv) Field Identification. Impacted trees shall be designated with metal tags that are to remain in place throughout the development. Those tags shall be numbered, with the numbers keyed to the tree survey map that is provided with the application. See subsection (3)(a)(ii)(B) of this section regarding large groups of trees.

(v) Tree Protection. A statement addressing tree protection during construction in accordance with VMC 8.10.130.

(b) Mitigation Plan. A plan prepared by a certified arborist or landscape architect describing the proposed tree replacement program with a detailed explanation including the number, size, species, and planting location of replacement trees, and any necessary activities to ensure viability including, but not limited to, mulching and irrigation.

(4) Waiver of Documentation. The reviewing authority may waive any of the above information requirements where the information has already been made available to the city, the information is not necessary to determine conformance with applicable criteria, or alternate forms of information have been provided which provide sufficient detail to allow such a determination.

(5) Approval Standards for Type C Permits. All Type C permits submitted as part of a proposed residential development shall be reviewed under Option A in subsection (5)(a) of this section unless the applicant chooses the alternative design review available in Option B in subsection (5)(b) of this section. All commercial and industrial developments shall comply with the criteria of Option B.

(a) Option A – Numerical Preservation Standard for Residential Developments. Existing trees must be preserved. The total tree diameter on the site is the total diameter of all significant trees on the site, minus the diameter of all exempt trees as defined by this chapter. The applicant must choose one of the following options. Calculations shall be in accordance with subsection (5)(c) of this section.

(i) Preserve at least 30 percent of the total significant tree diameter on the site;

(ii) Preserve all heritage trees and at least 30 percent of the significant trees on the site;

(iii) If the site is larger than one acre, preserve at least 25 percent of the total tree canopy area on the site.

(b) Option B – Commercial/Industrial and Alternative Residential Design Review. Tree preservation and conservation as a design principle shall be equal in concern and importance to other design principles. Application of the standards of this section shall not result in a reduction of overall building square footage or loss of density, but may require an applicant to modify plans to allow for buildings of greater height, different design, or alternate location. Tree removal or transplanting pursuant to a Type C permit shall be limited to instances where the applicant has provided complete and accurate information as required by this chapter and where the reviewing authority determines that the following criteria have been met.

(i) The proposal includes provisions for mitigation and tree protection in accordance with VMC 8.10.120 and 8.10.130.

(ii) The proposed removal is necessary for the construction of roads, structures, or other site improvements and the applicant has demonstrated that there are no feasible and reasonable location alternatives and/or design options which would better preserve significant trees on the site while providing the same overall level of density and design functionality.

(iii) Other. Where the applicant shows that tree removal or transplanting is reasonable and necessary under the circumstances.

(c) Under Option A, when calculating the amount of tree diameter and the number of significant trees on the site, the applicant may choose one of the following methods of measurement:

(i) Tree Inventory. A tree inventory identifies all trees on the site, specifying location, species, and diameter of each tree; or

(ii) Statistical Sampling. Statistical sampling may be used to estimate the total tree diameter and total number of significant trees present. Sampling must be carried out by individuals with demonstrated experience performing such surveys and shall be based on generally accepted standard methodologies.

(iii) Tree Canopy. When calculating the amount of tree canopy on the site, the total canopy area is based on the most recent aerial photograph available. If the most recent aerial photograph available is more than five years old, the applicant must provide a more recent photograph. (Ord. 483 § 9, 2008)


8.10.100 Type D permit.

The owner or operator of a commercial wood lot shall apply and receive approval for a Type D permit before beginning harvesting operations of more than three trees within any 12-month period. Type D permit applications shall be reviewed by the building official.

(1) Application for a Type D permit shall include the following:

(a) Proof that the subject property is a “commercial wood lot” as defined by this chapter;

(b) A map of the property including property boundaries;

(c) The size, species and location of all significant trees other than Douglas fir;

(d) The size, species and location of all heritage trees.

(2) Approval Standards for Type D permits. An application for a Type D permit shall be granted when all of the following criteria are met:

(a) The applicant has submitted a complete application as required by subsection (1) of this section;

(b) All heritage trees other than Douglas fir will be protected according to the requirements of this chapter;

(c) All nonfir significant trees in excess of three shall be mitigated according to VMC 8.10.120 or protected according to VMC 8.10.130; 

(d) All applicable standards of the Oregon Forest Practice Rules are met;

(e) The applicant has submitted and obtained approval of an erosion control plan from the city engineer; and

(f) If the tree removal proposed is a final harvest, and no further planting, maintenance, or rotation of trees is proposed, the applicant shall submit a long-term erosion control and revegetation plan for review and approval. (Ord. 483 § 10, 2008)


8.10.110 Amendments to approved permits.

(1) Amendments. The planning official may allow removal of up to a total of three additional nonheritage trees as amendments to an approved Type B permit, or up to 10 additional nonheritage trees for a Type C permit subject to the mitigation requirements of this chapter. If removal of more than this number of trees, removal of a heritage tree, or substantial changes to the mitigation plan are necessary prior to final platting or certificate of occupancy due to changes in infrastructure layout, variable field conditions, or the necessities of construction, such changes shall be reviewed by the planning official as a Type B permit subject to the mitigation requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 483 § 11, 2008)


8.10.120 Mitigation.

(1) Requirement Established. Type B or C tree removal permit grantees shall plant one replacement tree for each significant tree removed in excess of the three that could otherwise be removed under a Type A permit. Type D permit grantees shall mitigate nonfir trees as required by VMC 8.10.100(2)(c). Mitigation is not required for removal of hazardous, dead, or dying trees.

(2) Heritage trees shall be mitigated based on the following methodology:

Replacement trees = 1 + (A - Q)

Where:

A = Actual dbh of the tree in question.

Q = Minimum dbh for this species to qualify as a heritage tree.

(3) Replacement Trees. Trees planted as mitigation must meet all of the following standards:

(a) To encourage a diversity of species when four or more trees are required as mitigation, no more than 25 percent of trees planted as mitigation shall be of any one species. Use of native trees where appropriate is encouraged;

(b) All replacement trees shall be appropriately chosen for the site conditions (especially soil and hydrology) from an approved tree species list supplied by the city, and shall be state Department of Agriculture and American Association of Nurserymen (AAN) American Standards for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1) for top grade; 

(c) All replacement trees shall be two-inch caliper. The planning official or planning commission may allow the use of replacement Oregon white oaks and other native trees with the largest available nursery stock if two-inch caliper trees are not available; 

(d) Replacement trees shall be planted prior to final plat approval for land divisions; issuance of final certificate of occupancy for other land use approvals; or within two years after the issuance of the tree removal permit. Planting shall be consistent with any applicable conditions of approval imposed within the subdivision, land development or tree removal permit approval. Mitigation requirements shall run with the land until all required mitigation has been completed;

(e) Replacement trees must be staked, fertilized, mulched, and irrigated as necessary to ensure survival; and

(f) Trees planted as mitigation for a Type C permit shall be guaranteed by the permit grantee or the grantee’s successors-in-interest for three years after the planting date through an irrevocable development agreement.

(4) Alternatives to On-Site Mitigation.

(a) Relocation or Replacement Off Site. If in the opinion of a certified arborist or landscape architect there is insufficient available space on the subject property to accommodate the required mitigation plantings, the following alternatives may be used to fulfill mitigation requirements:

(i) Replanting may occur on other property in the applicant’s ownership or control within the city, or in a city-owned or dedicated open space or park. If planting on city-owned or dedicated property, the city may specify the species, size, and location of the trees. Nothing in this section shall be construed as an obligation of the city to allow trees to be planted on city-owned or dedicated property.

(ii) Payment in Lieu of Planting. The applicant may pay into the tree fund an amount equal to the number of replacement trees required times a per-tree rate as established by resolution of the city council. In the event the land use or land division approval associated with a Type C tree permit expires and trees were removed in accordance with a tree removal permit, owner shall make a payment in lieu of planting for all required replacement trees within 10 days after expiration of the approval.

(5) Trees preserved or planted as mitigation may be used to fulfill the landscaping requirements as set forth in Veneta Land Development Ordinance Section 5.12.

(6) To encourage the retention of established trees which do not yet meet the criteria for significance, credit towards mitigation requirements shall be given on a tree-for-tree basis for preservation of the following healthy, structurally sound trees. If such trees are to be used towards meeting the mitigation requirements of this section, required tree preservation and planting plans shall include the size, species, and location of these trees, and these trees shall be given the protections required by VMC 8.10.130 and shall then be considered significant trees. Trees located within the greenway/open space subzone may not be counted towards required mitigation.

	Big leaf maple	2 – 12" dbh

	Oregon ash	2 – 8" dbh

	Madrone	2 – 6" dbh

	Red alder	2 – 6" dbh

	Ponderosa pine	2 – 6" dbh

	Western red cedar	2 – 6" dbh

	Chinquapin	2 – 6" dbh

	Pacific dogwood	2 – 6" dbh

	Douglas fir	2 – 6" dbh

	Oregon white oak	2 – 6" dbh

(7) Economic Development Waiver. The city council may reduce or waive mitigation requirements for developments on commercial and industrial zoned parcels when all of the criteria below are met. Request for waiver shall be made in writing to the city council following the approval of land use applications and resolution of all appeals.

(a) The applicant has complied with the landscaping requirements of Land Development Ordinance Section 5.12.

(b) The applicant is unable to meet the mitigation requirements through on-site plantings or off-site mitigation as determined by a professional landscape architect.

(c) The council determines that the proposed development will provide substantial economic, employment, and service benefits to the community including provision of family-wage jobs or services currently lacking within the city. (Ord. 542 §§ 5, 6, 2017; Ord. 483 § 12, 2008)


8.10.130 Tree protection during construction.

Where trees are to be preserved as part of a development plan, the following standards apply:

(1) All trees to be protected must be clearly differentiated from those being removed by clearly marking trees to be removed in an obvious visible manner such as bright-colored paint, ribbon, etc.

(2) Protective Barrier. Before development, vegetation removal, filling, or any land alteration for which a tree removal permit is required, the developer shall erect and maintain suitable barriers to prevent damage to remaining trees. Barriers shall be erected at the edge of the critical root zone of trees to be preserved. Protective barriers shall not be moved and shall remain in place until the city authorizes their removal or issues a final certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. At a minimum, barriers shall consist of 48-inch-high heavy duty, high visibility plastic fencing, or silt fencing, attached to anchored metal or wooden posts.

(3) Prior to commencement of ground-disturbing activities, the applicant shall request and receive an inspection of all tree protection barriers to ensure that the approved tree removal plans are accurately implemented on the ground. All inspection requests shall provide a minimum of 24 hours’ notice.

(4) Construction Near Preserved Trees. No person may conduct any construction activity damaging to a tree designated to remain, including, but not limited to, placing solvents, building material, construction equipment or depositing soils within the tree protection zone, attaching fencing or other items to trees, using trees as anchors, or placing irrigated landscaping within the protective barrier.

(5) Where trees are removed from within the CRZ of a tree to remain, the removal shall be done by cutting the tree near the ground and grinding the stump or leaving it in place. Removal of trees or stumps within the CRZ of a protected tree by pushing trees down or pulling trees and/or stumps out of the ground is prohibited. (Ord. 483 § 13, 2008)


8.10.140 Notice and appeal.

(1) Notice of a pending Type C permit shall be mailed to surrounding property owners in accordance with Section 2.11 of the Veneta Land Development Ordinance. For sites larger than one acre, city will provide notice of approved Type B permits via first class mail to owners of record of property on the most recent property tax assessment roll located within 100 feet of the property for which the Type B permit has been issued. Failure to provide such notice will not invalidate an approved permit, nor does the notice or lack thereof provide any right of appeal.

(2) Any decision on a Type C tree removal permit may be appealed in accordance with Section 2.07 of the Veneta Land Development Ordinance. (Ord. 542 § 7, 2017; Ord. 483 § 14, 2008)


8.10.150 Timing of removal, display of permit – Inspection.

(1) No tree removal permitted as a Type B, C, or D permit shall take place until the applicant has received a notice to proceed from the city engineer on public improvements. When no public improvements are proposed, tree removal shall not occur until building permits have been issued. The building official may make exceptions to this requirement when warranted due to extenuating circumstances or when no such permits are necessary.

(2) For applicants seeking a Type B permit to remove trees independent of site improvements, no tree removal shall take place until tree protection measures have been inspected and approved by the building official.

(3) Inspection and approval of all required tree protection measures by the building official is required prior to tree removals permitted as Type B, C, and D permits.

(4) Forty-eight hours prior to tree removal, a copy of the tree removal permit shall be prominently displayed on the subject property and shall remain on display at all times while tree removal operations are being conducted. (Ord. 483 § 15, 2008)


8.10.155 Tree removal site requirements.

Properties on which trees are removed shall be maintained in accordance with the following standards:

(1) All logging equipment shall be removed no later than 30 days after tree removal. The replacement trees shall be planted within the time limits set in VMC 8.10.120(3)(d);

(2) Property shall be maintained in conformance with VMC 8.05.060 prohibiting noxious vegetation;

(3) Slash shall be chipped within 30 days after tree removal. (Ord. 542 § 8, 2017)


8.10.160 Violation – Enforcement.

(1) Any person found to have removed a significant tree in violation of this chapter shall incur a penalty of not more than $1,000 nor less than $250.00 per violation.

(2) Any person found to have removed a heritage tree in violation of this chapter shall incur a penalty of not less than the value of the tree according to VMC 8.10.120 plus no less than $500.00 for each heritage tree removed.

(3) Failure to comply with any condition of the permit issued to the applicant shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall subject the applicant to a fine of not more than $1,000, nor less than $500.00. Any fines collected by the city under this section shall accrue to the city tree fund.

(4) Each tree removed in violation of this chapter or any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a separate violation.

(5) Each tree that the applicant fails to replant or replace as required by the terms of the permit, and each violation of any other condition of a permit, shall constitute a separate violation.

(6) Retroactive Permit. A person who removes a tree without obtaining a Type A permit may apply retroactively for a permit. In addition to all application requirements of this chapter, the person must be able to demonstrate compliance with all requirements of this chapter, in addition to paying an additional fee as established by resolution of the city council. Mitigation requirements of this chapter may apply to all retroactive permits.

(7) Withholding Permits and Stop-Work Orders. The building official has the authority to issue a stop-work order, withhold approval of a final plat, or withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy, permits or inspections until the provisions of this chapter, including any conditions attached to a tree removal permit, have been fully met.

(8) Revocation of Permit. The city administrator may revoke any tree removal permit when the planning official or designee thereof has clearly demonstrated that the application was incomplete or inaccurate to such a degree as to invalidate the approval. Such a revocation may be immediately followed by a stop-work order and the applicant required to either:

(a) Revise and resubmit the permit for review and approval; or

(b) Pay fines for removing trees in violation of the permit under subsections (1) and (2) of this section.

(9) The city shall notify the property owner in writing that a violation has occurred and mitigation is required. Within 30 days of the date of mailing of the notice, the property owner shall provide a mitigation plan to the city. The plan shall provide for replacement of a tree or, at the city’s discretion, payment into the tree fund according to the standards of VMC 8.10.120. (Ord. 483 § 16, 2008)


8.10.170 Alternative enforcement.

In the event that a person, company, or other operating unit commits more than one violation of this chapter, the following alternative sentence may be imposed by the Veneta municipal court:

(1) If a person has gained money or property through the commission of an offense under this section, then upon conviction thereof the court, in lieu of imposing a fine, may sentence the person to pay an amount, fixed by the court, not to exceed double the amount of the gain from the commission of the offense.

(2) “Gain” is defined as the amount of money or value of property derived from the commission of the violation, less the amount of money or value of property seized by or surrendered to the city. “Value” shall be the greater of the market value or replacement cost as determined by a licensed professional in the tree, nursery, or landscape field. (Ord. 483 § 17, 2008)


8.10.180 Findings of fact.

The findings of fact adopted by the Veneta city council on September 22, 2008, as support for the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, attached as Exhibit A, are hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 483 § 18, 2008)


8.10.190 Amendments.

All amendments made to this land use chapter shall be in accordance with the amendment procedures set forth in Veneta’s Land Development Ordinance. (Ord. 483 § 19, 2008)


Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE

Chapters:

9.05    General Offenses

9.10    Parental Responsibility

9.15    Minors Curfew

9.20    Noise

9.25    Marijuana

9.30    Transitional Housing Campgrounds and Overnight Camping
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



Chapter 9.05 GENERAL OFFENSES

Sections:

I. General Provisions 

9.05.005    Effective date of state statute.

9.05.010    Definitions and exception for felonies.

II. Disorderly Conduct and Related Offenses 

9.05.020    Disorderly conduct.

9.05.030    Drinking in public places.

9.05.031    Prostitution.

9.05.032    Frequenting a place where controlled substances are used.

9.05.033    Harassment.

9.05.034    Possession of controlled substances. 

9.05.035    Public conduct. 

III. Firearms and Fireworks 

9.05.040    Discharge of firearms.

9.05.050    Fireworks.

IV. Offenses Related to Property 

9.05.060    Theft.

9.05.070    Trespass.

9.05.080    Criminal mischief.

9.05.081    Forgery and related offenses.

9.05.082    Repealed.

9.05.083    Prohibited camping.

V. Minors 

9.05.090    Child neglect.

9.05.100    Use of invalid license.

9.05.110    Providing liquor to persons under 21 or intoxicated persons.

9.05.120    Purchase or possession of liquor by minors.

VI. Animals 

9.05.130    Cruelty to animals.

VII. Obstructing Governmental Administration 

9.05.140    Unsworn falsification.

9.05.150    Obstructing governmental administration.

9.05.160    Tampering with public records.

9.05.170    Impersonation.

9.05.180    Initiating a false report.

9.05.190    Giving false information to police officer for a citation.

9.05.200    Giving false information to city attorney.

9.05.210    Refusal to assist in fire fighting operations.

9.05.220    Refusing to assist a peace officer.

9.05.230    Resisting arrest.

9.05.240    Escape.

VIII. Street and Sidewalk Offenses 

9.05.250    Obstruction of fire hydrants.

IX. Transportation of Refuse 

9.05.260    Definition.

9.05.270    Leaking loads.

9.05.280    Violation – Penalty.

X. Miscellaneous 

9.05.290    Offensive littering.

9.05.300    Offenses outside the city limits.

9.05.310    Attempt.

9.05.320    Solicitation.

9.05.330    Conspiracy.

9.05.340    Multiple convictions barred in inchoate crimes.

9.05.350    Separate offenses.

9.05.360    Violation – Penalties.

9.05.370    Nuisance abatement.

9.05.380    Working out fines and costs.

9.05.390    Defenses – Criminal liability – Parties to crime – Justification – Responsibility.

I. General Provisions


9.05.005 Effective date of state statute.

All state statutes, definitions, or other provisions of state law adopted by reference in this chapter are adopted as amended as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 468 § 2, 2006; Ord. 328 § 93, 1991)


9.05.010 Definitions and exception for felonies.

(1) All definitions contained in the Oregon Criminal Code of 1971, as amended, in effect on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter.

(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, this chapter does not incorporate any state statute which describes, prohibits, or imposes penalties for felonies. (Ord. 486 § 7, 2009; Ord. 328 § 1, 1991)

II. Disorderly Conduct and Related Offenses


9.05.020 Disorderly conduct.

ORS 166.025 and 166.116 are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 448 § 1, 2004; Ord. 328 § 2, 1991)


9.05.030 Drinking in public places.

(1) No person shall sell or consume alcoholic beverages in or upon any street, park or other city property without a permit.

(2) The city administrator may issue permits to permit sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages upon streets, parks, or other city property where:

(a) Such sale or consumption is permitted by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission rules and regulations;

(b) The city administrator determines that issuance of the permit will not unduly endanger persons or property.

(3) The city administrator shall develop an application form for permits under this section, and may condition issuance of a permit upon proof of adequate liability insurance, provisions of appropriate security, and payment to the city of a reasonable sum for the increased law enforcement costs associated with the event for which the permit is issued. The city administrator shall establish a permit fee.

(4) A permit issued under this section may be revoked by the city administrator or any law enforcement officer of the city, without notice, if reasonable grounds exist to believe that continued consumption of alcohol on city property or other public place is creating or may create a danger to persons or property, or that the terms and conditions of the permit are being violated.

(5) Any person affected by a decision to grant, deny, revoke, or impose conditions on the issuance of a permit under this section may appeal such decision to the city council, which may affirm or reverse the decision or alter the conditions for issuance of the permit. An appeal under this section must be in writing and contain the applicant’s name, address, and telephone number, together with a statement of the grounds for appeal.

(6) Sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places without a permit is a violation punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00.

(7) ORS 471.475 is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 448 § 2, 2004; Ord. 328 § 3, 1991)


9.05.031 Prostitution.

ORS 167.007 is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 448 § 3, 2004; Ord. 328 § 4, 1991)


9.05.032 Frequenting a place where controlled substances are used.

ORS 167.222 is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 448 § 4, 2004; Ord. 328 § 5, 1991)


9.05.033 Harassment.

ORS 166.065 and 166.090 are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 448 § 5, 2004; Ord. 328 § 6, 1991)


9.05.034 Possession of controlled substances.

ORS 475.992, 475.994 and 475.999 are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 448 § 6, 2004; Ord. 328 § 7, 1991)


9.05.035 Public conduct.

(1) Public Indecency. A person commits a crime of public indecency if while in, or in view of, a public place a person performs:

(a) An act of sexual intercourse; or

(b) An act of deviant sexual intercourse; or

(c) An act of exposing the genitals of the person with the intent of arousing the sexual desire of the person or another person.

(2) Prohibited Nudity. It shall be unlawful for any person eight years of age or older to expose their genitalia while in a public place or place visible from a public place, if the public place is open or available to persons of the opposite sex.

(3) Urinating or Defecating. No person shall urinate or defecate in, or in view of, a public place, except in a lavatory. (Ord. 448 § 7, 2004; Ord. 328 § 8, 1991)

III. Firearms and Fireworks


9.05.040 Discharge of firearms.

(1) No person shall, within the city limits of Veneta, discharge any firearm, including any pistol, rifle, shotgun, spring weapon which propels a projectile by use of gun power or other explosive, jet or rocket propulsion, compressed air or spring device.

(2) Nothing herein shall prohibit the discharge of firearms within the city limits by:

(a) Any peace officer;

(b) Any animal control officer;

(c) Any person engaged in slaughter of livestock for consumption;

(d) Any other person acting in self-defense or defense of another in accordance with Oregon law;

(e) Any person engaged in rodent or pest control pursuant to a permit issued by the chief of police or the officer in charge of any law enforcement organization providing law enforcement to the city under contract in accordance with subsection (3) of this section.

(3) The chief of police or the officer in charge of any law enforcement organization providing law enforcement services to the city of Veneta under contract, or the designee of such person, may issue permits to permit discharge of firearms within the city limits for the purposes of rodent or pest control where:

(a) The applicant is 18 years of age or older;

(b) The type of weapon to be used is appropriate for rodent or pest control;

(c) The proposed use of the weapon does not appear to create an undue hazard to persons or property.

(4) A permit issued under subsection (3) of this section may contain whatever conditions or restrictions are deemed appropriate to minimize the risk of injury to persons or property from the discharge of the firearms, including, but not limited to, restrictions on the type of weapon used, the hours during which the weapons may be discharged, the time at which the permit will expire, not to exceed one year from the date of issuance, and the maximum distance from the target from which the weapon may be discharged.

(5) The city administrator shall develop an application for permits under this section, a permit form, and a permit fee.

(6) Any person affected by a decision to grant, deny, revoke or impose conditions on the issuance of a permit under this section may appeal such decision to the city council, which may affirm or reverse the decision, or alter the conditions or restrictions of the permit. An appeal under this section must be in writing and contain the applicant’s name, address and telephone number, together with a statement of the grounds for appeal. 

(7) ORS 166.240 and 166.416 are adopted by this reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 448 § 8, 2004; Ord. 328 § 11, 1991)


9.05.050 Fireworks.

(1) ORS 480.110, 480.120, 480.124, 480.130, 480.140, 480.150 and 480.160 are adopted by reference, and made a part of this chapter.

(2) The sale, use or discharge of fireworks, or particular types of fireworks, may be prohibited at such times, and during such periods, as the city administrator may determine, if the city administrator determines that such sale, use or discharge of fireworks creates a substantial fire hazard due to weather or fire conditions.

(3) Any order made by the city administrator pursuant to subsection (2) of this section may be appealed to the city council. Any appeal under this section must be in writing and contain the applicant’s name, address and telephone number, together with a statement of the grounds for appeal. (Ord. 390 § 7A, 1998; Ord. 328 § 12, 1991)

IV. Offenses Related to Property


9.05.060 Theft.

ORS 164.015 through 164.045, 164.065, 164.085 through 164.125, 164.162 and 131.655 are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 448 § 9, 2004; Ord. 328 § 21, 1991)


9.05.070 Trespass.

ORS 164.205 and 164.235 through 164.265 are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 448 § 10, 2004; Ord. 328 § 22, 1991)


9.05.080 Criminal mischief.

ORS 164.345 and 164.354 are adopted by reference, and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 328 § 23, 1991)


9.05.081 Forgery and related offenses.

ORS 165.007, 165.017, 165.055 and 165.065 are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 448 § 11, 2004; Ord. 328 § 24, 1991)


9.05.082 Violation of park rules.

Repealed by Ord. 485. (Ord. 448 § 12, 2004; Ord. 328 § 25, 1991)


9.05.083 Prohibited camping.

(1) No person shall camp or park overnight in any area within a city park.

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, camping is permitted in areas specifically designated as public campgrounds.

(3) No person shall camp at a designated public campground in a city park for a period longer than 14 days in any 30-consecutive-day period.

(4) Activities otherwise prohibited by subsections (1) and (3) of this section and not permitted by subsection (2) of this section are permitted with specific written authorization from the city council or its duly authorized agent. (Ord. 448 § 13, 2004; Ord. 328 § 26, 1991)

V. Minors


9.05.090 Child neglect.

ORS 163.545 and 167.065 are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 448 § 14, 2004; Ord. 328 § 31, 1991)


9.05.100 Use of invalid license.

ORS 807.580 is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 328 § 32, 1991)


9.05.110 Providing liquor to persons under 21 or intoxicated persons.

ORS 471.410 is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 328 § 33, 1991)


9.05.120 Purchase or possession of liquor by minors.

ORS 471.430 is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 328 § 34, 1991)

VI. Animals


9.05.130 Cruelty to animals.

ORS 167.310 through 167.350 are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 328 § 41, 1991)

VII. Obstructing Governmental Administration


9.05.140 Unsworn falsification.

No person shall knowingly make any false written statement to a public servant in connection with an application for any benefit. (Ord. 328 § 51, 1991)


9.05.150 Obstructing governmental administration.

ORS 162.195, 162.235 and 181.599 are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 448 § 15, 2004; Ord. 328 § 52, 1991)


9.05.160 Tampering with public records.

ORS 162.305 is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 328 § 53, 1991)


9.05.170 Impersonation.

ORS 162.365 is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 328 § 54, 1991)


9.05.180 Initiating a false report.

ORS 162.075, 162.085, 162.295, 162.375, 165.570 and 165.805 are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 448 § 16, 2004; Ord. 328 § 55, 1991)


9.05.190 Giving false information to police officer for a citation.

ORS 162.385 is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 328 § 56, 1991)


9.05.200 Giving false information to city attorney.

A person commits the crime of giving false information to a city attorney if the person knowingly makes a false, misleading or unfounded statement or report to a city attorney or member of the city attorney’s staff concerning a violation or alleged violation of a city ordinance or the commission or alleged commission of a crime. (Ord. 328 § 57, 1991)


9.05.210 Refusal to assist in fire fighting operations.

ORS 162.255 is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 328 § 58, 1991)


9.05.220 Refusing to assist a peace officer.

ORS 162.245 is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 328 § 59, 1991)


9.05.230 Resisting arrest.

ORS 162.315 is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 328 § 60, 1991)


9.05.240 Escape.

ORS 162.145 is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 328 § 61, 1991)

VIII. Street and Sidewalk Offenses


9.05.250 Obstruction of fire hydrants.

No person shall place or maintain any bush, shrub, tree, fence or other obstruction within eight feet of any fire hydrant, and no owner or occupant of property adjacent to a fire hydrant shall permit any bush, shrub, tree, fence or other obstruction to be maintained within eight feet of such fire hydrant. (Ord. 328 § 71, 1991)

IX. Transportation of Refuse


9.05.260 Definition.

The term “refuse” means any sort of rubbish, trash, garbage, debris or refuse, including all putrescible and nonputrescible waste, vegetable and animal waste, ashes, waste household articles, waste vehicle parts or tires, waste metal of any kind, waste paper or cardboard, waste wood of any kind, severed tree limbs or brush, waste building materials of any kind, and further includes any other rejected matter and all articles and things ordinarily and customarily hauled off and dumped for promoting health or cleanliness. (Ord. 390 § 7B, 1998; Ord. 328 § 72, 1991)


9.05.270 Leaking loads.

No person shall transport or carry refuse in or on a motor vehicle or trailer, upon a public road in the city of Veneta, unless such refuse is either:

(1) Completely covered on all sides and on the top and bottom thereof and such cover is either a part of or securely fastened to the body of such motor vehicle or trailer; or

(2) Securely tied to the body of such motor vehicle or trailer so that no piece, article, item or part of such refuse is not fastened to the body of such motor vehicle or trailer. (Ord. 390 § 7B, 1998; Ord. 328 § 73, 1991)


9.05.280 Violation – Penalty.

Violation of this article is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not less than $10.00, nor more than $100.00. (Ord. 390 § 7B, 1998; Ord. 328 § 74, 1991)

X. Miscellaneous


9.05.290 Offensive littering.

ORS 164.775, 164.785, 164.805, 466.995 and 476.715 are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 448 § 17, 2004; Ord. 328 § 81, 1991)


9.05.300 Offenses outside the city limits.

Where permitted by Oregon law, an act made unlawful by this chapter shall constitute an offense when committed on any property owned or leased by the city, even though outside the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 328 § 82, 1991)


9.05.310 Attempt.

(1) ORS 161.405 through 161.430, insofar as they apply to misdemeanors, are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter.

(2) An attempt is a violation if the offense attempted is a violation of a city ordinance defined without reference to state law. (Ord. 328 § 83, 1991)


9.05.320 Solicitation.

(1) ORS 161.435 through 161.440, insofar as they apply to misdemeanors, are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter.

(2) A solicitation is a violation if the offense solicited is a violation of a city ordinance defined without reference to state law. (Ord. 328 § 84, 1991)


9.05.330 Conspiracy.

(1) ORS 161.450 through 161.475, insofar as they apply to misdemeanors, are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter.

(2) Conspiracy is a violation if an object of the conspiracy is commission of a violation of a city ordinance defined without reference to state law. (Ord. 328 § 85, 1991)


9.05.340 Multiple convictions barred in inchoate crimes.

ORS 161.485 is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 328 § 86, 1991)


9.05.350 Separate offenses.

Except for those ordinances which adopt state law by reference, each day that a violation of any Veneta ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 328 § 87, 1991)


9.05.360 Violation – Penalties.

(1) Violation of any provisions of this chapter which incorporate a state statute, which is a misdemeanor, shall be punishable as a violation with a fine not to exceed $1,000.

(2) Except where the penalties are specifically provided, the penalty for a violation of any provision of this chapter which incorporates a state statute which is a violation shall be identical to the penalty for violating the state statute.

(3) Where any section of this chapter is substantially similar to a state statute, but does not adopt the state statute by reference, the maximum and minimum penalties shall be limited to the maximum and minimum fines provided for in the substantially similar statute. 

The provisions of this section shall not be construed to affect penalties provided by any section of this chapter which are less severe than the penalties provided for in a substantially similar state statute. For purposes of this chapter, a state statute is substantially similar to a city ordinance if the same conduct is prescribed and the elements of the offense are the same.

(4) Whether or not a state statute incorporated by this chapter or substantially similar to any section of this chapter provides for imprisonment, no imprisonment shall be allowed under any section of this chapter.

(5) Except as provided in subsection (3) of this section, the penalty for a violation of any provision of this chapter which does not adopt state law by reference, or which does not contain its own penalty provision, shall be a fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000. (Ord. 486 § 8, 2009; Ord. 448 § 18, 2004; Ord. 328 § 88, 1991)


9.05.370 Nuisance abatement.

No provision in this chapter shall preclude the abatement of a nuisance as provided in Chapter 8.05 VMC. (Ord. 328 § 89, 1991)


9.05.380 Working out fines and costs.

When a person has been convicted of violating any city ordinance, and a fine has been imposed for such conviction, the municipal court judge may permit such person to work off such fine by performing community service under the direction of the city administrator or his designee, at the rate of $10.00 credit toward the fine for each day worked. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit other sentencing options available under this chapter or state statute, including community service programs. (Ord. 328 § 90, 1991)


9.05.390 Defenses – Criminal liability – Parties to crime – Justification – Responsibility.

ORS 161.015 through 161.485 are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 328 § 92, 1991)


Chapter 9.10       PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY

Sections:

9.10.010    State legislation adopted.


9.10.010      State legislation adopted.

The following enumerated sections of Oregon's parental responsibility legislation in effect on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter: ORS 163.577, 419C.570 and 419C.573. (Ord. 372 § 1, 1997)


Chapter 9.15       MINORS CURFEW

Sections:

9.15.010    State legislation adopted.


9.15.010      State legislation adopted.

ORS 419C.680, establishing a curfew and penalties for violation thereof, is adopted by reference and made part of this chapter. (Ord. 374 § 1, 1997)


Chapter 9.20       NOISE

Sections:

9.20.010    Purpose.

9.20.020    Scope.

9.20.030    Definitions.

9.20.040    Prohibitions.

9.20.050    Liability of person in control of property.

9.20.060    Exemptions.

9.20.070    Variances.

9.20.080    Violation – Penalty.


9.20.010      Purpose.

The city council has determined that excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare and quality of life, and it shall be the policy of the city to prevent excessive sound which may jeopardize the health, welfare and safety of citizens or degrade the quality of life. (Ord. 299 § 1, 1988)


9.20.020      Scope.

This chapter shall apply to the regulations of all sounds originating within the city limits. (Ord. 299 § 2, 1988)


9.20.030      Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter the following words shall mean:

(1) "Chainsaw" means a saw which utilizes a chain as a cutting device, whether powered by an internal combustion engine or electricity.

(2) "Construction activity" means the construction (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, street, sidewalk, driveway, sewer, or utility line.

(3) "Domestic power tools" means any mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, pneumatic tool, air compressor, or other similar power tool, but not including a chainsaw or a power lawn tool.

(4) "Emergency services vehicle" means any publicly owned vehicle used for police, fire fighting, or ambulance services.

(5) "Idling speed" means that speed at which an engine will run when no pressure is applied to the accelerator or accelerator linkage.

(6) "Noise disturbance" means any sound which:

(a) Injures or endangers the safety or health of a human;

(b) Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivity; or

(c) Endangers or injures personal or real property.

(7) "Noise sensitive unit" means any residence, apartment, condominium, multifamily dwelling, or vehicle, boat or other structure adapted or used for the overnight accommodation of persons, or any school, church, temple, synagogue, nursing home, rest home, retirement home, group care home, or daycare center.

(8) "Off-road vehicle" means any self-propelled land vehicle designed or used for traversing over natural terrain, including, but not limited to, dune buggies, go-carts, motorcycles, mini-bikes, or other similar vehicles, but not including tractors or other motor vehicles when being used for commercial or agricultural purposes.

(9) "Person" means a person, persons, firm, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or any entity, public or private in nature.

(10) "Person in control of property" means any property owner, tenant, resident, occupant, or other person who has a current right to use property and a right to limit access to property by others.

(11) "Plainly audible" means where the listener clearly can hear the content of the sound produced by the noise source. Sounds which may be clearly audible include, but are not limited to, musical rhythms, spoken words, vocal sounds, and engine noises.

(12) "Power lawn tool" means any mechanically powered lawn mower, edger, brush cutter, leaf blower, or other similar lawn or garden power tool, whether powered by gasoline, diesel, or electricity.

(13) "Sound reproduction device" means any radio, stereo, loudspeaker, amplifier, television, tape player, or other similar machine or mechanical or electronic device intended for the reproduction or amplification of sound. (Ord. 396 § 1, 1998; Ord. 299 § 3, 1988)


9.20.040      Prohibitions.

No person shall create or assist in creating or permit the continuance of noise in the city of Veneta from the following sources, by the following acts, or in excess of the following limits:

(1) Unlicensed Off-Road Vehicles. Operation of any unlicensed off-road vehicle on public or private property within the city limits, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., upon property zoned "rural-residential" of five acres or more in size with the express written permission of the property owner to operate the vehicle on said property. Such use is allowed only for a total of four hours per 24-hour period on any one parcel of property;

(2) Licensed Off-Road Vehicles. Operation of any licensed off-road vehicle on public or private property within the city, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on public roads, parking lots open to the public, private roads, or other private property zoned "rural-residential" which is more than five acres in size. The express written permission of the property owner is necessary for such use on private roads and property, and is allowed only for a total of four hours per 24-hour period on any one parcel of property;

(3) Revving Engines. Unnecessarily revving the engine of any internal combustion engine, whether or not in a motor vehicle, within 200 feet of any noise sensitive unit, except as may be reasonably necessary to start, warm up, or mechanically repair such engine;

(4) Idling Engines on Motor Vehicles. Running the engine on any motor vehicle at idling speed for more than 15 consecutive minutes between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;

(5) Power Lawn Tools. Operation of any power lawn tool between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;

(6) Domestic Power Tools. Operation of any domestic power tool between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; provided, however, that domestic power tools may be operated between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. if operated within a completely enclosed area; and provided further, that the noise produced by such tool does not create a noise disturbance;

(7) Sound Reproduction Devices. Operation of any sound reproduction device which creates sound which:

(a) Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. creates a noise disturbance; or

(b) Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. is plainly audible within any noise sensitive unit which is not the source of the sound or 50 feet or more from such device;

(8) Chainsaws. The operation of any chainsaw:

(a) Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;

(b) For a total of more than four hours in any one day;

(c) For a total of more than 24 hours in any one month;

(9) Motor Vehicle Repair and Testing. Repairing or testing a motor vehicle between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to produce sound which creates a noise disturbance;

(10) Construction Activities. Engaging in construction activities between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. if such activities produce sound which creates a noise disturbance;

(11) Heating and Cooling Devices. Operation of any heat pump, furnace, water cooler, fan, air conditioner, or other heating or cooling device which, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., creates a noise disturbance;

(12) Miscellaneous Sounds. Producing sound by any means or through any activity other than those listed in this section or VMC 9.20.060 which:

(a) Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. creates a noise disturbance; or

(b) Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. is plainly audible within any noise sensitive unit which is not the source of the sound or 50 feet or more from such device. (Ord. 396 § 3, 1998; Ord. 393 § 1, 1998; Ord. 390 § 6, 1998; Ord. 299 § 5, 1988)


9.20.050      Liability of person in control of property.

(1) A person in control of property is liable and subject to penalties to the same extent as a person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter if such person:

(a) Has actual knowledge of the violation at the time it occurs;

(b) Has the actual ability and legal right to prevent the violation of this chapter by ejecting a person creating the noise from the property, removing or causing the termination of the operation of the noise-producing device or activity, or otherwise preventing the violation; and

(c) Fails, refuses, or neglects to prevent the violation.

(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to render any person in control of property liable for violations of this chapter by trespassers or other persons using the property without the implied or express consent of the person in control of property, nor shall anything in this chapter be construed to require a person in control of property to assume a substantial risk of physical injury to prevent a violation. (Ord. 299 § 6, 1988)


9.20.060      Exemptions.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

(1) Emergency Work. Sounds caused by the performance of emergency work reasonably necessary to prevent injury to persons or property;

(2) Aircraft. Aircraft operations in compliance with applicable federal laws or regulations;

(3) Railroads. Railroad activities as defined in subpart (A), Part 201 of Title 40, CFR, of the Environmental Protection Agency's Railroad Emission Standards, incorporated herein by reference;

(4) Refuse Pickup. Sounds created by refuse pick-up operations, other than sounds caused by violations of VMC 9.20.040(6) and (7);

(5) Emergency Vehicles. Sounds caused by publicly owned emergency vehicles, sirens, or warning devices;

(6) Police and Fire Fighters. Sounds caused by police or fire fighting activities;

(7) Construction. Sounds caused by construction activities between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.;

(8) Governmental Operations. Sounds caused by motor vehicles, equipment, or other property owned by the city of Veneta, Lane County, the state of Oregon, or any other governmental entity, and sounds caused by employees of any such governmental entities in the course of such employee's official duties, and sounds caused by any contractors, subcontractors, or employees of such persons or entities while engaged in performing a public contract or providing services to any governmental entity;

(9) Alarms. Sounds made by warning devices to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger; provided, however, that privately owned burglar or fire alarms shall not operate continuously for more than 15 minutes;

(10) Athletic Activities. Sounds caused by organized athletic or other group activities not involving sound reproduction devices, when such activities are conducted on property generally used for such purposes;

(11) Pre-Existing Industrial or Mill Activities. Sounds caused by lawful industrial or mill activities and uses to the extent that those activities and uses existed and caused sound prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

(12) Commercial Logging Activities. Sounds caused by commercial logging activities on lots of not less than two acres zoned rural-residential if such activities:

(a) Are restricted to the hours of 7:00.a.m. to 7:00 p.m.;

(b) Comply with VMC 9.20.040(5); and

(c) Are restricted to felling, bucking, trimming, splitting, or otherwise processing or hauling timber grown on the particular lot. (Ord. 393 § 2, 1998; Ord. 299 § 7, 1988)


9.20.070      Variances.

Any person who owns or controls any sound producing device or other sound source, or who is engaged in or planning any activity which violates, will violate, or may violate any provision of this chapter, or any property owner or person in control of property on which such sound source is located or such activity is planned, may apply to the city administrator for a variance.

(1) Time Duration of Variance. A variance may be either temporary, long-term, or permanent. A temporary variance shall be for a specific period of time not to exceed two weeks, and a long-term variance shall be for a specific period exceeding two weeks.

(2) Application. Applications for temporary variances shall be made to the city administrator. Applications for long-term and permanent variances shall be made to the planning commission. The application shall state the provision of this chapter from which a variance is sought, whether the variance sought is temporary, long-term or permanent, the nature and duration of the proposed sound-producing activity or device, the economic benefit of the proposed activity, the feasibility and cost of noise abatement, the period of time the variance is to apply, the reason the variance is sought, and any other supporting information which the city administrator may reasonably require.

(3) Application Fee. An application fee of $25.00 shall be submitted with any application for a long-term or permanent variance. The application fee may be waived in the discretion of the city administrator if the city administrator finds that imposition of the fee would constitute a substantial financial hardship to the applicant.

(4) Review Considerations. In considering a request for a variance, the following factors shall be considered:

(a) The potential nature and duration of the sound caused or to be caused by the device or activity;

(b) The protection of the health, safety, and welfare of citizens, and the potential effect of the sound on the sleep, peace, quiet, comfort or repose of other persons;

(c) The feasibility and cost of noise abatement and the financial ability of the owner, occupant or other person producing noise or in control of property to comply with this chapter;

(d) The loss or inconvenience which would result to any party in interest from the denial of the variance;

(e) The past, present, and future patterns of land use;

(f) Whether previous variances have been granted and the applicant's record of compliance with the terms and restrictions of any previous variances;

(g) In the case of a person requesting a variance for a heating or cooling device, any special medical requirements for continued use of the device shall be considered.

(5) Notification and Public Hearing. Notice and public hearing on applications for variance shall be provided as follows:

(a) No notice or hearing is required for the grant or denial of a temporary variance.

(b) Public notice shall be given of an application for a long-term or permanent variance at least 10 days prior to the hearing on such application by:

(i) Publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the county; and

(ii) Mailing such notice to occupants and owners of noise sensitive units located within 200 feet of the property line of the property for which the variance is sought. Notice given under this section shall be complete upon mailing, and shall be sufficient if given to the last-known owner and occupant as shown by city records.

(c) Notice of the variance application shall include:

(i) A description of the location of the property for which the variance is sought by street address or, if there is no street address, by legal description or other description reasonably calculated to apprise persons receiving the notice of the location of the property;

(ii) A general description of the variance requested and the type of sound-producing activity or device which is proposed; and

(iii) The date, time, and place of the hearing.

(6) Approval or Denial. The planning commission shall, within 10 days after the hearing, deny the variance, approve it, or approve it subject to restrictions or conditions.

(7) Conditions and Restrictions. If a variance is approved, the city administrator, planning commission, or city council may impose such conditions or restrictions as are deemed reasonably necessary to ensure the peace, quiet, repose, health, welfare, and safety of the citizens of Veneta and to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.

(8) Appeal. The decision of the city administrator or planning commission may be appealed to the city council. Notice of appeal shall be delivered to City Hall. The council shall review the application and shall have the discretion whether or not to hold a further hearing. If a hearing is held, notice shall be given in accordance with this section.

(9) At any time before or during the operation of any variance, the city administrator, planning commission, or city council may revoke the variance for good cause. (Ord. 299 § 8, 1988)


9.20.080      Violation – Penalty.

Violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $3,000. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall be considered a separate violation. (Ord. 299 § 9, 1988)


Chapter 9.25 MARIJUANA

Sections:

9.25.010    Definitions.

9.25.020    Possession of marijuana by persons under 21.

9.25.030    Public view.

9.25.040    Use of marijuana in a public place.

*    Prior legislation: Ord. 398.

**    Code reviser’s note: For provisions regarding the tax on marijuana and marijuana-infused products, see Chapter 3.40 VMC.


9.25.010 Definitions.

(1) “Cannabinoid” means any of the chemical compounds that are the active constituents of marijuana.

(2) “Cannabinoid concentrate” means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from marijuana by:

(a) A mechanical extraction process;

(b) A chemical extraction process using a nonhydrocarbon-based or other solvent, such as water, vegetable glycerin, vegetable oils, animal fats, isopropyl alcohol or ethanol;

(c) A chemical extraction process using the hydrocarbon-based solvent carbon dioxide; provided, that the process does not involve the use of high heat or pressure; or

(d) Any other process identified by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, in consultation with the Oregon Health Authority, by rule.

(3) “Cannabinoid extract” means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from marijuana by:

(a) A chemical extraction process using a hydrocarbon-based solvent, such as butane, hexane or propane;

(b) A chemical extraction process using the hydrocarbon-based solvent carbon dioxide, if the process uses high heat or pressure; or

(c) Any other process identified by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, in consultation with the Oregon Health Authority, by rule.

(4) “Cannabinoid product” means a cannabinoid edible and any other product intended for human consumption or use, including a product intended to be applied to the skin or hair that contains cannabinoids or dried marijuana leaves or flowers. “Cannabinoid product” does not include:

(a) Usable marijuana by itself;

(b) A cannabinoid concentrate by itself;

(c) A cannabinoid extract by itself; or

(d) Industrial hemp, as defined in ORS 571.300.

(5) “Homegrown” or “homemade” means grown or made by a person 21 years of age or older for noncommercial purposes.

(6) “Marijuana” means the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae, any part of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae and the seeds of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae. “Marijuana” does not include industrial hemp, as defined in ORS 571.300.

(7) “Marijuana items” means marijuana, cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates and cannabinoid extracts.

(8) “Public place” means a place to which the general public has access and includes, but is not limited to, hallways, lobbies and other parts of apartment houses and hotels not constituting rooms or apartments designed for actual residence, and highways, streets, schools, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds and areas used in connection with public passenger transportation.

(9) “Usable marijuana” means the dried leaves and flowers of marijuana. “Usable marijuana” does not include:

(a) The seeds, stalks and roots of marijuana; or

(b) Waste material that is a by-product of producing or processing marijuana. (Ord. 522 § 1, 2015)


9.25.020 Possession of marijuana by persons under 21.

Unlawful possession of one avoirdupois ounce or less of marijuana by a person under 21 years of age is a specific fine violation. The presumptive fine for a violation of this section is $650.00. (Ord. 522 § 1, 2015)


9.25.030 Public view.

(1) A person may not produce, process or store homegrown marijuana or homemade cannabinoid products or cannabinoid concentrates if the homegrown marijuana or homemade cannabinoid products or cannabinoid concentrates can be readily seen by normal unaided vision from a public place.

(2) A violation of subsection (1) of this section is a Class B violation. The presumptive fine for a violation of subsection (1) of this section is $260.00. (Ord. 522 § 1, 2015)


9.25.040 Use of marijuana in a public place.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to engage in the use of marijuana items in a public place.

(2) A violation of subsection (1) of this section is a Class B violation. The presumptive fine for a violation of subsection (1) of this section is $260.00. (Ord. 522 § 1, 2015)


Chapter 9.25 MARIJUANA

Sections:

9.25.010    Definitions.

9.25.020    Possession of marijuana by persons under 21.

9.25.030    Public view.

9.25.040    Use of marijuana in a public place.

*    Prior legislation: Ord. 398.

**    Code reviser’s note: For provisions regarding the tax on marijuana and marijuana-infused products, see Chapter 3.40 VMC.


9.25.010 Definitions.

(1) “Cannabinoid” means any of the chemical compounds that are the active constituents of marijuana.

(2) “Cannabinoid concentrate” means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from marijuana by:

(a) A mechanical extraction process;

(b) A chemical extraction process using a nonhydrocarbon-based or other solvent, such as water, vegetable glycerin, vegetable oils, animal fats, isopropyl alcohol or ethanol;

(c) A chemical extraction process using the hydrocarbon-based solvent carbon dioxide; provided, that the process does not involve the use of high heat or pressure; or

(d) Any other process identified by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, in consultation with the Oregon Health Authority, by rule.

(3) “Cannabinoid extract” means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from marijuana by:

(a) A chemical extraction process using a hydrocarbon-based solvent, such as butane, hexane or propane;

(b) A chemical extraction process using the hydrocarbon-based solvent carbon dioxide, if the process uses high heat or pressure; or

(c) Any other process identified by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, in consultation with the Oregon Health Authority, by rule.

(4) “Cannabinoid product” means a cannabinoid edible and any other product intended for human consumption or use, including a product intended to be applied to the skin or hair that contains cannabinoids or dried marijuana leaves or flowers. “Cannabinoid product” does not include:

(a) Usable marijuana by itself;

(b) A cannabinoid concentrate by itself;

(c) A cannabinoid extract by itself; or

(d) Industrial hemp, as defined in ORS 571.300.

(5) “Homegrown” or “homemade” means grown or made by a person 21 years of age or older for noncommercial purposes.

(6) “Marijuana” means the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae, any part of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae and the seeds of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae. “Marijuana” does not include industrial hemp, as defined in ORS 571.300.

(7) “Marijuana items” means marijuana, cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates and cannabinoid extracts.

(8) “Public place” means a place to which the general public has access and includes, but is not limited to, hallways, lobbies and other parts of apartment houses and hotels not constituting rooms or apartments designed for actual residence, and highways, streets, schools, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds and areas used in connection with public passenger transportation.

(9) “Usable marijuana” means the dried leaves and flowers of marijuana. “Usable marijuana” does not include:

(a) The seeds, stalks and roots of marijuana; or

(b) Waste material that is a by-product of producing or processing marijuana. (Ord. 522 § 1, 2015)


9.25.020 Possession of marijuana by persons under 21.

Unlawful possession of one avoirdupois ounce or less of marijuana by a person under 21 years of age is a specific fine violation. The presumptive fine for a violation of this section is $650.00. (Ord. 522 § 1, 2015)


9.25.030 Public view.

(1) A person may not produce, process or store homegrown marijuana or homemade cannabinoid products or cannabinoid concentrates if the homegrown marijuana or homemade cannabinoid products or cannabinoid concentrates can be readily seen by normal unaided vision from a public place.

(2) A violation of subsection (1) of this section is a Class B violation. The presumptive fine for a violation of subsection (1) of this section is $260.00. (Ord. 522 § 1, 2015)


9.25.040 Use of marijuana in a public place.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to engage in the use of marijuana items in a public place.

(2) A violation of subsection (1) of this section is a Class B violation. The presumptive fine for a violation of subsection (1) of this section is $260.00. (Ord. 522 § 1, 2015)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



9.30.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement two programs aimed at creating transitional housing for people who lack permanent shelter and cannot be placed in other low-income housing. (Ord. 545 § 3, 2018)


9.30.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following terms will have the following meaning:

(1) “Campground” means no more than two city-owned parcels located within the city’s urban growth boundary that are designated by the city as suitable to accommodate transitional housing and includes parking facilities and walkways.

(2) “Campsite” means any place where any bedding, sleeping bag, or other sleeping matter, or any stove or fire is placed, established, or maintained, whether or not such place incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to, shack, or any other structure, or any vehicle or part thereof.

(3) “Managing agency” means a designated organization that organizes and manages campers or a designated campground.

(4) “Personal property” means any item that is reasonably recognizable as belonging to a person and that has apparent utility.

(5) “Place of worship” means a religious institution with a specially designed structure, or property where individuals or a group of people such as a congregation come to perform acts of devotion, veneration, or religious study that has provided articles of incorporation to the Secretary of State as a “religious corporation” in accordance with ORS 65.001(37). Uses for the property include community-oriented services.

(6) “To camp” means to set up, or to remain in or at a campsite, for the purpose of establishing or maintaining a transitional place to live.

(7) “Transitional” means temporary in nature, not permanent.

(8) “Vehicle” means any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway and includes vehicles that are propelled or powered by any means. Vehicle does not mean manufactured structure (Oregon State Vehicle Code).

(9) “Walkway” means any sidewalk, path, or shoulder available for pedestrians (Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Design Guide). (Ord. 545 § 3, 2018)


9.30.030 Transitional housing accommodations on campgrounds.

ORS 446.265 authorizes the city to approve the establishment of up to two campgrounds to provide transitional housing accommodations. Site amenities for campgrounds must include parking facilities and walkways. Transitional housing accommodations are only available to people who lack permanent shelter and cannot be placed in other low-income housing. Shared facilities of the campgrounds are subject to regulations under the recreation park specialty code described under ORS 446.310 to 446.350. When approving a parcel as a campground for transitional housing accommodations, the city must give preference to locations that have access to grocery stores and public transit services. (Ord. 545 § 3, 2018)


9.30.040 Camping allowed on designated public property.

(1) The city shall provide up to eight camping permits for use on the designated campsite. No more than two persons are authorized to camp under one permit. A managing agency may be designated to register the campers and implement the permits.

(2) Any person who lacks permanent shelter is eligible to apply for a permit if he/she cannot be placed in other low-income housing and may camp in a parcel designated by the city for transitional housing accommodations in accordance with ORS 446.265, unless otherwise specifically authorized by this code or by declaration by the mayor in emergency circumstances.

(3) Family camping, which means the camping of adult(s) legally related to and with one or more children under the age of 18, is not allowed in the campgrounds, unless circumstances prevent more suitable accommodations. The city or a managing agency will make all efforts to find more suitable accommodations for children and their families.

(4) The city, or designated managing agency operating the campgrounds according to a written agreement with the city, will provide a written code of conduct for individuals who use the campgrounds to sign and abide by. The code of conduct will provide for the health, safety and welfare of campground residents, as well as mitigate impacts of the campground on adjacent property owners and the overall community.

(5) The city, or designated managing agency operating the campgrounds according to a written agreement with the city, will provide and maintain sanitary portable toilets in the number required to meet capacity guidelines by the manufacturer and sufficient trash receptacles.

(6) Campground residents are responsible for adhering to the code of conduct. Violations of the code of conduct may result in: (a) eviction from the camp by the Lane County Sheriff’s Office or the city’s designee, or (b) partial or entire campground abatement in accordance with VMC 8.05.175, Abatement of prohibited camping-related activity.

(7) Persons may reside at a designated campground for as long as persons lack permanent shelter and cannot access low-income housing, abide by the code of conduct, and have been issued a site-specific city camping permit. (Ord. 545 § 3, 2018)


9.30.050 Homeless camping at places of worship.

ORS 203.082 authorizes the city to implement a program that would allow churches, synagogues, and similar religious institutions to offer overnight camping on institution property to homeless persons living in vehicles. An institution authorized by the city to provide camping sites to homeless people must (a) limit the number of camping spaces to three or fewer vehicles at the same time; and (b) provide campers with access to sanitary facilities, including but not limited to toilet, hand washing, and trash disposal facilities.

(1) The city council will review a religious institution’s application for authorization to offer overnight car camping and decide whether authorization is appropriate. The city council’s decision will become effective with a signed agreement between the city and the religious institution. The agreement shall be customized to each site and will require at a minimum:

(a) Written agreement between the place of worship and a managing agency responsible for campground operations which shall be included as an exhibit in the respective city and place of worship agreement;

(b) Types of camping and behavior allowed and/or prohibited;

(c) Eviction/removal process;

(d) Sanitation;

(e) Water;

(f) Access;

(g) Allowed structures;

(h) Maintenance responsibilities;

(i) Indemnification;

(j) Insurance;

(k) Conditions for agreement termination.

(2) City council may authorize the city administrator to implement the written agreement between the city and place of worship. The city council may designate the city administrator to implement and interpret the said agreement. (Ord. 545 § 3, 2018)


9.30.060 Prohibited camping-related activity.

Prohibited camping activity includes behaviors or activity codified in Chapter 8.05 VMC, Nuisances, and shall be abated, including eviction, in accordance with VMC 8.05.175. (Ord. 545 § 3, 2018)


Chapter 9.25 MARIJUANA


Chapter 9.25 MARIJUANA

Sections:

9.25.010    Definitions.

9.25.020    Possession of marijuana by persons under 21.

9.25.030    Public view.

9.25.040    Use of marijuana in a public place.

*    Prior legislation: Ord. 398.

**    Code reviser’s note: For provisions regarding the tax on marijuana and marijuana-infused products, see Chapter 3.40 VMC.


9.25.010 Definitions.

(1) “Cannabinoid” means any of the chemical compounds that are the active constituents of marijuana.

(2) “Cannabinoid concentrate” means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from marijuana by:

(a) A mechanical extraction process;

(b) A chemical extraction process using a nonhydrocarbon-based or other solvent, such as water, vegetable glycerin, vegetable oils, animal fats, isopropyl alcohol or ethanol;

(c) A chemical extraction process using the hydrocarbon-based solvent carbon dioxide; provided, that the process does not involve the use of high heat or pressure; or

(d) Any other process identified by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, in consultation with the Oregon Health Authority, by rule.

(3) “Cannabinoid extract” means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from marijuana by:

(a) A chemical extraction process using a hydrocarbon-based solvent, such as butane, hexane or propane;

(b) A chemical extraction process using the hydrocarbon-based solvent carbon dioxide, if the process uses high heat or pressure; or

(c) Any other process identified by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, in consultation with the Oregon Health Authority, by rule.

(4) “Cannabinoid product” means a cannabinoid edible and any other product intended for human consumption or use, including a product intended to be applied to the skin or hair that contains cannabinoids or dried marijuana leaves or flowers. “Cannabinoid product” does not include:

(a) Usable marijuana by itself;

(b) A cannabinoid concentrate by itself;

(c) A cannabinoid extract by itself; or

(d) Industrial hemp, as defined in ORS 571.300.

(5) “Homegrown” or “homemade” means grown or made by a person 21 years of age or older for noncommercial purposes.

(6) “Marijuana” means the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae, any part of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae and the seeds of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae. “Marijuana” does not include industrial hemp, as defined in ORS 571.300.

(7) “Marijuana items” means marijuana, cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates and cannabinoid extracts.

(8) “Public place” means a place to which the general public has access and includes, but is not limited to, hallways, lobbies and other parts of apartment houses and hotels not constituting rooms or apartments designed for actual residence, and highways, streets, schools, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds and areas used in connection with public passenger transportation.

(9) “Usable marijuana” means the dried leaves and flowers of marijuana. “Usable marijuana” does not include:

(a) The seeds, stalks and roots of marijuana; or

(b) Waste material that is a by-product of producing or processing marijuana. (Ord. 522 § 1, 2015)


9.25.020 Possession of marijuana by persons under 21.

Unlawful possession of one avoirdupois ounce or less of marijuana by a person under 21 years of age is a specific fine violation. The presumptive fine for a violation of this section is $650.00. (Ord. 522 § 1, 2015)


9.25.030 Public view.

(1) A person may not produce, process or store homegrown marijuana or homemade cannabinoid products or cannabinoid concentrates if the homegrown marijuana or homemade cannabinoid products or cannabinoid concentrates can be readily seen by normal unaided vision from a public place.

(2) A violation of subsection (1) of this section is a Class B violation. The presumptive fine for a violation of subsection (1) of this section is $260.00. (Ord. 522 § 1, 2015)


9.25.040 Use of marijuana in a public place.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to engage in the use of marijuana items in a public place.

(2) A violation of subsection (1) of this section is a Class B violation. The presumptive fine for a violation of subsection (1) of this section is $260.00. (Ord. 522 § 1, 2015)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



10.05.010 Adoption of Oregon Vehicle Code.

The following enumerated portions of the Oregon Vehicle Code in effect on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter, except for any provisions to the extent they describe, prohibit, or impose penalties for felonies:

	ORS Chapter 153	ORS Chapter 813

	ORS Chapter 801	ORS Chapter 814

	ORS Chapter 802	ORS Chapter 815

	ORS Chapter 803	ORS Chapter 816

	ORS Chapter 805	ORS Chapter 818

	ORS Chapter 806	ORS Chapter 819

	ORS Chapter 807	ORS Chapter 820

	ORS Chapter 809	ORS Chapter 821

	ORS Chapter 810	ORS Chapter 822

	ORS Chapter 811	ORS Chapter 823

(Ord. 469 § 1, 2006; Ord. 444 § 1, 2004; Ord. 371 § 1, 1997)


10.05.020 Definitions.

In addition to those definitions contained in the adopted sections of the Oregon Vehicle Code in VMC 10.05.010, the following words or phrases, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, shall mean:

(1) “Curb” means the extreme edge of the roadway.

(2) “Driveway” means an area on private property where automobiles and other vehicles are operated or allowed to be parked or stored.

(3) “Front yard” means an area extending the full width of an improved residential lot between its side property lines, the front property lot line and a line that is an extension of the front line of the residential structure located on a lot, excluding a driveway. The front yard of a corner lot shall be determined by the street address of the residence located on such lot.

(4) “Holidays,” where used in this chapter or on signs in accordance with this chapter, shall mean: Sundays, New Year’s Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day, and any other legal holidays designated as such by the statutes of the state of Oregon or proclaimed as such by the city council.

(5) “Parking strip” means the area between a street and the sidewalk which is parallel to that street.

(6) “Person” means every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.

(7) “Play street” means a street or roadway upon which vehicular traffic is prohibited or restricted during a certain time or times.

(8) “Vehicle” means and includes any house trailer, mobile home, motor vehicle, truck, passenger motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, motorhome, camper, cabin, motorcycle, trailer, boat, farm machinery or similar equipment, or any truck with more than two axles or any trailer, mobile home or motorhome with a length exceeding 20 feet. (Ord. 554 § 1, 2019; Ord. 371 § 2, 1997)


10.05.030 Traffic control.

(1) General Powers of the City Council. Subject to state laws and regulations, the city council shall exclusively exercise all municipal traffic authority for the city, except for those powers specifically delegated to the city administrator or public works director in this chapter or any other ordinance, which delegated powers may be exercised either by the city council or by the city administrator or public works director.

(2) Designation of Powers. The powers of the city council shall include, but not be limited to, the power to establish, regulate, or designate the following, by resolution or otherwise:

(a) Through streets;

(b) One-way streets;

(c) Truck routes;

(d) Parking meter zones;

(e) No parking or restricted parking zones;

(f) City owned or leased lots or property on which public parking will be permitted, and setting charges for such parking;

(g) Angle of parking;

(h) Special speed regulations for city parks, municipal parking lots, and city streets;

(i) Use of certain streets by any class or kind of vehicle or by vehicles exceeding maximum weight or length;

(j) Type, location, and time of operation of traffic control signals, kinds or devices;

(k) Bus stops, bus stands, taxi cab stands, and stands for other passenger-carrier vehicles, passenger loading zones, and commercial loading zones;

(l) Crosswalks, safety zones, and traffic lanes;

(m) Areas where left, right, or U-turns are prohibited and the times when such prohibitions apply;

(n) Play streets;

(o) A uniform citation form or forms to be used to initiate proceedings for violations of this chapter;

(p) Rules requiring trimming of hedges, shrubbery or trees extending over the street. (Ord. 371 § 3, 1997)


10.05.040 Duties of the public works director.

The public works director shall have the nonexclusive power to exercise those powers listed in VMC 10.05.030(2)(e), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (1), (m) and (p). Whenever such powers are exercised, the public works director shall make a report to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, and the city council shall have the power to reverse or override any decision of the public works director or exercise of the public works director’s powers granted by this chapter. (Ord. 371 § 4, 1997)


10.05.050 Duties of city administrator.

The city administrator shall have the nonexclusive power to exercise those powers listed in VMC 10.05.030(2)(d), (f), (h), (i), (j), (k), (n) and (o). Whenever such powers are exercised, the city administrator shall make a report to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, and the city council shall have the power to reverse or override any decision of the city administrator or exercise of the city administrator’s powers granted by this chapter. (Ord. 371 § 5, 1997)


10.05.060 Authority of law enforcement and fire fighting personnel.

In the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic, or to safeguard pedestrians, law enforcement, fire fighting or emergency medical personnel may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 371 § 6, 1997)

II. Pedestrians


10.05.070 Use of sidewalks.

Pedestrians shall not use any roadway for travel when sidewalks abutting the same are available. No pedestrian shall cross the street at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a marked crosswalk. (Ord. 371 § 7(1), 1997)


10.05.080 Use of crosswalks.

Pedestrians must use crosswalks. No pedestrian shall cross the street other than within a crosswalk in blocks with marked crosswalks. (Ord. 371 § 7(2), 1997)

III. Parades and Processions


10.05.090 Permits required for parades.

No procession or parade, except a funeral procession, or convoy of the United States armed forces and the military forces of this state, may occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the city administrator. Such permit may be granted where it is found that such parade is not to be held for any unlawful purpose and will not cause damage, or unreasonably interfere with the public use of the street or the peace and quiet of the inhabitants of the city of Veneta. (Ord. 371 § 8(1), 1997)


10.05.100 Funeral processions.

(1) A funeral procession shall proceed to the place of interment by the most direct route which is both legal and practicable.

(2) The procession shall be accompanied by adequate escort vehicles for traffic control.

(3) All motor vehicles in the procession shall be operated with their lights turned on.

(4) No person shall unreasonably interfere with a funeral procession.

(5) No person shall operate a vehicle which is not a part of the procession between the vehicles of a funeral procession. (Ord. 371 § 8(2), 1997)


10.05.110 Storage of vehicles prohibited.

(1) No vehicle shall be parked for storage on a public street, right-of-way or alley for a period in excess of 30 days. A vehicle shall be conclusively determined to have been “parked for storage” if it is parked in the same position for a period of 30 days. The continuity of time shall not be deemed broken by movement of the vehicle elsewhere on the same city block or in the same alley unless the movement removes the vehicle from that city block or alley where it was located before it is returned.

(2) When a vehicle is found in violation of subsection (1) of this section a law enforcement officer shall issue a citation for the violation and after 24 hours may treat the vehicle as an abandoned vehicle and remove it pursuant to VMC 10.10.020 (1)(b).

(3) No citation for violation of this section will be issued unless notice to move the vehicle has been attached to the vehicle by any law enforcement officer or city employee, not less than 24 hours before the citation is issued. (Ord. 371 § 9, 1997)

IV. Parking


10.05.120 Method of parking.

(1) No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the curb, except where the street is marked or signed for angled parking.

(2) Where parking space markings are placed on a street, no person shall stand or park a vehicle other than at the indicated direction and within a single marked space, unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible.

(3) Whenever the owner or driver of the vehicle discovers that such vehicle is parked immediately in front of or close to a building to which the fire department has been summoned, the owner or driver shall immediately remove such vehicle from the area unless otherwise directed by police or fire officials. (Ord. 371 § 10, 1997)


10.05.130 Prohibited parking.

(1) No person shall park and no owner shall allow a vehicle to be parked or stored:

(a) In violation of any posted signs prohibiting or restricting parking, or in violation of ORS Chapter 811 or any other state statutes incorporated into this chapter by reference in VMC 10.05.010, or adjacent to any curb or portion of a curb marked in yellow, or for any period exceeding 24 hours after a notice to move the vehicle has been attached to the vehicle by any law enforcement officer or employee of the city;

(b) In any alley or street, except to load or unload persons or materials, not to exceed 30 consecutive minutes in any two-hour period;

(c) On a street for the principal purpose of:

(i) Displaying the vehicle for sale;

(ii) Repairing or servicing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency;

(iii) Storing any recreational vehicle, trailer, camper, or other vehicle or trailer designed or used for sleeping purposes or not primarily intended for the transportation of people for a period longer than 48 hours, on any public property, street, right-of-way or alley, unless a permit is obtained from the city administrator, or his designee, and displayed on an inside window or windshield of the vehicle;

(iv) Storing an inoperable vehicle or storing goods or trash in any empty trailer for more than 15 hours;

(d) In a driveway that blocks clear vision or upon or over a sidewalk, or upon a portion of driveway that intersects a sidewalk;

(e) Upon a parking strip, except where specifically authorized;

(f) On any city lot, park, or other city-owned property, unless a permit is obtained from the city administrator, or his designee, and the permit is displayed on an inside window or windshield of the vehicle; or the place where the vehicle is parked is marked or posted as a public parking area for no longer than 24 hours, or as specifically designated;

(g) Within the area of the curb or curb line and the sidewalk line or outer edge of the sidewalk, commonly known as the parking strip;

(h) In the front or side yard on any unimproved surface in a residential zone or a lot not in a residential zone but in residential use. For the purposes of this section, an improved surface shall consist of asphalt, concrete, cement or pavers sufficient to support the weight of a permanently parked vehicle. Rock, gravel and similar materials not in a retention and stabilization grid or similar material do not constitute an improved surface within a front yard, but may constitute an improved surface in side and rear yards. Parking on an improved surface in a front yard is allowed only on a driveway located between a garage, carport, or equivalent to the closest street frontage. (Ord. 555 § 1, 2019; Ord. 554 § 2, 2019; Ord. 488 § 1, 2009)


10.05.140 Parking permits.

The public works director, city administrator, or their designees may issue permits for overnight parking in accordance with VMC 10.05.130(3)(c) and (5) subject to the following conditions:

(1) The proposed activity for which the permit is issued is not likely to cause the peace and quiet of any person to be disturbed;

(2) The proposed activity is unlikely to result in litter, trash, garbage, sewage, or other unsanitary material being placed or left on city property;

(3) The application is made on the application form established by the city administrator and accompanied by an application fee established by the city administrator. (Ord. 371 § 12, 1997)


10.05.150 Moving a parked vehicle.

The moving of any vehicle within a city block or alley shall not be deemed to extend the time of parking. (Ord. 371 § 13, 1997)

V. Parking Citations and Owner Responsibility


10.05.160 Citation on illegally parked vehicle.

Whenever a vehicle without an operator is found parked in violation of a restriction imposed by this chapter, or state law, the law enforcement officer finding the vehicle shall take its license number and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a traffic citation instructing the operator to answer to the charge against the operator to appear at the court date on the issued citation. (Ord. 554 § 3, 2019; Ord. 371 § 14, 1997)


10.05.170 Failure to comply with traffic citation attached to a parked vehicle.

If the operator does not respond to a traffic citation affixed to a vehicle within a period of 30 days, the municipal judge or his designee may send to the owner of the vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a letter informing the owner of the violation and warning the owner that, in the event that the penalty is not paid or the citation is not answered for by the assigned court date:

(1) The fine will be doubled; and

(2) The vehicle may be impounded at the judge’s discretion, and the impounded vehicle shall not be released until outstanding fines and charges are paid. (Ord. 554 § 4, 2019; Ord. 384 § 3A, 1998; Ord. 371 § 15, 1997)


10.05.180 Owner responsibility.

The owner of a vehicle placed in violation of a parking restriction shall be responsible for the offense, except when the use of the vehicle was secured by the operator without the owner’s consent. The owner of a vehicle shall have the burden of proving that the use of the vehicle was obtained without the owner’s consent. (Ord. 371 § 16, 1997)


10.05.190 Registered owner presumption.

In the prosecution of a vehicle owner charging a violation of a restriction on parking, proof that the vehicle at the time of the violation was registered to the defendant shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the defendant was then the owner-in-fact. (Ord. 371 § 17, 1997)

VI. Impoundment of Vehicles


10.05.200 Impoundment.

When a motor vehicle or motor vehicle part is standing or parked in violation of any city regulation or ordinance, it shall be given a traffic citation and may be removed by any law enforcement officer or public works employee of the city in accordance with Chapter 10.10 VMC, governing the removal of abandoned vehicles. (Ord. 371 § 18, 1997)


10.05.210 Redemption.

The owner of the vehicle or the vehicle part, or his agent authorized to redeem it, may redeem it by paying to the city the costs of towing and storing the vehicle, as established by the city administrator, together with all unpaid, uncontested parking citations, and municipal court bail forfeitures. (Ord. 371 § 19, 1997)


10.05.220 Sale.

A motor vehicle or motor vehicle part so impounded and not so redeemed within 30 days after the impoundment shall be sold in accordance with Chapter 10.10 VMC, governing the sale of abandoned vehicles. (Ord. 371 § 20, 1997)

VII. General Regulations


10.05.230 Public parks.

No person shall drive a vehicle on any public park or other city property except on roads, parking lots, or other areas designated for vehicle traffic. The provisions of this section shall not apply to law enforcement, fire department, or public works department personnel, or other authorized agents of the city, in the exercise of their official duties. (Ord. 371 § 21, 1997)


10.05.240 Speed limits in public parks.

No person shall drive a vehicle upon any road or parking lot in any public park at a speed exceeding 15 m.p.h., unless signs erected indicate otherwise. (Ord. 371 § 22, 1997)


10.05.250 Boarding or alighting from vehicles.

No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. (Ord. 371 § 23, 1997)


10.05.260 Unlawful riding.

No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion not designated or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to a person, or persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise except to the extent prohibited by state statutes or regulations. (Ord. 371 § 24, 1997)


10.05.270 Clinging to vehicles.

No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, skateboard, roller skates, sled, or any toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any public roadway. (Ord. 371 § 25, 1997)


10.05.280 Use of roller skates and skateboards restricted.

No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any skateboard, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any street except while crossing at a crosswalk, or upon a play street. (Ord. 371 § 26, 1997)


10.05.290 Damaging sidewalks and curbs.

No person shall:

(1) Drive a vehicle upon or within any sidewalk or parking strip area except to cross at a permanent or temporary driveway;

(2) Place any dirt, wood, or other material in the gutter or space next to the curb of any street with the intent of using the same as a driveway;

(3) Remove or damage in any way any portion of any curb or move any heavy vehicle or thing over and upon a curb or sidewalk without first obtaining a permit from the city administrator or public works director. An application for a permit under this section shall include a statement of the reasons why such permit is sought, and shall be accompanied by an application fee as established by the city administrator. The city administrator may require, as a condition of the issuance of a permit, that the person applying for such permit agree to pay for the cost of repairing any and all damage to the curb or sidewalk caused by the proposed activity;

(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply to city maintenance vehicles, law enforcement vehicles, fire department vehicles, or other emergency vehicles. (Ord. 371 § 27, 1997)


10.05.300 Obstructing streets.

No person shall park or leave any vehicle, or any part thereof, or any trailer, box, ware or merchandise of any description, or any other thing that in any way impedes traffic, or obstructs the view, upon any street, alley, parking strip, sidewalk, or curb, except by such lawful use and parking of vehicles as is allowed by the ordinance codified in this chapter or other ordinances of this city. (Ord. 371 § 28, 1997)


10.05.310 Depositing material in streets.

(1) No person shall throw, place, deposit, scatter, or drop any gravel, rubbish, earth, asphalt, lumber, or other materials on a paved street or alley unless deposited in one pile for immediate use; provided, that no such pile shall obstruct the flow of water through a ditch, drain or gutter, or obstruct the flow of traffic. Such materials must also be prevented from washing into storm systems or drainageways. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to city, county, or state employees or contractors engaged in maintenance, repair or construction of roadways or other public property.

(2) Any person causing glass to be broken upon, or any party to a collision, or other vehicle accident upon any street of this city shall immediately remove or cause to be removed from such street all glass and other foreign substance.

(3) Any person violating this section shall remove all such materials from the roadway, and, in case of failure to do so on demand from the city administrator or his designee, the city may clean the roadway of such materials and charge the expense to said person. (Ord. 384 § 3A, 1998; Ord. 371 § 29, 1997)

VIII. Bicycles


10.05.320 Effect of regulations.

(1) No parent or guardian of any minor child shall authorize or knowingly permit any such minor child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or state law.

(2) Provisions of this chapter relating to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein. (Ord. 371 § 31, 1997)


10.05.330 Bicycle dealers.

Every person engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles shall maintain a record of every bicycle purchased, giving the name and address of the person from whom purchased, a description of such bicycle by name or make, the frame number thereof, and the license number, if any, found thereon. (Ord. 371 § 32, 1997)


10.05.340 Parking.

No person shall park a bicycle upon a street or upon a sidewalk except in a rack to support the bicycle, or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 371 § 33, 1997)


10.05.350 Bicycle licenses.

The city administrator may issue bicycle licenses to bicycle owners requesting such licenses, for purpose of identification. Fees for such bicycle licenses shall be set by the city administrator or by resolution. (Ord. 371 § 34, 1997)

IX. Existing Regulations


10.05.360 Existing signs and regulations.

All official traffic signs and signals existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, such as stop signs, caution signs, slow signs, no-reverse-turn signs, signs designating time limits for parking or prohibiting parking, lines marked on streets or curbs designating parking areas or markers designating loading zones, parking meters, and all other official traffic signs or signals erected, installed or painted for the purpose of directing, controlling, and regulating traffic, are hereby approved. (Ord. 371 § 35, 1997)

X. Violations – Penalties


10.05.370 Violations – Penalties.

(1) Violation of any provision of this chapter which incorporates a state statute, which is a misdemeanor, shall be punishable as a violation with a fine not to exceed $1,000.

(2) Except where other penalties are specifically provided, the penalty for a violation of any provision of this chapter which incorporates a state statute which is a violation shall be identical to the penalties for those state statutes.

(3) Where any section of this chapter is substantially similar to a state statute, but does not adopt the state statute by reference, the maximum and minimum penalties shall be limited to the maximum and minimum fines provided for in the substantially similar statute.

The provisions of this section shall not be construed to affect penalties provided by any section of this chapter which are less severe than the penalties provided for in a substantially similar state statute. For purposes of this chapter, a state statute is substantially similar to a city ordinance if the same conduct is prescribed and the elements of the offense are the same.

(4) Any person found to have violated any other provision of this chapter shall incur a civil penalty not to exceed $250.00, together with the cost of repairing any city property damaged by such violation or removing any materials placed or left on city roads or property in violation of this chapter.

(5) Whether or not a state statute incorporated by this chapter or substantially similar to any section of this chapter provides for imprisonment, no imprisonment shall be allowed under any section of this chapter. (Ord. 486 § 9, 2009; Ord. 448 § 19, 2004; Ord. 371 § 36, 1997)


Chapter 10.10 ABANDONED, INOPERABLE AND DISCARDED VEHICLES

Sections:

10.10.010    Definitions.

10.10.020    Removal and sale of abandoned vehicle.

10.10.030    Immediate custody and removal of vehicle constituting hazard.

10.10.040    Removal of vehicle on private property without hearing.

10.10.050    Rights and liabilities of owner.

10.10.060    Lien for towing.

10.10.070    Notice prior to removal – Methods – Contents.

10.10.080    Notice after removal – Method – Contents.

10.10.090    Hearing to contest validity of removal and custody.

10.10.100    Exemption from notice – Hearing requirements for vehicle held in criminal investigation.

10.10.110    Sale of vehicle not reclaimed.

10.10.120    Disposal of vehicle valued at $1,000 or less, but more than $200.00.

10.10.130    Disposal of vehicle valued at $200.00 or less.

10.10.140    Certificate of sale – Issuing certificate of title and registration card for vehicle.

10.10.150    Return of sale – Proceeds.

10.10.160    Claim by former owner to proceeds of sale.

10.10.170    Declaration of public nuisance.

10.10.180    Prohibited action.

10.10.190    Storing an abandoned vehicle.

10.10.200    Entry upon private property.


10.10.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

(1) “Abandoned vehicle” means a vehicle, or a major part thereof, which is in one or more of the following conditions:

(a) Inoperative;

(b) Wrecked;

(c) Dismantled;

(d) Partially dismantled;

(e) Abandoned;

(f) Junked;

(g) Without an unexpired license plate lawfully affixed thereto;

(h) Illegally parked.

(2) “City” means the city of Veneta.

(3) “City administrator” means the city administrator of the city of Veneta, or the city administrator’s designee.

(4) “City police” means the Veneta city police department or any law enforcement agency with which the city contracts for law enforcement services, including, but not limited to, the Lane County Sheriff.

(5) “Division” means the motor vehicles division of the Oregon Department of Transportation.

(6) “Hearings officer” means a hearings officer appointed by the city of Veneta to conduct hearings as provided in this chapter.

(7) “Holiday” means all federally observed holidays where routine postal services are not provided.

(8) “Qualified vehicle appraiser” means a person who holds a certificate issued under ORS 819.230. (Ord. 349 § 1, 1994)


10.10.020 Removal and sale of abandoned vehicle.

(1) After providing notice required under VMC 10.10.070 and, if requested, a hearing under VMC 10.10.090, the city police may take a vehicle into custody and remove the vehicle if:

(a) The city police have authority to believe the vehicle is disabled or abandoned; and

(b) The vehicle has been parked or left standing upon any public way for a period in excess of 24 hours without authorization by statute or local ordinance.

(2) The authority in this section to remove and take vehicles into custody is in addition to any authority to remove and take vehicles into custody under VMC 10.10.030 and 10.10.040.

(3) Subject to VMC 10.10.050, vehicles and the contents of vehicles removed and taken into custody under this section are subject to a lien as provided under VMC 10.10.060.

(4) When removing a vehicle under this section, the city police shall cause the vehicle to be appraised within a reasonable time by a qualified vehicle appraiser.

(5) Vehicles removed and taken into custody under this section are subject to sale under VMC 10.10.110 or 10.10.120 if the vehicles are not reclaimed as provided under VMC 10.10.050 or returned to the owner or person entitled to possession under VMC 10.10.090. (Ord. 349 § 2, 1994)


10.10.030 Immediate custody and removal of vehicle constituting hazard.

(1) The city police may immediately take custody of a vehicle that is disabled, abandoned, parked or left standing unattended on a city street, alley, road or highway right-of-way and that is in such a location as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to motor vehicle traffic using the city street, alley, road or highway.

(2) As used in this section, a hazard or obstruction includes, but is not necessarily limited to:

(a) Any vehicle that is parked so that any part of the vehicle extends within the paved portion of the travel lane;

(b) Any vehicle that is parked so that any part of the vehicle extends within the highway shoulder or bicycle lane of any highway during or into the period between sunset and sunrise if the vehicle presents a clear danger.

(3) As used in this section, hazard or obstruction does not include parking in a designated parking area along any highway or, except as described in subsection (2) of this section, parking temporarily on the shoulder of the highway as indicated by a short passage of time and by the operation of the hazard lights of the vehicle, the raised hood of the vehicle, or advance warning with emergency flares or emergency signs.

(4) After taking a vehicle into custody under this section the city administrator shall give the notice described in VMC 10.10.080 and, if requested, a hearing described under VMC 10.10.090.

(5) The authority in this section to remove and take vehicles into custody is in addition to any authority to remove and take vehicles into custody under VMC 10.10.020 and 10.10.040.

(6) Subject to VMC 10.10.050, vehicles and the contents of vehicles removed and taken into custody under this section are subject to a lien as provided in VMC 10.10.060.

(7) After a vehicle is removed under this section, the city administrator shall cause the vehicle to be appraised within a reasonable time by a qualified vehicle appraiser.

(8) Vehicles removed and taken into custody under this section are subject to sale or disposition under VMC 10.10.110 or 10.10.120 if the vehicles are not reclaimed under VMC 10.10.050 or returned to the owner or person entitled thereto under VMC 10.10.090. (Ord. 349 § 3, 1994)


10.10.040 Removal of vehicle on private property without hearing.

(1) The city police may take custody of and remove a vehicle that is on private property if:

(a) The owner or person in lawful possession of the land requests the removal; and

(b) The vehicle is parked or left standing upon the property without the express consent of the owner or person in lawful possession or control of the property.

(2) No notice or hearing is required when vehicles are taken into custody pursuant to this section.

(3) The authority in this section to remove and take vehicles into custody is in addition to any authority to remove and take vehicles into custody under VMC 10.10.020 and 10.10.030.

(4) Subject to VMC 10.10.050, vehicles and the contents of vehicles removed and taken into custody under this section are subject to a lien as provided under VMC 10.10.060.

(5) When a vehicle is removed pursuant to this section, it shall be appraised within a reasonable time by a qualified vehicle appraiser.

(6) Vehicles removed and taken into custody under this section are subject to sale or disposition under VMC 10.10.110 or 10.10.120, if the vehicles are not reclaimed under VMC 10.10.050. (Ord. 349 § 4, 1994)


10.10.050 Rights and liabilities of owner.

The owner, a person entitled to possession or any person with an interest shown on the certificate of title of a vehicle taken into custody under VMC 10.10.020, 10.10.030 or 10.10.040:

(1) Is liable for all costs and expenses incurred in the removal, preservation and custody of the vehicle and its contents except that:

(a) The owner or person entitled to the vehicle is not liable for nor shall be required to pay storage charges for a period in excess of 60 days;

(b) A security interest holder is not liable under this subsection unless the security interest holder reclaims the vehicle;

(2) May reclaim the vehicle at any time after it is taken into custody and before the vehicle is sold or disposed of under VMC 10.10.110 or 10.10.120 upon presentation to the city administrator of satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession and upon payment of costs and expenses for which the person is liable under this section;

(3) If the vehicle is taken into custody under VMC 10.10.020 or 10.10.030, has a right to request and have a hearing under VMC 10.10.090;

(4) If the vehicle is sold or disposed of under VMC 10.10.110, 10.10.120 or 10.10.130, has no further right, title or claim to or interest in the vehicle or the contents of the vehicle;

(5) If the vehicle is sold or disposed of under VMC 10.10.110, has a right to claim the balance of the proceeds from the sale or disposition as provided under VMC 10.10.160;

(6) Has no right to a hearing if the vehicle is taken into custody under VMC 10.10.040 or is disposed of under VMC 10.10.130. (Ord. 349 § 5, 1994)


10.10.060 Lien for towing.

(1) Except as otherwise provided by this section, a person shall have a lien on the vehicle and its contents if the person, at the request of the city police or the city administrator, tows any of the following vehicles:

(a) An abandoned vehicle appraised at a value of more than $200.00 by a qualified vehicle appraiser;

(b) A vehicle taken into custody under VMC 10.10.020, 10.10.030 or 10.10.040, unless it is an abandoned vehicle appraised at a value of $200.00 or less by a qualified vehicle appraiser;

(c) A vehicle left parked or standing in violation of ORS 811.555, 811.570, or VMC 10.05.110 or 10.05.120.

(2) A lien established under this section shall be on the vehicle and its contents for the just and reasonable charges for the towing service performed and any storage provided. The lien shall be subject to the provisions for liens under ORS 98.812(3). The person holding the lien may retain possession of the vehicle and contents until the charges on which the lien is based are paid. A lien described under this section does not attach:

(a) To the contents of any vehicle taken from public property until 15 days after taking the vehicle into custody;

(b) To the contents of any vehicle that is taken into custody for a violation of ORS 811.555, 811.570, or VMC 10.05.110 or 10.05.120.

(3) A person who tows any vehicle at the request of the city police or the city administrator under VMC 10.10.020 or 10.10.030 shall provide written notice approved by the city, containing information on the procedures necessary to obtain a hearing under VMC 10.10.090. The notice shall be provided to each person who seeks to redeem the vehicle. This subsection does not apply to a person who tows an abandoned vehicle that is appraised at a value of $200.00 or less by a qualified vehicle appraiser. (Ord. 384 § 2, 1998; Ord. 349 § 6, 1994)


10.10.070 Notice prior to removal – Methods – Contents.

If the city police propose to take custody of a vehicle under VMC 10.10.020, the city shall provide notice before the proposed removal and custody and shall provide an explanation of procedures available for obtaining a hearing under VMC 10.10.090. Notice required under this section shall comply with all of the following:

(1) Notice shall be given by both of the following methods:

(a) The city police shall affix a citation to the vehicle with the required information.

(b) The city administrator shall mail notice by first class mail, at least three days before taking the vehicle into custody, with the required information to the owners and to any lessors or security interest holders at the address of each as shown by the records of the division. The three-day period under this subsection does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays.

(2) Notice shall state all of the following:

(a) That the vehicle will be subject to being taken into custody and removed by the city police if the vehicle is not removed before the time set by the city police;

(b) The statute, ordinance or rule violated by the vehicle and under which the vehicle will be removed;

(c) The place where the vehicle will be held in custody or the telephone number and address of the city administrator that will provide the information;

(d) That the vehicle, if taken into custody and removed by the city police, will be subject to towing and storage charges and that a lien will attach to the vehicle and its contents;

(e) That the vehicle will be sold to satisfy the costs of towing and storage if the charges are not paid;

(f) That the owner, possessor or person having an interest in the vehicle is entitled to a hearing, before the vehicle is impounded, to contest the proposed custody and removal if a hearing is timely requested;

(g) That the owner, possessor or person having an interest in the vehicle may also challenge the reasonableness of any towing and storage charges at the hearing;

(h) The time within which a hearing must be requested and that a request for a hearing must be submitted, in writing, to the city administrator. (Ord. 426 § 1, 2001; Ord. 349 § 7, 1994)


10.10.080 Notice after removal – Method – Contents.

(1) If the city police take custody of a vehicle under VMC 10.10.030, the city administrator shall mail notice by first class and registered or certified mail with one mailing return receipt requested, within 48 hours of the removal, with an explanation of procedures available for obtaining a hearing under VMC 10.10.090 to the owners of the vehicle and any lessors or security interest holders as shown in the records of the division. The notice shall state that the vehicle has been taken into custody and shall give the location of the vehicle and describe procedures for the release of the vehicle and for obtaining a hearing under VMC 10.10.090. The 48-hour period under this subsection does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays.

(2) Any notice given under this section after a vehicle is taken into custody and removed shall state all of the following:

(a) That the vehicle has been taken into custody and removed by the city police, and the ordinance under which the vehicle has been taken into custody and removed;

(b) The location of the vehicle or the telephone number and address of the city administrator, from whom the location of the vehicle may be obtained;

(c) That the vehicle is subject to towing and storage charges, the amount of charges that have accrued to the date of the notice and the daily storage charges;

(d) That the vehicle and its contents are subject to a lien for payment of the towing and storage charges and that the vehicle and its contents will be sold to cover the charges if the charges are not paid by a date specified;

(e) That the owner, possessor or person having an interest in the vehicle and its contents is entitled to a prompt hearing to contest the validity of taking the vehicle into custody and removing it and to contest the reasonableness of the charges for towing and storage if a hearing is timely requested;

(f) That a hearing must be requested within five days, by submitting the request for hearing in writing to the city administrator. A request for hearing is submitted only when it is actually received by the city administrator;

(g) That the vehicle and its contents may be immediately reclaimed by presentation to the city administrator of satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession and either payment of the towing and storage charges or the deposit of cash security or a bond equal to the charges with the city. (Ord. 349 § 8, 1994)


10.10.090 Hearing to contest validity of removal and custody.

A person provided notice under VMC 10.10.070 or 10.10.080 or any other person who reasonably appears to have an interest in the vehicle may request a hearing under this section to contest the validity of the removal and custody under VMC 10.10.030 or proposed removal and custody of a vehicle under VMC 10.10.020 by submitting a request for hearing to the city administrator not more than five days from the mailing date of the notice. The five-day period in this section does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays. A hearing under this section shall comply with all of the following:

(1) If the city administrator receives a request for hearing before the vehicle is taken into custody and removed, the vehicle shall not be removed unless the vehicle constitutes a hazard.

(2) A request for hearing shall be in writing and shall state grounds upon which the person requesting the hearing believes that the custody and removal of the vehicle is not justified.

(3) Upon receipt of a request for a hearing under this section, the city administrator shall set a time for the hearing within 72 hours of the receipt of the request and shall provide notice of the hearing to the person requesting the hearing and to the owners of the vehicle and any lessors or security interest holders shown in the records of the division, if not the same as the person requesting the hearing. The 72-hour period in this subsection does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays.

(4) If the hearings officer finds, after hearing and by substantial evidence on the record, that the custody and removal of a vehicle was:

(a) Invalid, the hearings officer shall order the immediate release of the vehicle to the owner or person with right of possession. If the vehicle is released under this subsection, the person to whom the vehicle is released is not liable for any towing or storage charges. If the person has already paid the towing and storage charges on the vehicle, the city shall reimburse the person for the charges. New storage costs on the vehicle will not start to accrue, however, until more than 24 hours after the time the vehicle is officially released to the person under this subsection;

(b) Valid, the hearings officer shall order the vehicle to be held in custody until the costs of the hearing and all towing and storage costs are paid by the party claiming the vehicle. If the vehicle has not yet been removed, the hearings officer shall order its removal.

(5) A person who fails to appear at a hearing under this section is not entitled to another hearing unless the person provides reasons satisfactory to the hearings officer for the person’s failure to appear.

(6) The city is only required to provide one hearing under this section for each time the city police take a vehicle into custody and remove the vehicle, or the city administrator proposes to remove the vehicle.

(7) A hearing under this section may be used to determine the reasonableness of the charge for towing and storage of the vehicle. Towing and storage charges set by law, ordinance or rule or that comply with law, ordinance or rule are reasonable for purposes of this subsection.

(8) The hearings officer shall provide a written statement of the results of a hearing held under this section to the person requesting the hearing.

(9) Hearings held under this section may be informal in nature, but the presentation of evidence in a hearing shall be consistent with the presentation of evidence required for contested cases under ORS 183.450.

(10) The hearings officer at a hearing under this section may be an officer, official or employee of the city, but shall not have participated in any determination or investigation related to taking into custody and removing the vehicle that is the subject of the hearing.

(11) The determination of a hearings officer at a hearing under this section is final and is not subject to appeal. (Ord. 349 § 9, 1994)


10.10.100 Exemption from notice – Hearing requirements for vehicle held in criminal investigation.

A vehicle that is being held as part of any criminal investigation is not subject to any requirements under VMC 10.10.070, 10.10.080 and 10.10.090. (Ord. 349 § 10, 1994)


10.10.110 Sale of vehicle not reclaimed.

(1) If a vehicle taken into custody under VMC 10.10.020, 10.10.030 and 10.10.040 is not reclaimed within 30 days after it is taken into custody, the city shall either:

(a) Sell the vehicle and its contents at public auction in the manner provided in ORS 87.192 and 87.196; or

(b) Dispose of the vehicle in a manner provided by resolution of the Veneta city council.

(2) The contents of any vehicle sold under this section are subject to the same conditions of sale as the vehicle in which they are found.

(3) The authority to dispose of a vehicle under this section is in addition to any authority under VMC 10.10.030.

(4) Funds received from the sale of a vehicle or its contents under this section shall be disposed of as provided in VMC 10.10.150.

(5) Upon sale of a vehicle under this section, the city administrator shall issue a certificate of sale as described in VMC 10.10.140. (Ord. 349 § 11, 1994)


10.10.120 Disposal of vehicle valued at $1,000 or less, but more than $200.00.

(1) If a vehicle taken into custody under VMC 10.10.020, 10.10.030 or 10.10.040 is appraised at a value of $1,000 or less, or if it is an abandoned vehicle appraised at a value of $1,000 or less but more than $200.00, the city may dispose of the vehicle without notice and public auction if any of the following occur:

(a) The owner of the vehicle and any lessor or security interest holder shown in the records of the division sign a release, under oath, disclaiming any future interest in the vehicle;

(b) The owner and any lessor or security interest holder shown in the records of the division have been sent notification of the location of the vehicle and, within 15 days after the date the notification is mailed, the persons notified have not signed releases or the vehicle has not been reclaimed. Failure to sign a release or to reclaim the vehicle shall constitute a waiver of interest in the vehicle.

(2) If the city intends to dispose of a vehicle under this section, the city administrator shall do all of the following:

(a) File with the division an affidavit describing the vehicle, and stating the location and appraised value of the vehicle and that the vehicle will be junked or dismantled;

(b) Surrender the registration plates of the vehicle, if any, to the division;

(c) Include in the affidavit a statement that any notice required under this section has been provided;

(d) Forward any release of interest completed under this section to the division.

(3) Upon completion of the requirements under this section, the city may sell the vehicle without notice and public auction to any of the persons described in this subsection. The city administrator shall issue to the person purchasing the vehicle a certificate of sale described under VMC 10.10.140 and shall notify the person that the person might be required by the provisions of ORS 819.016 to apply for a salvage title. The city may sell a vehicle under this subsection to any of the following:

(a) A wrecker with a certificate issued under ORS 822.110;

(b) Any other person who complies with the provisions of and executes the forms required by ORS 819.010. The forms required by ORS 819.010 shall be included with the certificate of sale described under VMC 10.10.140.

(4) Upon disposition of a vehicle under this section the vehicle shall cease to be a vehicle for purposes of the vehicle code, except as provided in the following:

(a) The person purchasing the vehicle is subject to the provisions of ORS 819.010 and 819.040 relating to salvage procedures and requirements for destruction of vehicles;

(b) The provisions of VMC 10.10.040 apply to the procedures of the division relating to the vehicle, as appropriate.

(5) The authority to sell or dispose of a vehicle under this section is in addition to any authority under VMC 10.10.110. (Ord. 349 § 12, 1994)


10.10.130 Disposal of vehicle valued at $200.00 or less.

(1) If an abandoned vehicle appraised at a value of $200.00 or less by a qualified vehicle appraiser is not claimed within 15 days from the time it was towed, the person who towed the vehicle or the city administrator, if the city administrator chooses to dispose of the vehicle, shall:

(a) Notify the registered owner and secured parties as provided in subsection (2) of this section;

(b) Photograph the vehicle;

(c) Notify the division that the vehicle will be disposed of; and

(d) Unless the vehicle is claimed by a person entitled to possession of it, dispose of the vehicle and its contents to a person who holds a valid wrecker certificate issued under ORS 822.110.

(2) The person who tows the vehicle or the city administrator, if the city administrator chooses to dispose of the vehicle, shall give written notice within 48 hours of the day the vehicle was towed to the persons who names are furnished under subsection (1) of this section. The 48 hours shall not include Saturdays, Sundays or holidays. The notice shall state that a person entitled to possession of the vehicle has 15 days from the date the vehicle was towed to claim the vehicle and that if the vehicle is not claimed it will be disposed of as provided in this section.

(3) Disposal of a vehicle to a wrecker as provided in this section extinguishes all prior ownership and possessory rights.

(4) The notice provided to the division pursuant to subsection (1) of this section shall be submitted to the division on such forms as the division may, by rule, require. A copy of the notification to the division may be submitted to the wrecker instead of submitting to the wrecker ownership or other title documents for the vehicle. (Ord. 349 § 13, 1994)


10.10.140 Certificate of sale – Issuing certificate of title and registration card for vehicle.

When any vehicle is sold under VMC 10.10.110 or 10.10.120, the city administrator, at the time of the payment of the purchase price, shall execute a certificate of sale in duplicate. The original certificate of sale shall be delivered to the purchaser and the copy shall be retained by the city. The certificate of sale shall contain the name and address of the purchaser, the date of sale, the consideration paid, a description of the vehicle and a stipulation that no warranty is made as to the condition or title of the vehicle. (Ord. 349 § 14, 1994)


10.10.150 Return of sale – Proceeds.

(1) When any vehicle is sold under VMC 10.10.110 or 10.10.120, the city shall transmit to the motor vehicles division, and to the finance officer of the city, a return of sale setting forth:

(a) A description of the vehicle;

(b) The purchase price;

(c) The name and address of the purchaser;

(d) The costs incurred in the sale; and

(e) The costs and expenses incurred in the removal, preservation and custody of the vehicle.

(2) The city shall transmit to the city finance officer, with the return of sale, the balance of the proceeds of the sale. The city may deduct from the proceeds the costs incurred in the sale and the costs and expenses incurred in the removal, preservation and custody of the vehicle. Upon receipt of the return of sale and such proceeds, the finance officer shall deposit such proceeds in the general fund of the city and file in the city records the return of sale. (Ord. 349 § 15, 1994)


10.10.160 Claim by former owner to proceeds of sale.

At any time within two years after the sale of a vehicle under VMC 10.10.110, the former owner or former interest holder of the vehicle may recover the proceeds from the general fund of the city under VMC 10.10.150 by filing a claim with the city. The claim shall be audited and paid as are other claims against the city. (Ord. 349 § 16, 1994)


10.10.170 Declaration of public nuisance.

Abandoned vehicles are hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight, deterioration and unsightliness, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of abandoned vehicles on public or private property is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance, which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 349 § 17, 1994)


10.10.180 Prohibited action.

(1) A person commits the offense of abandoning a vehicle if the person abandons a vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property.

(2) The owner of the vehicle as shown by the records of the division shall be considered responsible for the abandonment of the vehicle in the manner prohibited by this section and shall be liable for the cost of removal and disposition of the abandoned vehicle.

(3) A vehicle abandoned in violation of this section is subject to the provisions for removal of abandoned vehicles under VMC 10.10.020 to 10.10.040 and to being sold as provided under VMC 10.10.110 or 10.10.120, whether the vehicle is abandoned on public or private property.

(4) The offense described in this section is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed $250.00. This penalty may be imposed in addition to any other charges, costs or assessments imposed pursuant to the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 349 § 18, 1994)


10.10.190 Storing an abandoned vehicle.

(1) A person commits the offense of storing an abandoned vehicle if the person stores an abandoned vehicle upon any private property.

(2) The owner of the real property where the vehicle is stored is responsible for the storage of the abandoned vehicle in the manner prohibited by this section.

(3) The offense described in this section, storing an abandoned vehicle, is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed $250.00. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 349 § 19, 1994)


10.10.200 Entry upon private property.

(1) The city police are authorized at all reasonable times to enter upon private property and examine any vehicle for the purpose of determining whether or not such vehicle is abandoned. However, before entering upon private property, the city police shall obtain the consent of an occupant thereof or a warrant of the municipal court authorizing entry for the purpose of inspection, except when an emergency exists.

(2) No search warrant shall be issued under the terms of this chapter until an affidavit has been filed with the municipal court, showing probable cause for such inspection by stating the purpose and extent of the proposed inspection, citing the ordinance codified in this chapter as the basis for such inspection, whether it is an inspection instituted by a complaint, or other specific or general information concerning the vehicle in question or the property on which it is situated.

(3) It is unlawful for any person to interfere with or attempt to prevent the city police from entering upon private premises and inspecting any vehicle when an emergency exists or the city police exhibit a warrant authorizing entry. (Ord. 349 § 20, 1994)


Title 11    (Reserved)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES

Chapters:

12.05    Construction Permits

12.10    City Parks

12.15    Public Rights-of-Way

12.20    Naming of Streets and Numbering of Buildings
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



Chapter 12.05 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS

Sections:

12.05.010    Definitions.

12.05.020    Permit – Required.

12.05.030    Permit – Application.

12.05.040    Permit – Insurance requirement.

12.05.050    Permit – Fees and deposits.

12.05.060    Opening streets by franchise holder.

12.05.070    Opening unpaved streets – Deposit required.

12.05.080    Opening unpaved streets – Duty of permittees.

12.05.090    Opening unpaved streets – Refund of deposit.

12.05.100    Opening paved streets – Restoration deposit.

12.05.110    Barriers.

12.05.120    Restoration.

12.05.130    Opening holes in streets, alleys, sidewalks and driveway approaches.

12.05.140    Building construction sidewalk permit required.

12.05.150    Storage of materials in streets during sidewalk construction.

12.05.160    Curbs – Requirements.

12.05.170    Driveways – Curb cut.

12.05.180    Driveways – Existing driveways.

12.05.190    Driveways – General construction requirements.

12.05.200    Driveways – Near alleys.

12.05.210    Driveways – Areas of limited street improvements.

12.05.220    Driveways – Use of public property.

12.05.230    Construction in public right-of-way.

12.05.240    Interfering with water or sewer mains or pipes.

12.05.250    Violation – Penalty.


12.05.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall mean:

(1) “Apron” means that portion of the driveway approach extending from the gutter flow line to the property line and lying between the end slopes of the driveway approach. When the sidewalk is located at the curb line, the apron is a part of the sidewalk section.

(2) “City” means the city of Veneta, including city council, city staff, and personnel retained to assist the city, such as the city attorney and city engineer.

(3) “Curb cut” means the curb opening for the apron and lying between the end slopes of the driveway approach.

(4) “Driveway” means an area on private property where automobiles and other vehicles are operated or allowed to stand.

(5) “Driveway approach” means an area, construction or improvement between the roadway of a public street and private property intended to provide access for vehicles from the roadway of a public street to a definite area of the private property, such as a parking area, a driveway, or a door at least seven feet wide, intended and used for the ingress and egress of vehicles. The component parts of the driveway approach are termed the apron, the end slopes or curb return and the sidewalk section.

(6) “End slopes” means those portions of the driveway approach which provide a transition from the normal curb and sidewalk elevations to the grade of the apron, either by means of a sloping surface or by means of a curb return together with the area between the projected tangents of the curb return.

(7) “Frontage” means that boundary of private property abutting the city street line.

(8) “Paved street” means all concrete or asphalted concrete streets.

(9) “Sidewalk section” means that portion of the driveway approach lying between the back edge of the sidewalk and the apron plus the end slopes measured at the front edge of the sidewalk.

(10) “Single ownership” means:

(a) A parcel of land under one ownership;

(b) A parcel of land under 15-year lease or longer, operated under separate management;

(c) A group of separately owned parcels operated under group management.

(11) “Unpaved street” means those gravel, oil matted, or oil shot streets and all streets not falling under the definition of a paved street. (Ord. 188 § 1, 1979; Ord. 149 § 1, 1977)


12.05.020 Permit – Required.

(1) No person shall do work affecting the public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the city. Work affecting the public right-of-way includes, but is not limited to, construction, reconstruction, grading, oiling, repair, opening, excavation of or connection to a sidewalk, street, public utilities, curb, driveway, culvert, ditch or sewer and water main in a public right-of-way, but does not include construction of public improvements performed under city contract.

(2) The city engineer or his designated representative shall have the power and duty to enforce all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 188 § 1, 1979; Ord. 149 § 2, 1977)


12.05.030 Permit – Application.

(1) Application for a public improvement work permit shall be made to the city on forms provided.

(2) The city may require such information including drawings, surveys and plans as deemed necessary to determine whether the proposed work conforms to this chapter, standard specification of the city and sound engineering and design practices.

(3) If the city determines that it is proper that the proposed work be done, the application shall be approved and upon payment of the required fee and deposits, the city shall issue the permit.

(4) If a permit is denied, the applicant shall have the right of appeal to the council. (Ord. 149 § 3, 1977)


12.05.040 Permit – Insurance requirement.

No permit shall be issued unless an applicant agrees to save the city, its officer, employees and agents harmless from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed under said permit. The acceptance of a permit under VMC 12.05.020 shall constitute such an agreement by the applicant whether the same is expressed or not. (Ord. 149 § 4, 1977)


12.05.050 Permit – Fees and deposits.

An application for a public improvement work permit must be accompanied by the application fee set by council resolution. Any deposits required by the city must be tendered before the permit is issued. (Ord. 149 § 5, 1977)


12.05.060 Opening streets by franchise holder.

(1) If the application for a permit as required in VMC 12.05.020 is legally entitled, under a franchise held by him, to use a part of the streets, alleys or other public grounds for the purpose desired, the city shall issue him a written permit. The city shall designate in the permit the part of the streets, alleys, or other public grounds to be used and the applicant shall strictly conform to the designation so made.

(2) All water pipes and mains, gas pipes and mains and all other pipes and conduits which are laid underground shall be laid at a depth of not less than 30 inches below the city established street grade or alley grade and not less than 30 inches below the ground level in utility easements. In case it becomes necessary, for the proper or necessary public use of any street, alley or other public ground of the city, that any pipes heretofore laid be removed or that any use made thereof by a public franchise holder be discontinued, the city shall give written notice to the franchise holder or to his assigns, to remove the same, within a reasonable time. In case of failure to comply with such requirement, the city may remove the same. (Ord. 149 § 6, 1977)


12.05.070 Opening unpaved streets – Deposit required.

Before issuing a permit for the excavation of an unpaved street, the city shall require the applicant to deposit a sum established by the city to be held for a period not to exceed one month from the date of completion as a guaranty that the street shall be permanently restored to its former condition. In no case shall the deposit be less than $150.00. The permit shall state the time the street may be disturbed and what precautions, if any, shall be observed by the permittee for the protection of the public while the street is disturbed. (Ord. 149 § 7, 1977)


12.05.080 Opening unpaved streets – Duty of permittees.

A person receiving a permit to excavate an unpaved street shall take all reasonable precautions to prevent injury to the public and to the city during the excavation, shall faithfully observe any direction in that regard made in the permit, and shall make the excavation promptly to restore the street to as good condition as before he disturbed the same. (Ord. 149 § 8, 1977)


12.05.090 Opening unpaved streets – Refund of deposit.

At the expiration of one month, the permittee may apply to the city for a refund of the sum deposited as provided in VMC 12.05.070. The city shall thereupon examine the excavation covered by the permit in question and if it shall find the excavation fully restored to its former condition and settled, it shall endorse its approval on the permit and, thereupon, the finance officer shall refund the deposit. (Ord. 149 § 9, 1977)


12.05.100 Opening paved streets – Restoration deposit.

When the city approves an application to cut through, dig through or tunnel under the pavement, or excavate or dig in a paved street or alley, a permit shall be issued only upon deposit of an amount of money which will be necessary to restore, repair and replace the pavement in the street to its former condition for a period of one year. In no case shall the deposit be less than $200.00. (Ord. 149 § 10, 1977)


12.05.110 Barriers.

Every person to whom a permit is issued shall, before proceeding with any work under the permit, erect a suitable barrier and guard on the site of the proposed project. The barrier shall be kept and maintained upon the site until the project is fully restored to a safe and usable condition. (Ord. 149 § 11, 1977)


12.05.120 Restoration.

In proceeding to cut a pavement or dig up or excavate a street, the holder of the permit shall do the work in the manner specified in the application for the permit and as recommended by the city. He shall replace the earth underneath the pavement, tamp the same solid and restore the same to as nearly its former condition as possible according to the specifications of the city. If the city engineer after inspection finds that repairs do not conform to city specifications, he may do such work himself and shall file with the finance officer a statement of financial cost of such repair, restoration and replacement. If the city engineer repairs the pavement, thereupon the finance officer shall, from the deposit so made by the applicant for the permit, pay the amount of the costs of such inspection, repair and restoration as called for in the statement of the city engineer, and the balance of such deposit shall be returned to the person procuring such permit in the manner provided by law for the payment of claims against the city. (Ord. 149 § 12, 1977)


12.05.130 Opening holes in streets, alleys, sidewalks and driveway approaches.

(1) When it is necessary to open a concrete pavement, sidewalk or asphalt pavement with concrete base within the boundary of the streets or alleys, the boundary of the area to be removed shall be cut with a concrete saw to a minimum depth of three inches. If the concrete is more than six inches in depth, the saw cut shall extend not less than one-half the thickness of the concrete.

(2) No opening in the pavement shall be made which comes closer than three feet to the face of the curb or two feet from a full joint.

(3) All ditches or similar excavations in the streets shall be backfilled in layers not to exceed six inches and each layer tamped with a mechanical tamper or backfilled with bar run. (Ord. 149 § 13, 1977)


12.05.140 Building construction sidewalk permit required.

(1) Concurrent with the issuance of a building permit for the construction of a dwelling or business structure or an addition to a dwelling or business structure, the value of which is $5,000 or more except for structures within an industrial zone, the owner, builder or contractor to whom the building permit is issued shall obtain a sidewalk construction permit for the construction of a sidewalk within the dedicated right-of-way for the full frontage in which sidewalk in good repair does not exist. The sidewalk construction shall be completed within the building construction period of within one year after the sidewalk permit is issued, whichever is the lesser.

(2) The city may issue a permit and certificate allowing noncompliance with the provisions of subsection (1) of this section to the owner, builder or contractor when the construction of a sidewalk is impractical for one or more of the following reasons:

(a) Sidewalk grades have not and cannot be established for the property in question within a reasonable period of time;

(b) Future installation of public utilities or street paving would of necessity cause severe damage to existing sidewalks;

(c) Right-of-way width is insufficient to accommodate a sidewalk on one or both sides of the street;

(d) Topography or contours make the construction of a sidewalk impractical;

(e) The noncompliance provided in subsection (2)(a) and (b) of this section shall be temporary and shall cease to exist when grades are established for sidewalks by the city or when public utilities or street paving have been constructed. The permit shall indicate the reason for its issuance.

(3) If the owner, builder or contractor considers the construction of a sidewalk impractical for any reason other than those listed in subsection (2) of this section, the planning commission shall recommend to the council whether a permit and certificate of noncompliance shall or shall not be granted, and the council may grant a permit and certificate of noncompliance.

(4) If a sidewalk is not constructed within the time required by this section, then the city may construct it for the full street frontage in front of the property and proceed with the construction, assessment and collection of costs as provided by ordinance.

(5) The city engineer is hereby authorized to establish street grades and sidewalk grades when requested to do so by either the Veneta planning commission or Veneta city council. (Ord. 188 § 1, 1979; Ord. 149 § 14, 1977)


12.05.150 Storage of materials in streets during sidewalk construction.

Whenever the city shall issue a permit to build or repair a sidewalk in the city, the city shall include in the permit permission to use the street abutting the sidewalk for the purpose of storing material used in the repair and building of the sidewalk for which the permit is issued. In no event shall more than one-fourth of the street width from curb to curb be used for the purpose of storing material used in the construction or repair of a sidewalk. No person shall store in the streets material to be used in the construction or repair of sidewalks without first obtaining the permit. Upon violation of this section, the permit may be revoked and all material removed from the street. (Ord. 149 § 15, 1977)


12.05.160 Curbs – Requirements.

All curbs shall conform to the official street grades and built and constructed to city specifications. (Ord. 149 § 16, 1977)


12.05.170 Driveways – Curb cut.

(1) A permit shall be required for each request for a curb cut or cuts.

(2) The length of driveway curb cuts shall be specified in the permit and shall not exceed the following dimensions:

(a) Each single ownership shall be entitled to a 20-foot driveway curb cut;

(b) Where a driveway curb cut or curb cuts in excess of 20 feet are requested for a single ownership, the maximum lengths which the city engineer may approve are as follows:

    Number of	Total Length

Frontage    Curb Cuts	of Curb Cuts

40 ft. or less    1	20 ft.

Over 40 ft. to 100 ft.    2	20 ft. + 50% of frontage over 40 ft.

Over 100 ft. to 200 ft.    3	50 ft. + 30% of frontage over 100 ft.

Over 200 ft. to 300 ft.    4	80 ft. + 20% of frontage over 200 ft.

Over 300 ft. to 500 ft.    5	100 ft. + 10% of frontage over 300 ft.

Over 500 ft.    6	120 ft. +5% of frontage over 500 ft.

(3) A safety island of not less than 22 feet of full height curb shall in all cases be provided between driveway approaches under one ownership or where practicable under separate ownership.

(4) The maximum length of a single curb cut shall not exceed 35 feet unless authorized by the city as provided in VMC 12.05.230.

(5) In no event shall the curb cut extend beyond the property line or rights of the owner requesting the curb cut, except in those cases where:

(a) The adjacent property owner gives written approval; or

(b) In the opinion of the city such a decision is necessary for safe ingress and egress for the traveling public.

(6) Where a curb cut is requested, the curb shall not be removed by breaking the curb with a sledge or other device which may cause damage to the remaining structure without first scoring or cutting the curb to a depth of not less than two inches deep. (Ord. 149 § 17, 1977)


12.05.180 Driveways – Existing driveways.

All driveway approaches deemed reconstructed by the owners of the property served by such approaches are to conform to the provisions of this chapter on or before three months after notice is given. Should the change not be made within the above mentioned time, the street adjacent to the approaches shall be appropriately marked for parking by the city, so as to conform to the provisions of this chapter regulating the length and number of approaches. In reconstructing and remodeling the driveway approaches to conform to the provisions of this chapter, curbs shall be replaced in accordance with city specifications. (Ord. 149 § 18, 1977)


12.05.190 Driveways – General construction requirements.

(1) All driveway approaches between the curb line and the back edge of the sidewalk shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete. The concrete of the driveway approach, including the sidewalk section, shall be constructed in accordance with city specifications.

(2) The sidewalk section of the driveway approach shall be finished and scored as specified by the city for typical sidewalk construction.

(3) Driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with the standard plans for driveway approaches as filed with the city, a copy of which shall be furnished the applicant at the time the application is filed. (Ord. 149 § 19, 1977)


12.05.200 Driveways – Near alleys.

Driveway approaches located within five feet of the existing curb return at an alley intersection may be merged with the alley intersection pavement, thus requiring the removal of the existing curb return. The total apron length plus the alley width, measured at the curb line of the apron to the opposite alley line, shall not exceed 40 feet. (Ord. 149 § 20, 1977)


12.05.210 Driveways – Areas of limited street improvements.

(1) Where standard gutters and curbs have not been installed, the width of driveway approach shall be measured along the property line and shall comply with the same requirements as specified in VMC 12.05.170 for curb cuts. Permits shall not be issued for a surface improvement or paving on the street right-of-way between driveway approaches unless a concrete curb or other physical obstruction, of a design satisfactory to the city is constructed and maintained by the applicant along his property line, so that the entrance and exit of vehicles to and from the applicant’s property will be restricted to the established driveway approaches.

(2) Where standard curbs and gutters have not been installed the applicant shall pave the driveway approaches or other area within the right-of-way with asphaltic concrete or other material approved by the city so that it merges with the street pavement; the paving shall be adequate and suitable for the traffic to be carried as determined by the city. The extended paving between the property line and the street pavement shall be to the established grade or other slope fixed by the city to provide for proper runoff. The paving between the property line and the street pavement may be wider than the driveway approach at the property line in order to provide for safe deceleration of vehicles turning into the applicant’s premises. If the applicant’s paving is extended beyond the property line into a street right-of-way at an intersection or crossroad, the city may require the applicant to construct a suitable traffic island or curb to provide for the protection of such municipal facilities as may be necessary. (Ord. 149 § 21, 1977)


12.05.220 Driveways – Use of public property.

City street rights-of-way may not be used for private commercial purposes except under provision of a revocable permit. A permit for the construction of driveway approaches shall not be issued unless vehicles to be served or serviced can be parked entirely within the private property lines. (Ord. 149 § 22, 1977)


12.05.230 Construction in public right-of-way.

(1) The city is authorized to issue revocable permits for construction or location of a retaining wall, steps, terracing, plantings, planters, walkways and other appurtenances to be installed within a public street right-of-way at the property owner’s risk and subject to the following conditions and requirements:

(a) Adequate plans and specification for the proposed installation are to be submitted;

(b) Conditions approved by the city shall be attached to and made a part of the application and plans;

(c) That the structures comply with the applicable codes or ordinances with regard to structural safety, sanitation and fire safety requirements;

(d) That the requests be evaluated by the city engineer in regard to any adverse effect on adjoining properties;

(e) That there be no interference with the use of the public street for roadway, walkway, existing or proposed utilities and other authorized uses;

(f) That said permit shall be revocable by the city on demand;

(g) All plantings shall be first approved by the city;

(h) The form of permit shall be approved by the city attorney;

(i) A fee for the permit shall be charged to the applicant;

(j) The applicant shall agree to the foregoing conditions for the approval of said permit.

(2) The city council only is authorized to permit special sidewalk surfaces over and above those allowed in the standard specifications for paving; provided, however:

(a) The surfacing has been approved by the city staff from the standpoint of nonskid requirements;

(b) Blocks, bricks, and other sidewalk materials are imbedded to prevent rocking or differential settlement;

(c) The surfacing will be maintained by and at the expense of the abutting property owner. (Ord. 149 § 23, 1977)


12.05.240 Interfering with water or sewer mains or pipes.

No person shall attach to or detach from any water or sewer main or service pipe or other connection through which water or sewer facilities are supplied by the city to the consumers of the city or interfere in any manner with such pipes or connections, without having first obtained a permit from the city and without having paid the required fees and deposits. (Ord. 149 § 24, 1977)


12.05.250 Violation – Penalty.

Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate, fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a violation and shall be fined an amount not to exceed $360.00; and each day during which any violation hereof shall continue and persist after due notice thereof shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this chapter. (Ord. 486 § 3, 2009; Ord. 149 § 25, 1977)


Chapter 12.10 CITY PARKS

Sections:

12.10.010    Definition.

12.10.020    Park hours.

12.10.030    Prohibited smoking and tobacco use.

12.10.040    Glass containers.

12.10.050    Exclusion from park.

12.10.060    Posting of rules.

12.10.070    Violation – Penalty.


12.10.010 Definition.

(1) “Electronic smoking device” (or “ESD”) means any electronic product that delivers nicotine or any other substance to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, vape pen or e-hookah. Electronic smoking device includes any component, part, or accessory of such a product, whether or not sold separately.

(2) “Park” means:

(a) Any land owned or leased by the city of Veneta and designated as a park by the city council;

(b) Any city owned or managed parks and recreational facilities; and

(c) All public parks, trails, open space, and special use areas, such as sport fields, basketball courts, and swimming pools, including spectator areas and bleachers.

(3) “Smoke” and “smoking” mean inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant, or other tobacco-like product or substance in any manner or in any form. “Smoke” and “smoking” also include the use of an electronic smoking device which creates an aerosol, in any manner or in any form. A lighted smoking instrument includes an activated or “switched on” ESD. (Ord. 520 § 1(A), 2015; Ord. 485 § 1, 2008)


12.10.020 Park hours.

All city parks will be open between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. from October 1st through April 30th (winter) and between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. from May 1st through September 30th (summer).

No person shall be in a city park except during the hours stated in this section or when a permit has been issued by the city administrator or public works superintendent under Chapter 10.05 VMC, Article IV. (Ord. 485 § 2, 2008)


12.10.030 Prohibited smoking and tobacco use.

No person may chew any tobacco or tobacco product, or smoke or carry any lighted smoking instrument, in any park or within 10 feet of the boundary of any park. (Ord. 520 § 1(B), 2015; Ord. 485 § 3, 2008)


12.10.040 Glass containers.

No person may bring glass containers into the areas described in VMC 12.10.030. (Ord. 485 § 4, 2008)


12.10.050 Exclusion from park.

(1) Any police officer or city employee, in connection with their duties imposed by law, shall have the authority to exclude from all or any part of a public park any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any other provision of the Veneta Municipal Code, or any law of the state of Oregon.

The excluded person need not be charged, tried, or convicted of any crime or infraction in order for exclusion noticed to be issued or effective. The exclusion may be based upon the observation of the police officer or city employee, or upon the type of civilian reports that would ordinarily be relied upon by police officers in the determination of probable cause.

(2) The exclusion period shall be as follows:

(a) For a period not exceeding one year, if the offense is a felony.

(b) For a period not exceeding 30 days, for a first offense which is not a felony.

(c) For a period not exceeding six months, for a second offense which is not a felony.

(3) Written notice signed by the issuing party shall be issued to the person excluded. The notice shall specify the reason for the exclusion, the places and duration of exclusion, the consequences for failure to comply with the notice, and appeal rights. The notice shall be given either by personal delivery or by certified mail with return receipt requested. Unless otherwise expressly set forth in the notice, the exclusion shall commence immediately upon delivery of the notice to the excluded person.

(4) The city administrator is authorized to prepare a form of notice to be used in connection with excluding a person from a park, and to include such other information as is considered necessary for administrative purposes.

(5) A person excluded under this section may not enter or remain upon any part of the park from which the person is excluded during the period of exclusion. An excluded person who enters or remains upon any part of the park from which the person has been excluded is a trespasser and may be arrested and prosecuted as such.

(6) A person receiving an exclusion notice may seek a hearing before the city administrator of the city of Veneta or his designee to have the notice rescinded or shortened. The request for a hearing must be delivered to the city of Veneta administrative offices within seven days after issuance of exclusion notice. A hearing should be scheduled within seven days of the request.

(7) At the appeal hearing, the violation must be proved by a preponderance of the evidence in order to uphold the exclusion notice. The city administrator or his designee may consider information that would not be admissible under the evidence rules in a court of law but which the city administrator or his designee considers relevant and trustworthy.

If the violation is proved, the exclusion notice shall be upheld; but upon good cause shown, the city administrator or his designee may shorten the duration of the exclusion. If the violation is not proved by a preponderance of the evidence, the notice shall be rescinded.

(8) The exclusion shall remain in effect during the pendency of any administrative or judicial proceeding.

(9) No determination of facts made by a person conducting a hearing under this section shall have any collateral estoppel effect on the subsequent criminal prosecution or civil proceeding, and shall not preclude litigation of the same facts in a subsequent criminal prosecution or civil proceeding. (Ord. 485 § 5, 2008)


12.10.060 Posting of rules.

The city administrator may cause signs to be posted at city parks giving notice of these park rules. (Ord. 485 § 6, 2008)


12.10.070 Violation – Penalty.

(1) Except as otherwise provided, a violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each violation of a provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense, and each day that a violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to any other forfeiture, remedy, order or penalty provided by law or city ordinance, the court, upon a determination of a violation, may order the exclusion of a person from a park or any portion thereof for a period of up to one year.

(2) The remedies provided by this chapter for violations are cumulative and the pursuit of one remedy shall not preclude the use of another. In addition, where an offense defined under this section is also punishable under state law or Veneta ordinance, the use of a remedy or remedies provided by this chapter shall not be construed as an election of remedies or otherwise preclude the use of additional or alternative remedies or penalties provided by law. (Ord. 485 § 7, 2008)


Chapter 12.10 CITY PARKS

Sections:

12.10.010    Definition.

12.10.020    Park hours.

12.10.030    Prohibited smoking and tobacco use.

12.10.040    Glass containers.

12.10.050    Exclusion from park.

12.10.060    Posting of rules.

12.10.070    Violation – Penalty.


12.10.010 Definition.

(1) “Electronic smoking device” (or “ESD”) means any electronic product that delivers nicotine or any other substance to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, vape pen or e-hookah. Electronic smoking device includes any component, part, or accessory of such a product, whether or not sold separately.

(2) “Park” means:

(a) Any land owned or leased by the city of Veneta and designated as a park by the city council;

(b) Any city owned or managed parks and recreational facilities; and

(c) All public parks, trails, open space, and special use areas, such as sport fields, basketball courts, and swimming pools, including spectator areas and bleachers.

(3) “Smoke” and “smoking” mean inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant, or other tobacco-like product or substance in any manner or in any form. “Smoke” and “smoking” also include the use of an electronic smoking device which creates an aerosol, in any manner or in any form. A lighted smoking instrument includes an activated or “switched on” ESD. (Ord. 520 § 1(A), 2015; Ord. 485 § 1, 2008)


12.10.020 Park hours.

All city parks will be open between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. from October 1st through April 30th (winter) and between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. from May 1st through September 30th (summer).

No person shall be in a city park except during the hours stated in this section or when a permit has been issued by the city administrator or public works superintendent under Chapter 10.05 VMC, Article IV. (Ord. 485 § 2, 2008)


12.10.030 Prohibited smoking and tobacco use.

No person may chew any tobacco or tobacco product, or smoke or carry any lighted smoking instrument, in any park or within 10 feet of the boundary of any park. (Ord. 520 § 1(B), 2015; Ord. 485 § 3, 2008)


12.10.040 Glass containers.

No person may bring glass containers into the areas described in VMC 12.10.030. (Ord. 485 § 4, 2008)


12.10.050 Exclusion from park.

(1) Any police officer or city employee, in connection with their duties imposed by law, shall have the authority to exclude from all or any part of a public park any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any other provision of the Veneta Municipal Code, or any law of the state of Oregon.

The excluded person need not be charged, tried, or convicted of any crime or infraction in order for exclusion noticed to be issued or effective. The exclusion may be based upon the observation of the police officer or city employee, or upon the type of civilian reports that would ordinarily be relied upon by police officers in the determination of probable cause.

(2) The exclusion period shall be as follows:

(a) For a period not exceeding one year, if the offense is a felony.

(b) For a period not exceeding 30 days, for a first offense which is not a felony.

(c) For a period not exceeding six months, for a second offense which is not a felony.

(3) Written notice signed by the issuing party shall be issued to the person excluded. The notice shall specify the reason for the exclusion, the places and duration of exclusion, the consequences for failure to comply with the notice, and appeal rights. The notice shall be given either by personal delivery or by certified mail with return receipt requested. Unless otherwise expressly set forth in the notice, the exclusion shall commence immediately upon delivery of the notice to the excluded person.

(4) The city administrator is authorized to prepare a form of notice to be used in connection with excluding a person from a park, and to include such other information as is considered necessary for administrative purposes.

(5) A person excluded under this section may not enter or remain upon any part of the park from which the person is excluded during the period of exclusion. An excluded person who enters or remains upon any part of the park from which the person has been excluded is a trespasser and may be arrested and prosecuted as such.

(6) A person receiving an exclusion notice may seek a hearing before the city administrator of the city of Veneta or his designee to have the notice rescinded or shortened. The request for a hearing must be delivered to the city of Veneta administrative offices within seven days after issuance of exclusion notice. A hearing should be scheduled within seven days of the request.

(7) At the appeal hearing, the violation must be proved by a preponderance of the evidence in order to uphold the exclusion notice. The city administrator or his designee may consider information that would not be admissible under the evidence rules in a court of law but which the city administrator or his designee considers relevant and trustworthy.

If the violation is proved, the exclusion notice shall be upheld; but upon good cause shown, the city administrator or his designee may shorten the duration of the exclusion. If the violation is not proved by a preponderance of the evidence, the notice shall be rescinded.

(8) The exclusion shall remain in effect during the pendency of any administrative or judicial proceeding.

(9) No determination of facts made by a person conducting a hearing under this section shall have any collateral estoppel effect on the subsequent criminal prosecution or civil proceeding, and shall not preclude litigation of the same facts in a subsequent criminal prosecution or civil proceeding. (Ord. 485 § 5, 2008)


12.10.060 Posting of rules.

The city administrator may cause signs to be posted at city parks giving notice of these park rules. (Ord. 485 § 6, 2008)


12.10.070 Violation – Penalty.

(1) Except as otherwise provided, a violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each violation of a provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense, and each day that a violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to any other forfeiture, remedy, order or penalty provided by law or city ordinance, the court, upon a determination of a violation, may order the exclusion of a person from a park or any portion thereof for a period of up to one year.

(2) The remedies provided by this chapter for violations are cumulative and the pursuit of one remedy shall not preclude the use of another. In addition, where an offense defined under this section is also punishable under state law or Veneta ordinance, the use of a remedy or remedies provided by this chapter shall not be construed as an election of remedies or otherwise preclude the use of additional or alternative remedies or penalties provided by law. (Ord. 485 § 7, 2008)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



12.15.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases, unless the context otherwise requires, shall mean:

(1) “City” means the city of Veneta, Oregon.

(2) “Person” means an individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, joint stock company, and similar entities.

(3) “Public rights-of-way” include, but are not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all other public ways or areas, including subsurface and air space over these areas.

(4) “Within the city” means territory over which the city now has or acquires jurisdiction for the exercise of its powers. (Ord. 381 § 1, 1998)


12.15.020 Jurisdiction.

The city of Veneta has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over all public rights-of-way within the city under the authority of the City Charter and state law. (Ord. 381 § 2, 1998)


12.15.030 Scope of regulatory control.

The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over each public right-of-way whether the city has a fee, easement, or other legal interest in the right-of-way. The city has jurisdiction and regulatory control over each right-of-way whether the legal interest in the right-of-way was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure or other means. (Ord. 381 § 3, 1998)


12.15.040 City permission requirement.

No person may occupy or encroach on a public right-of-way without the permission of the city. The city grants permission to use rights-of-way by franchises, licenses and permits. (Ord. 381 § 4, 1998)


12.15.050 Obligations of the city.

The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory control over a public right-of-way by the city is not official acceptance of the right-of-way, and does not obligate the city to maintain or repair any part of the right-of-way. (Ord. 381 § 5, 1998)


12.15.060 Obligations of property owners.

It shall be the duty of all property owners of record to keep all sidewalks abutting owner’s property clean and in good repair. All property owners shall be required to keep the sidewalks abutting owner’s property free and clear of any defects, obstructions, and hazardous materials. Failing in such duty, the property owner shall be liable to any person injured thereby and shall hold harmless and indemnify the city for any costs the city may incur as a result of the defective sidewalk. (Ord. 526 § 2, 2016)


Chapter 12.10 CITY PARKS

Sections:

12.10.010    Definition.

12.10.020    Park hours.

12.10.030    Prohibited smoking and tobacco use.

12.10.040    Glass containers.

12.10.050    Exclusion from park.

12.10.060    Posting of rules.

12.10.070    Violation – Penalty.


12.10.010 Definition.

(1) “Electronic smoking device” (or “ESD”) means any electronic product that delivers nicotine or any other substance to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, vape pen or e-hookah. Electronic smoking device includes any component, part, or accessory of such a product, whether or not sold separately.

(2) “Park” means:

(a) Any land owned or leased by the city of Veneta and designated as a park by the city council;

(b) Any city owned or managed parks and recreational facilities; and

(c) All public parks, trails, open space, and special use areas, such as sport fields, basketball courts, and swimming pools, including spectator areas and bleachers.

(3) “Smoke” and “smoking” mean inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant, or other tobacco-like product or substance in any manner or in any form. “Smoke” and “smoking” also include the use of an electronic smoking device which creates an aerosol, in any manner or in any form. A lighted smoking instrument includes an activated or “switched on” ESD. (Ord. 520 § 1(A), 2015; Ord. 485 § 1, 2008)


12.10.020 Park hours.

All city parks will be open between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. from October 1st through April 30th (winter) and between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. from May 1st through September 30th (summer).

No person shall be in a city park except during the hours stated in this section or when a permit has been issued by the city administrator or public works superintendent under Chapter 10.05 VMC, Article IV. (Ord. 485 § 2, 2008)


12.10.030 Prohibited smoking and tobacco use.

No person may chew any tobacco or tobacco product, or smoke or carry any lighted smoking instrument, in any park or within 10 feet of the boundary of any park. (Ord. 520 § 1(B), 2015; Ord. 485 § 3, 2008)


12.10.040 Glass containers.

No person may bring glass containers into the areas described in VMC 12.10.030. (Ord. 485 § 4, 2008)


12.10.050 Exclusion from park.

(1) Any police officer or city employee, in connection with their duties imposed by law, shall have the authority to exclude from all or any part of a public park any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any other provision of the Veneta Municipal Code, or any law of the state of Oregon.

The excluded person need not be charged, tried, or convicted of any crime or infraction in order for exclusion noticed to be issued or effective. The exclusion may be based upon the observation of the police officer or city employee, or upon the type of civilian reports that would ordinarily be relied upon by police officers in the determination of probable cause.

(2) The exclusion period shall be as follows:

(a) For a period not exceeding one year, if the offense is a felony.

(b) For a period not exceeding 30 days, for a first offense which is not a felony.

(c) For a period not exceeding six months, for a second offense which is not a felony.

(3) Written notice signed by the issuing party shall be issued to the person excluded. The notice shall specify the reason for the exclusion, the places and duration of exclusion, the consequences for failure to comply with the notice, and appeal rights. The notice shall be given either by personal delivery or by certified mail with return receipt requested. Unless otherwise expressly set forth in the notice, the exclusion shall commence immediately upon delivery of the notice to the excluded person.

(4) The city administrator is authorized to prepare a form of notice to be used in connection with excluding a person from a park, and to include such other information as is considered necessary for administrative purposes.

(5) A person excluded under this section may not enter or remain upon any part of the park from which the person is excluded during the period of exclusion. An excluded person who enters or remains upon any part of the park from which the person has been excluded is a trespasser and may be arrested and prosecuted as such.

(6) A person receiving an exclusion notice may seek a hearing before the city administrator of the city of Veneta or his designee to have the notice rescinded or shortened. The request for a hearing must be delivered to the city of Veneta administrative offices within seven days after issuance of exclusion notice. A hearing should be scheduled within seven days of the request.

(7) At the appeal hearing, the violation must be proved by a preponderance of the evidence in order to uphold the exclusion notice. The city administrator or his designee may consider information that would not be admissible under the evidence rules in a court of law but which the city administrator or his designee considers relevant and trustworthy.

If the violation is proved, the exclusion notice shall be upheld; but upon good cause shown, the city administrator or his designee may shorten the duration of the exclusion. If the violation is not proved by a preponderance of the evidence, the notice shall be rescinded.

(8) The exclusion shall remain in effect during the pendency of any administrative or judicial proceeding.

(9) No determination of facts made by a person conducting a hearing under this section shall have any collateral estoppel effect on the subsequent criminal prosecution or civil proceeding, and shall not preclude litigation of the same facts in a subsequent criminal prosecution or civil proceeding. (Ord. 485 § 5, 2008)


12.10.060 Posting of rules.

The city administrator may cause signs to be posted at city parks giving notice of these park rules. (Ord. 485 § 6, 2008)


12.10.070 Violation – Penalty.

(1) Except as otherwise provided, a violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each violation of a provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense, and each day that a violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to any other forfeiture, remedy, order or penalty provided by law or city ordinance, the court, upon a determination of a violation, may order the exclusion of a person from a park or any portion thereof for a period of up to one year.

(2) The remedies provided by this chapter for violations are cumulative and the pursuit of one remedy shall not preclude the use of another. In addition, where an offense defined under this section is also punishable under state law or Veneta ordinance, the use of a remedy or remedies provided by this chapter shall not be construed as an election of remedies or otherwise preclude the use of additional or alternative remedies or penalties provided by law. (Ord. 485 § 7, 2008)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



12.20.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this section is to:

(1) Establish a consistent and accurate methodology for site identifications;

(2) Provide standards and procedures for addressing and readdressing properties within the city;

(3) Provide standards and procedures for naming and renaming roads with the city;

(4) Enhance site identification for improved emergency dispatch response, mail delivery and geographic information systems (GIS) compatibility;

(5) Provide a public participatory process that includes dispute resolution procedures. (Ord. 498 § 1, 2010)


12.20.020 All buildings to be numbered and streets named.

All buildings within the city shall be numbered and streets within the city named in the manner provided in this chapter. (Ord. 498 § 2, 2010)


12.20.030 Addressing standards.

Addresses shall be assigned by the city consistent with the following standards:

(1) Eligibility for Address.

(a) All occupied structures shall be assigned separate addresses.

(b) Unoccupied structures or properties may be assigned addresses if it is necessary to identify the site because of utility connections, assessment, permit issuance, emergency dispatching or other similar reasons.

(c) Temporary residences shall be addressed separately from other uses on the property.

(2) Placement of Addresses. Addresses shall be placed and located in a manner that is readily visible and legible from the street, as required by the Uniform Fire Code. Additionally:

(a) Addresses placed on residential structures shall be a minimum of four inches high and in a contrasting color to the structure’s surface.

(b) Addresses placed on commercial structures shall be a minimum of six inches high and in a contrasting color to the structure’s surface.

(c) Structures having street frontage shall have addresses posted on the wall adjacent to the entrance facing the street.

(d) Structures not having street frontage shall have additional addresses posted at the driveway entrance to the road serving the site.

(e) Commercial and industrial business parks, multifamily developments and mobilehome parks shall post addresses on each site. Buildings with multiple addresses shall have the address range identified on the structure through the use of on-building signs.

(3) Sequence of Numbering. Addresses shall be assigned consistent with the regional grid established by the city administrator or designee and on file in the city planning department, in consideration of the following:

(a) Addresses for the city of Veneta have five digits. The numbering for streets going east to west begins with a two and the numbers for streets going south to north begin with an eight. Numbers get larger going north or east, and numbers get smaller going south or west.

(b) Sites located on the south or west side of a road shall be assigned even numbered addresses and remain consistent the entire length of the road regardless of its meandering.

(c) Sites located on the north or east side of a road shall be assigned odd numbered addresses and remain consistent the entire length of the road regardless of its meandering.

(d) Street numbers shall be assigned at that point where the driveway intersects the road. Should a driveway entrance be relocated, the address shall be changed consistent with the applicable grid system unless the original driveway is maintained in a usable condition.

(e) Subdivisions shall be assigned different address numbers for adjacent parallel streets. Additionally, streets that are within the same subdivision and have similar names shall not have the same address numbers. (See Exhibit 1, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and incorporated by this reference, for an example of assigning addresses in general.)

(4) Exceptions. The following exceptions may be granted when the addressing of property conflicts with the addressing standards:

(a) The addressing on any road may remain sequential along the entire length of that road regardless of its meandering.

(b)(i) The addressing of loops or circles shall start the lowest number at one end where the loop or circle intersects the road giving access to the loop or circle, and shall progressively increase, consistent with the grid, until the loop or circle terminates;

(ii) If the loop or circle is located at the terminus of the road giving access to it, the loop or circle shall be given a separate name only if appropriate road name signage can be installed. This type of loop or circle necessitates odd and even addresses meeting on the same side of the road. Addresses shall be assigned such that this occurs at the most logical location based on road design. (See Exhibit 2, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and incorporated by this reference, for examples of assigning addresses on loop or circle streets.)

(c) Addresses of sites with circular driveways shall be assigned to that access point having the lowest number on the grid.

(d) Commercial and industrial business parks, multifamily developments and mobilehome parks may be assigned building, suite, unit or space numbers or letters when there are insufficient numbers available to assign addresses according to the grid. In the case of multiple floor structures, with one door accessing the street and unit doors accessed from within the street door, address with unit numbers, with the first digit of each number consistent with the floor level. In such a case, numbers, rather than letters, shall be used for identification. (See Exhibit 3, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and incorporated by this reference, for examples of assigning addresses to unit structures.)

(e) Sites without access to the road adjacent to the front property line shall be addressed in reference to the grid of the road accessing the site. (Ord. 498 § 3, 2010)


12.20.040 Street names shall be approved by the city.

In the course of development by public and private parties, there shall be new streets established. Except for extensions of existing streets, no street name shall be used that will duplicate or be confused with names of existing streets. Street names and numbers shall conform to the established pattern in the surrounding area.

(1) When development is proposed by the city, the council shall establish the names of public streets. 

(2) In the course of other development, such as subdivisions or planned developments, developers may propose names for streets as part of their application for development or improvement (such as an unnamed alley). Proposed names shall be reviewed by the city, the fire district, and the 911 fire district and other affected agencies to avoid conflicts with similar or closely sounding names. The officials designated to make final decisions on such development (typically the planning commission or city administrator) shall establish names of any public and private streets as part of those development decisions. (Ord. 498 § 4, 2010)


12.20.050 Road sign standards.

City, public and private roads shall be identified with a city approved road sign. An “approved” road sign is a sign built and placed by or at the direction of the city public works department, and shall be consistent with the following standards:

(1) City and public road signs shall be green with white letters and constructed to city standards.

(2) Private road signs shall be blue with white letters and constructed to city standards.

(3) Road signs shall be placed and maintained so they are fully visible from the intersecting roadway. City and public road signs shall be maintained by the city, whereas private road signs shall be maintained by the residents served by the road.

(4) When a city or public road is named or renamed at the request of other than the city, the first road sign(s) shall be purchased by the person(s) who made the request. Future replacement signs will be provided by the city at no charge to the residents whom the road is serving. The purchase of private road signs is the sole responsibility of the residents served by the road. (Ord. 498 § 5, 2010)


12.20.060 Initiation of action.

The following provisions establish procedures to request new or revised addresses and to request the naming or renaming of roads:

(1) Addresses. 

(a) The addressing or readdressing of properties may be considered by the city upon receipt of a permit application, except:

(i) New subdivisions shall have addresses assigned after approval of the final plat by the city.

(ii) Commercial and industrial business parks, multifamily developments and mobilehome parks shall have addresses assigned after final development approval by the city. 

(iii) Addressed requested which are inconsistent with VMC 12.20.030.

(b) The city may initiate the reassignment of addresses without the consent of the affected property owners under the following circumstances:

(i) Emergency service providers state in a written request that the numbering sequence identifying properties is in such disarray that emergency response times may be compromised; 

(ii) The development or redevelopment of an area requires new street addresses as a result of the creation or extension of roads; or

(iii) The city determines a new street address is in the public interest.

(2) Road Names. The naming or renaming of roads shall occur consistent with the following procedures:

(a) The city administrator or designee may administratively approve the naming of roads upon receipt of a complete application and conforming to VMC 12.20.070 or when reviewing applications for subdivisions, commercial and industrial business parks, multifamily developments and mobilehome parks and in consideration of the following criteria:

(i) The level of development currently being served by the road requires improved identification;

(ii) The potential for the road to be extended to serve additional development requires improved identification; or

(iii) The need to more accurately identify the area for the dispatching of emergency service personnel requires improved identification.

(b) The city may initiate the naming or renaming of a road without the consent of the affected property owners when:

(i) Emergency service providers state in a written request that the current identification of the road is inadequate such that emergency response time may be compromised;

(ii) The development or redevelopment of an area through a special district formation requires new road names as a result of the creation or extension of roads; or

(iii) Any other reason that is in the public interest. (Ord. 498 § 6, 2010)


12.20.070 Submittal requirements.

An application submitted by other than the city or an emergency service provider to name or rename a road shall be in the form of a petition that includes the following:

(1) A statement acknowledging that existing property addresses will change should the road name request be approved;

(2) Three road name choices, in order of preference;

(3) Legal descriptions (township, range, section, tax lot) of all the properties receiving access from this road (county assessors maps are suitable for this purpose);

(4) The current addresses of all the properties receiving access from this road;

(5) The printed or typed names of the owners of all the properties receiving access from this road;

(6) The signatures of the owners of properties receiving access from this road acknowledging and agreeing to the requested change. A minimum of three-fourths of the property owners’ signatures are necessary;

(7) The name, mailing address and phone number of the designated contact person;

(8) A site plan or map showing the location of the road and properties receiving access from this road;

(9) An application fee, as adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 498 § 7, 2010)


12.20.080 Administrative review.

The city may assign new addresses, revise existing addresses and name or rename roads subject to the following procedures:

(1) Type I Actions. The assignment of new or revision of existing addresses for new developments not yet occupied, including new subdivisions, commercial and industrial business parks, multifamily developments and mobilehome parks shall be considered Type I actions. These actions require notice consistent with VMC 12.20.090(1). Staff decisions shall be considered final.

(2) Type II Actions. Revising existing addresses, commercial and industrial business parks, multifamily developments and mobilehome parks shall be considered Type II actions and may be processed pursuant to the following procedures:

(a) Notice shall be given, pursuant to VMC 12.20.090, that the city is considering an application for a Type II action. A minimum of 20 days following the date of notice shall be allowed for public comment on the application;

(b) Following the public comment period, staff shall make a decision consistent with the provisions of this chapter. Notice of this decision shall be given pursuant to VMC 12.20.090;

(c) The staff decision shall be considered final unless written objections, pursuant to VMC 12.20.100, are received within 10 days of the date of the staff decision;

(d) If an appeal of the staff decision is filed, notice shall be given pursuant to VMC 12.20.090 within five days of the expiration of the appeal period.

(3) The naming or renaming of a public or city road outside city limits, but within six miles of the city limits, other than a county road or state highway shall follow the procedure laid out in ORS 227.120. (Ord. 498 § 8, 2010)


12.20.090 Notice requirements.

The following notice requirements shall apply to all address and road name requests. The county assessor’s records shall be used as the official records for notification purposes.

(1) Type I actions require notification to the following parties:

(a) LCOG and 911.

(b) Lane County assessment and taxation.

(c) Lane County fire district.

(d) Lane County sheriff’s department.

(e) Veneta post office.

(f) EPUD or Lane Electric.

(g) County transfer and recycling.

(h) Charter Communications.

(i) Building inspector.

(j) Qwest.

(k) City staff (planner, utility billing, building clerk, public works superintendent, accounting clerk and city recorder).

(l) Others as requested or deemed appropriate.

(2) In addition to those parties notified of Type I actions, Type II actions require notification to:

(a) All property owners whose address will be changed;

(b) All occupants of properties whose address will be changed when records identify a different mailing address for the property owner;

(c) Any local community planning organization which participated in the process. (Ord. 498 § 9, 2010)


12.20.100 Dispute resolution.

Appeals of Type II actions shall be considered by the city council within 30 days of the date of the date when filed. Approval of the appeal shall only be granted when consistent with the provisions of this chapter, as determined by the majority of the participating city council members. Additionally, the following requirements and procedures shall apply to appeals:

(1) Submittal Requirements:

(a) A written description of the basis for the appeal;

(b) Alternative(s) to the administrative review decision;

(c) Any other evidence deemed necessary to support the appellant’s position;

(d) A fee, as adopted by resolution of the city council.

(2) Appeal Procedures. The city council shall consider all appeals of these provisions and render a decision based on the record established to date. Additionally:

(a) At least 10 days prior to considering the appeal, a copy of the appeal shall be mailed pursuant to VMC 12.20.090;

(b) The decision of the city council shall be considered the final decision of the city;

(c) Notice of the decision of the city council shall be given pursuant to VMC 12.20.090. (Ord. 498 § 10, 2010)


Title 13    PUBLIC SERVICES

Chapters:

13.05  Water

13.10  Sewers

13.15  Public Drainage Channels

13.20  Cross Connections

13.25  System Development Charge

13.30  Specifications and Standards for Construction of Public Improvements

13.35  Stormwater Drainage System
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



Chapter 13.05 WATER

Sections:

13.05.010    Short title.

13.05.020    Definitions.

13.05.030    Authority.

13.05.040    Council powers and authority.

13.05.050    Council to set connection fees, penalties and other charges.

13.05.090    Application for connection to water system – Requirements.

13.05.100    Installation of service from main to curb line or property line.

13.05.110    Services outside the city.

13.05.120    Separate service to each house, unit, building or installation.

13.05.130    Access to premises for inspection.

13.05.150    Charges for relocating and altering meters.

13.05.180    Water shortage and water conservation measures.

13.05.220    Unauthorized water use.

13.05.230    Faucet placement.

13.05.240    Abandoned and new revenue producing services.

13.05.250    Water system shut-off – Responsibility.

13.05.260    Damage through pipe and fixtures.

13.05.270    Use of city water and private water.

13.05.280    Operating valves or hydrants without authority.

13.05.300    Unauthorized service extensions.

13.05.310    Violation – Penalty.

Prior legislation: Ords. 153, 167, 332 and 458.


13.05.010 Short title.

This code shall be known as the “water code,” and may be so cited and pleaded. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 1, 1967)


13.05.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean:

“City” means the city of Veneta, Oregon.

“City system” means the city’s property, infrastructure, service yard, and offices connected therewith, clerical or field, existing and necessary for the provision of water, sewage, transportation, and stormwater services, individually or combined, within and without the limits of the city of Veneta, Oregon.

“Person” means any individual, firm, co-partnership, association, corporation, or other legally recognized organization.

“Public works director” means the city public works director or the public works director’s designee.

“Water department” means the total water department of the city of Veneta, including office, service yard, and all employees connected therewith, clerical or field. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 2, 1967)


13.05.030 Authority.

The council shall have charge of the total water works, plant, and city system of the city of Veneta. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 4, 1967)


13.05.040 Council powers and authority.

(1) The council is authorized and empowered to purchase, construct, keep, conduct, extend, and maintain the city system and all necessary plants and facilities to furnish water to the city and to areas adjacent thereto and to areas adjacent to the pipes, conduits, or aqueducts constructed or used for such purposes, and to that end may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, and own and possess such real and personal property within and without the limits of the city as in the judgment of the council may be deemed necessary and convenient.

(2) The council shall have power and authority to enter into the necessary contracts or agreements to purchase all necessary material, equipment, and supplies as it may deem necessary or convenient to the conduct, extension, operation, maintenance, and management of the city system, and to do any other act in the construction, operation, and maintenance of the city system.

(3) The council shall have power and authority to acquire any waterworks or water plant, or part thereof, either by direct purchase or by condemnation proceedings, in the manner prescribed by law for the appropriation of private property for corporate purposes or public use.

(4) The council shall have power and authority to and shall, from time to time, make such regulations as may be necessary for the installation of water mains, and for the apportionment of the cost thereof between property owners and the city.

(5) Excepting such installations as are deemed by the council to be of benefit to the city system as a whole, the council shall not cause to be laid any water mains unless, in its judgment, the revenue that will be derived from the water sales resulting from such installation shall produce a revenue equal to 10 percent per annum of the cost of such project. When the owner of property to be served by a water main, the income from which will not equal a sufficient amount to justify the cost of the project thereof as provided by this chapter and such council regulations, desires such service, the council may cause such project to be done, in accordance with city specifications, at the sole cost and expense of the property owner; such main becoming the sole property of the city upon completion of installation; and at any time thereafter when the annual income from such main shall be sufficient to have justified its construction, the city may reimburse the property owner at a price not exceeding the original cost, less five percent per annum for depreciation.

(6) The council shall have power and authority, by resolution and publication, to designate specific days, dates or hours during which users of water from the city system may use water for irrigation purposes, and may prohibit the use of water from the city system for purposes of irrigation and it shall be unlawful for any person to irrigate or sprinkle in violation of such proclamation.

(7) The council shall have power and authority to do any other act or make any other regulation necessary and convenient for the conduct of its business and the due execution of the power and authority given it by Charter and not contrary to law. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 5, 1967)


13.05.050 Council to set connection fees, penalties and other charges.

(1) The council shall have power and authority to establish all fees, penalties and other charges for connecting to the city system and to provide for the payment of charges, fees, and penalties or when any of the rules and regulations of the city are disregarded or disobeyed. Said fees, penalties, and other charges shall be established by written resolution, without the necessity of amending the ordinance codified in this chapter, and such resolution when duly passed shall provide the lawful fees, penalties and other charges of the city in connection with such city system; provided, however, the requirements of law be complied with in connection therewith.

(2) The council shall have power and authority to classify water services by service pipe size, meter sizes, demand, nature of usage, or other means deemed equitable by the council, and to establish minimum charges by said classification and the establishment of such classification and such minimums shall be by written resolution, without the necessity of amending the ordinance codified in this chapter, and such resolution, when duly and regularly passed, shall be the lawful classification of water services and minimum charges of the city.

(3) The council shall have power and authority to enter into special agreements for water usage and at special rates either greater or less than existing rates to water users within or without the boundaries of the city. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 6, 1967)


13.05.090 Application for connection to water system – Requirements.

(1) The property owner or authorized agent shall make written application for permits to connect premises with the city system, on the forms provided by the city, in which the applicant shall specify the location and the use for which the service is required and shall agree to abide by the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 3.25 VMC governing utility service and other applicable chapters of the Veneta Municipal Code.

(2) No application for a permit to connect any new structure to city water or sewer mains shall be accepted or installed without proof by the applicant of an approved building permit. The application shall only be valid as long as the building permit is valid. The city permit shall be automatically extended if the building permit is extended. When a building permit is terminated or voided for any reason, all fees paid for the building permit, water permit and/or sewer permit shall be forfeited by the applicant as liquidated damages. All systems development charges shall be refunded. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 202 § 1, 1980; Ord. 38 § 10, 1967)


13.05.100 Installation of service from main to curb line or property line.

(1) Upon payment of the connection fee, the city or the consumer shall install a service pipe from the main to the curb or to the property line of the street in which the main is located, including curb stop, meter, and meter box. The city reserves the right to allocate the responsibility for the service pipe installation construction to consumer, at the consumer’s own expense, based upon the location and extent of existing development on the premises, subject to all applicable building, plumbing, and sanitation codes and required inspections, fees and charges of the city.

(2) It shall be the duty of the city to maintain said service line from the main to the curb or property line of the street in which the main is located.

(3) The consumer shall, at consumer’s own expense, install pipes from the curb or the property line of the street in which the main is located to the facilities as desired on consumer’s premises, subject always to building, plumbing, and sanitation codes and required inspections of the city. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 11, 1967)


13.05.110 Services outside the city.

The city may furnish water to places, individuals, companies, towns, and water districts outside the boundaries of the city and may charge therefor rates fixed by the council. In case such service is to companies, towns, or water districts, the aforesaid shall furnish to the city a map of its system, the number of consumers, and other information when called upon to do so, and the city may refuse to sell water to consumers who do not comply with the requirements of this section. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 12, 1967)


13.05.120 Separate service to each house, unit, building or installation.

(1) A separate service shall be furnished to each house or residence being individual and separate unto itself, whether abutting a street, easement, or public thoroughfare, or otherwise; and being not a part of a motel, trailer court, apartment house, or other multiple occupancy installation, nor being a related occupancy.

(2) A separate service shall be required to each unit of separate ownership, and in no event shall one service serve properties under separate ownership. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 13, 1967)


13.05.130 Access to premises for inspection.

City officials, agents, and employees shall at all reasonable times have access to any premises served by the city system for the purpose of inspection, repair, or enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, and in the event that any inspection discloses excessive leaks or any undue waste of water, then the city shall have the right to discontinue water service to such premises until satisfactory repairs have been made. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 14, 1967)


13.05.150 Charges for relocating and altering meters.

(1) When any property owner or his agent being served water by the city shall request a relocation or alteration of the service or meter location, either vertically or horizontally, a determination of advisability of such relocation or alteration shall be made by the public works director. The decision of the public works director, or designee, shall prevail, subject to the order of the council. In no event shall the meter or service be relocated onto private property beyond the property line, except by order of the council. The cost of such relocation or alteration shall be charged to the account of said owner or agent as established in rate resolution. However, should a service or meter relocation or alteration be deemed beneficial to the city by the public works director, or designee, such relocation or alteration may be done by the water department, whether desired by the property owner or not, and such relocation or alteration shall be at the expense of the city.

(2) Whenever a city owned meter is damaged, the water department shall repair the damage and charge the account of said owner or occupant as established in the rate resolution.

(3) When a service pipe, curb stop, meter, or meter box is damaged or destroyed by contractors or others in the performance of construction, excavation, hauling, or other work, or where service pipes are destroyed by electrolysis, the person, contractor, or company responsible for such damage or destruction shall be billed by the city for the cost of repair or replacement of such pipes, curb stops, meter, or meter box as established in the rate resolution. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 16, 1967)


13.05.180 Water shortage and water conservation measures.

(1) In an effort to prevent a water shortage the city council may adopt water conservation measures by resolution.

(2) In the event a water shortage should occur, and it becomes necessary for water to be conserved, or water use restricted, the city council by resolution may place such restrictions and promulgate such regulations in connection therewith as may be necessary until said water shortage is over. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 465 § 1, 2006)


13.05.220 Unauthorized water use.

No person shall use water from the city water system for any other purpose than that stated in the application or to supply in any other way persons without application and permit to do so, and where a violation of these provisions is found to exist, the city may discontinue service. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 23, 1967)


13.05.230 Faucet placement.

No faucets shall be allowed on the outside of any building except hose connections. The city reserves the right to require separate stops or control valves. No faucets shall be allowed on sidewalks or at the curb line where they are accessible to the public. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 24, 1967)


13.05.240 Abandoned and new revenue producing services.

Whenever a service connection to any premises is abandoned or no longer used, or when new buildings are to be erected on the site of old ones and it is desired to increase the size or change the location of the old service connection, the city may cut out or remove such service connection, and any new service required to said premises shall be installed only on application and payment for a new service connection in the regular manner. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 25, 1967)


13.05.250 Water system shut-off – Responsibility.

The city reserves the right at any time without notice to shut off the water supply for repairs, extensions, or nonpayment of rates, or for any other reason. The city shall not be responsible for any damage, such as bursting boilers, pipes or fixtures; stoppage or interruption of water supply, or any other damage resulting therefrom. The city shall not be responsible for broken pipes, leaks, or other defects in water lines or fixtures beyond the property line on private property. It shall be the duty of each property owner to install a shut-off valve on the property served to permit shut-offs for repairing leaks in property owner’s own system, and the city shall not be obligated to close any valve upon any street or alley in order to effect such repairs. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 26, 1967)


13.05.260 Damage through pipe and fixtures.

No water user or any person shall cause or suffer water from the system to run, drain or flow from property having the water connection onto any other property or onto any street or way, and the city shall in no case be liable for damage occasioned from water running from open or faulty fixtures or from broken or damaged pipes beyond the property line. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 27, 1967)


13.05.270 Use of city water and private water.

Owners of premises desiring to use both the city water system and a supply of water other than that furnished by the city may obtain water from the city upon the following conditions, and not otherwise.

Under no circumstances shall a physical connection, direct or indirect, exist or be made in any manner, even temporarily, between the city water supply and the other water supply. Where such connection is found to exist, or where provision is made to connect the two systems by any means, the city water supply shall be shut off from the premises without notice. Service to said premises shall not be restored until satisfactory proof is furnished that the cross connection has been completely and permanently severed. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 28, 1967)


13.05.280 Operating valves or hydrants without authority.

It shall be unlawful for any person without authority from the city to remove, injure, open, close, or in any way tamper with, any water pipe, water main, shut-off valve or hydrant which is a part of the city system. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 29, 1967)


13.05.300 Unauthorized service extensions.

It shall be unlawful for anyone to cause or permit the extension of water service from one dwelling unit, building or parcel of land to another without authority of the city. When additional dwelling units, buildings or parcels of land are connected without proper application and permit, such premises may be charged at double the rate for the time they are in use, and service may be disconnected by the city. The cost of such disconnection shall be established in the rates resolution, and service shall not be restored to said premises until such charge has been paid in full. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 31, 1967)


13.05.310 Violation – Penalty.

Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate, fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a violation and fined an amount not to exceed $360.00; and each day during which any violation hereof shall continue and persist after due notice thereof shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this chapter. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 486 § 1, 2009; Ord. 38 § 32, 1967)


Chapter 13.05 WATER

Sections:

13.05.010    Short title.

13.05.020    Definitions.

13.05.030    Authority.

13.05.040    Council powers and authority.

13.05.050    Council to set connection fees, penalties and other charges.

13.05.090    Application for connection to water system – Requirements.

13.05.100    Installation of service from main to curb line or property line.

13.05.110    Services outside the city.

13.05.120    Separate service to each house, unit, building or installation.

13.05.130    Access to premises for inspection.

13.05.150    Charges for relocating and altering meters.

13.05.180    Water shortage and water conservation measures.

13.05.220    Unauthorized water use.

13.05.230    Faucet placement.

13.05.240    Abandoned and new revenue producing services.

13.05.250    Water system shut-off – Responsibility.

13.05.260    Damage through pipe and fixtures.

13.05.270    Use of city water and private water.

13.05.280    Operating valves or hydrants without authority.

13.05.300    Unauthorized service extensions.

13.05.310    Violation – Penalty.

Prior legislation: Ords. 153, 167, 332 and 458.


13.05.010 Short title.

This code shall be known as the “water code,” and may be so cited and pleaded. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 1, 1967)


13.05.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean:

“City” means the city of Veneta, Oregon.

“City system” means the city’s property, infrastructure, service yard, and offices connected therewith, clerical or field, existing and necessary for the provision of water, sewage, transportation, and stormwater services, individually or combined, within and without the limits of the city of Veneta, Oregon.

“Person” means any individual, firm, co-partnership, association, corporation, or other legally recognized organization.

“Public works director” means the city public works director or the public works director’s designee.

“Water department” means the total water department of the city of Veneta, including office, service yard, and all employees connected therewith, clerical or field. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 2, 1967)


13.05.030 Authority.

The council shall have charge of the total water works, plant, and city system of the city of Veneta. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 4, 1967)


13.05.040 Council powers and authority.

(1) The council is authorized and empowered to purchase, construct, keep, conduct, extend, and maintain the city system and all necessary plants and facilities to furnish water to the city and to areas adjacent thereto and to areas adjacent to the pipes, conduits, or aqueducts constructed or used for such purposes, and to that end may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, and own and possess such real and personal property within and without the limits of the city as in the judgment of the council may be deemed necessary and convenient.

(2) The council shall have power and authority to enter into the necessary contracts or agreements to purchase all necessary material, equipment, and supplies as it may deem necessary or convenient to the conduct, extension, operation, maintenance, and management of the city system, and to do any other act in the construction, operation, and maintenance of the city system.

(3) The council shall have power and authority to acquire any waterworks or water plant, or part thereof, either by direct purchase or by condemnation proceedings, in the manner prescribed by law for the appropriation of private property for corporate purposes or public use.

(4) The council shall have power and authority to and shall, from time to time, make such regulations as may be necessary for the installation of water mains, and for the apportionment of the cost thereof between property owners and the city.

(5) Excepting such installations as are deemed by the council to be of benefit to the city system as a whole, the council shall not cause to be laid any water mains unless, in its judgment, the revenue that will be derived from the water sales resulting from such installation shall produce a revenue equal to 10 percent per annum of the cost of such project. When the owner of property to be served by a water main, the income from which will not equal a sufficient amount to justify the cost of the project thereof as provided by this chapter and such council regulations, desires such service, the council may cause such project to be done, in accordance with city specifications, at the sole cost and expense of the property owner; such main becoming the sole property of the city upon completion of installation; and at any time thereafter when the annual income from such main shall be sufficient to have justified its construction, the city may reimburse the property owner at a price not exceeding the original cost, less five percent per annum for depreciation.

(6) The council shall have power and authority, by resolution and publication, to designate specific days, dates or hours during which users of water from the city system may use water for irrigation purposes, and may prohibit the use of water from the city system for purposes of irrigation and it shall be unlawful for any person to irrigate or sprinkle in violation of such proclamation.

(7) The council shall have power and authority to do any other act or make any other regulation necessary and convenient for the conduct of its business and the due execution of the power and authority given it by Charter and not contrary to law. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 5, 1967)


13.05.050 Council to set connection fees, penalties and other charges.

(1) The council shall have power and authority to establish all fees, penalties and other charges for connecting to the city system and to provide for the payment of charges, fees, and penalties or when any of the rules and regulations of the city are disregarded or disobeyed. Said fees, penalties, and other charges shall be established by written resolution, without the necessity of amending the ordinance codified in this chapter, and such resolution when duly passed shall provide the lawful fees, penalties and other charges of the city in connection with such city system; provided, however, the requirements of law be complied with in connection therewith.

(2) The council shall have power and authority to classify water services by service pipe size, meter sizes, demand, nature of usage, or other means deemed equitable by the council, and to establish minimum charges by said classification and the establishment of such classification and such minimums shall be by written resolution, without the necessity of amending the ordinance codified in this chapter, and such resolution, when duly and regularly passed, shall be the lawful classification of water services and minimum charges of the city.

(3) The council shall have power and authority to enter into special agreements for water usage and at special rates either greater or less than existing rates to water users within or without the boundaries of the city. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 6, 1967)


13.05.090 Application for connection to water system – Requirements.

(1) The property owner or authorized agent shall make written application for permits to connect premises with the city system, on the forms provided by the city, in which the applicant shall specify the location and the use for which the service is required and shall agree to abide by the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 3.25 VMC governing utility service and other applicable chapters of the Veneta Municipal Code.

(2) No application for a permit to connect any new structure to city water or sewer mains shall be accepted or installed without proof by the applicant of an approved building permit. The application shall only be valid as long as the building permit is valid. The city permit shall be automatically extended if the building permit is extended. When a building permit is terminated or voided for any reason, all fees paid for the building permit, water permit and/or sewer permit shall be forfeited by the applicant as liquidated damages. All systems development charges shall be refunded. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 202 § 1, 1980; Ord. 38 § 10, 1967)


13.05.100 Installation of service from main to curb line or property line.

(1) Upon payment of the connection fee, the city or the consumer shall install a service pipe from the main to the curb or to the property line of the street in which the main is located, including curb stop, meter, and meter box. The city reserves the right to allocate the responsibility for the service pipe installation construction to consumer, at the consumer’s own expense, based upon the location and extent of existing development on the premises, subject to all applicable building, plumbing, and sanitation codes and required inspections, fees and charges of the city.

(2) It shall be the duty of the city to maintain said service line from the main to the curb or property line of the street in which the main is located.

(3) The consumer shall, at consumer’s own expense, install pipes from the curb or the property line of the street in which the main is located to the facilities as desired on consumer’s premises, subject always to building, plumbing, and sanitation codes and required inspections of the city. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 11, 1967)


13.05.110 Services outside the city.

The city may furnish water to places, individuals, companies, towns, and water districts outside the boundaries of the city and may charge therefor rates fixed by the council. In case such service is to companies, towns, or water districts, the aforesaid shall furnish to the city a map of its system, the number of consumers, and other information when called upon to do so, and the city may refuse to sell water to consumers who do not comply with the requirements of this section. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 12, 1967)


13.05.120 Separate service to each house, unit, building or installation.

(1) A separate service shall be furnished to each house or residence being individual and separate unto itself, whether abutting a street, easement, or public thoroughfare, or otherwise; and being not a part of a motel, trailer court, apartment house, or other multiple occupancy installation, nor being a related occupancy.

(2) A separate service shall be required to each unit of separate ownership, and in no event shall one service serve properties under separate ownership. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 13, 1967)


13.05.130 Access to premises for inspection.

City officials, agents, and employees shall at all reasonable times have access to any premises served by the city system for the purpose of inspection, repair, or enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, and in the event that any inspection discloses excessive leaks or any undue waste of water, then the city shall have the right to discontinue water service to such premises until satisfactory repairs have been made. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 14, 1967)


13.05.150 Charges for relocating and altering meters.

(1) When any property owner or his agent being served water by the city shall request a relocation or alteration of the service or meter location, either vertically or horizontally, a determination of advisability of such relocation or alteration shall be made by the public works director. The decision of the public works director, or designee, shall prevail, subject to the order of the council. In no event shall the meter or service be relocated onto private property beyond the property line, except by order of the council. The cost of such relocation or alteration shall be charged to the account of said owner or agent as established in rate resolution. However, should a service or meter relocation or alteration be deemed beneficial to the city by the public works director, or designee, such relocation or alteration may be done by the water department, whether desired by the property owner or not, and such relocation or alteration shall be at the expense of the city.

(2) Whenever a city owned meter is damaged, the water department shall repair the damage and charge the account of said owner or occupant as established in the rate resolution.

(3) When a service pipe, curb stop, meter, or meter box is damaged or destroyed by contractors or others in the performance of construction, excavation, hauling, or other work, or where service pipes are destroyed by electrolysis, the person, contractor, or company responsible for such damage or destruction shall be billed by the city for the cost of repair or replacement of such pipes, curb stops, meter, or meter box as established in the rate resolution. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 16, 1967)


13.05.180 Water shortage and water conservation measures.

(1) In an effort to prevent a water shortage the city council may adopt water conservation measures by resolution.

(2) In the event a water shortage should occur, and it becomes necessary for water to be conserved, or water use restricted, the city council by resolution may place such restrictions and promulgate such regulations in connection therewith as may be necessary until said water shortage is over. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 465 § 1, 2006)


13.05.220 Unauthorized water use.

No person shall use water from the city water system for any other purpose than that stated in the application or to supply in any other way persons without application and permit to do so, and where a violation of these provisions is found to exist, the city may discontinue service. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 23, 1967)


13.05.230 Faucet placement.

No faucets shall be allowed on the outside of any building except hose connections. The city reserves the right to require separate stops or control valves. No faucets shall be allowed on sidewalks or at the curb line where they are accessible to the public. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 24, 1967)


13.05.240 Abandoned and new revenue producing services.

Whenever a service connection to any premises is abandoned or no longer used, or when new buildings are to be erected on the site of old ones and it is desired to increase the size or change the location of the old service connection, the city may cut out or remove such service connection, and any new service required to said premises shall be installed only on application and payment for a new service connection in the regular manner. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 25, 1967)


13.05.250 Water system shut-off – Responsibility.

The city reserves the right at any time without notice to shut off the water supply for repairs, extensions, or nonpayment of rates, or for any other reason. The city shall not be responsible for any damage, such as bursting boilers, pipes or fixtures; stoppage or interruption of water supply, or any other damage resulting therefrom. The city shall not be responsible for broken pipes, leaks, or other defects in water lines or fixtures beyond the property line on private property. It shall be the duty of each property owner to install a shut-off valve on the property served to permit shut-offs for repairing leaks in property owner’s own system, and the city shall not be obligated to close any valve upon any street or alley in order to effect such repairs. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 26, 1967)


13.05.260 Damage through pipe and fixtures.

No water user or any person shall cause or suffer water from the system to run, drain or flow from property having the water connection onto any other property or onto any street or way, and the city shall in no case be liable for damage occasioned from water running from open or faulty fixtures or from broken or damaged pipes beyond the property line. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 27, 1967)


13.05.270 Use of city water and private water.

Owners of premises desiring to use both the city water system and a supply of water other than that furnished by the city may obtain water from the city upon the following conditions, and not otherwise.

Under no circumstances shall a physical connection, direct or indirect, exist or be made in any manner, even temporarily, between the city water supply and the other water supply. Where such connection is found to exist, or where provision is made to connect the two systems by any means, the city water supply shall be shut off from the premises without notice. Service to said premises shall not be restored until satisfactory proof is furnished that the cross connection has been completely and permanently severed. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 28, 1967)


13.05.280 Operating valves or hydrants without authority.

It shall be unlawful for any person without authority from the city to remove, injure, open, close, or in any way tamper with, any water pipe, water main, shut-off valve or hydrant which is a part of the city system. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 29, 1967)


13.05.300 Unauthorized service extensions.

It shall be unlawful for anyone to cause or permit the extension of water service from one dwelling unit, building or parcel of land to another without authority of the city. When additional dwelling units, buildings or parcels of land are connected without proper application and permit, such premises may be charged at double the rate for the time they are in use, and service may be disconnected by the city. The cost of such disconnection shall be established in the rates resolution, and service shall not be restored to said premises until such charge has been paid in full. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 38 § 31, 1967)


13.05.310 Violation – Penalty.

Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate, fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a violation and fined an amount not to exceed $360.00; and each day during which any violation hereof shall continue and persist after due notice thereof shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this chapter. (Ord. 533 § 1, 2016; Ord. 486 § 1, 2009; Ord. 38 § 32, 1967)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



13.10.010 BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand).

“BOD” (denoting “biochemical oxygen demand”) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius in milligrams per liter. (Ord. 258 § 1, 1983)


13.10.020 Building drain.

“Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes within or adjoining the building or structure and conveys the same to the building sewers which begins at a point five feet (1.5 meters) outside the established line of the building or structure including any structural projection except eaves. (Ord. 258 § 2, 1983)


13.10.030 Building sewer.

“Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping of a drainage system which extends from the end of the building drain and which receives the discharge of the building drain and conveys it to the public sewer, private sewer, individual sewage disposal system or other point of disposal. (Ord. 258 § 3, 1983)


13.10.040 City.

“City” means the city of Veneta, Oregon. (Ord. 529 § 1, 2016; Ord. 258 § 4, 1983)


13.10.050 Combined sewer.

“Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both runoff and sewage. (Ord. 258 § 5, 1983)


13.10.060 Garbage.

“Garbage” means solid waste from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from handling, storage and sale of produce. (Ord. 258 § 6, 1983)


13.10.070 Industrial waste.

“Industrial waste” means any and all liquid or water-borne waste from industrial or commercial processes except domestic sewage. (Ord. 258 § 7, 1983)


13.10.080 Natural outlet.

“Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. (Ord. 258 § 8, 1983)


13.10.090 Person.

“Person” means any individual, firm, co-partnership, association, corporation or other legally recognized organization. (Ord. 529 § 2, 2016; Ord. 258 § 9, 1983)


13.10.100 pH.

“pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions concentration in moles per liter. (Ord. 258 § 10, 1983)


13.10.110 Private sewer.

“Private sewer” means a building sewer which receives the discharge from more than one building drain and conveys it to a public sewer, private sewage disposal system or other point of disposal. (Ord. 258 § 11, 1983)


13.10.120 Properly shredded garbage.

“Properly shredded garbage” means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. (Ord. 258 § 12, 1983)


13.10.130 Public sewer.

“Public sewer” means a common sewer which is directly controlled by the public authority. (Ord. 258 § 13, 1983)


13.10.140 Sanitary sewer.

“Sanitary sewer” means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. (Ord. 258 § 14, 1983)


13.10.150 Sewage.

“Sewage” means any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension or solution and may include liquids containing chemicals in solution. (Ord. 258 § 15, 1983)


13.10.160 Sewage treatment plant.

“Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. (Ord. 258 § 16, 1983)


13.10.170 Sewage works.

“Sewage works” means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. (Ord. 258 § 17, 1983)


13.10.180 Sewer.

“Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. (Ord. 258 § 18, 1983)


13.10.190 Shall and may.

“Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive. (Ord. 258 § 19, 1983)


13.10.200 Slug.

“Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flaw exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. (Ord. 258 § 20, 1983)


13.10.210 Storm drain.

“Storm drain” (sometimes termed “storm sewer”) means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. (Ord. 258 § 21, 1983)


13.10.220 Superintendent.

“Superintendent” means the superintendent of the public works department of the city of Veneta or the superintendent’s designee. (Ord. 529 § 3, 2016; Ord. 258 § 22, 1983)


13.10.230 Suspended solids.

“Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. (Ord. 258 § 23, 1983)


13.10.240 Unsanitary.

“Unsanitary” means unhealthful; of or having to do with the conditions not beneficial to health; not preventative to diseases. (Ord. 258 § 24, 1983)


13.10.250 Watercourse.

“Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 258 § 25, 1983)

II. Privies, Cesspools, Etc.


13.10.260 Prohibited deposits.

It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city of Veneta, or in any area under the jurisdiction of city, any human excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. (Ord. 258 § 26(a), 1983)


13.10.270 Prohibited discharges.

It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other polluted waters. (Ord. 258 § 26(b), 1983)


13.10.280 Privies, cesspools, etc.

Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (Ord. 258 § 27, 1983)


13.10.290 Connection to sewer required.

The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at owner’s expense to install suitable sewage facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 409 § 1, 1999; Ord. 258 § 28, 1983)

III. Private Disposal Systems


13.10.300 Private disposal system.

Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of VMC 13.10.290, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of VMC 13.10.310 through 13.10.350, and the Veneta land development ordinance. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1999; Ord. 258 § 29, 1983)


13.10.310 Permit required.

Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the city and/or Department of Environmental Quality of the state of Oregon or their authorized agent. (Ord. 258 § 30, 1983)


13.10.320 Abandonment.

At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tank, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material in accordance with the rules of the city and/or the state of Oregon. (Ord. 258 § 31, 1983)


13.10.330 Sanitation.

The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. (Ord. 258 § 32, 1983)


13.10.340 Additional requirements.

No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by a health officer, the State of Oregon Department of Environmental Quality or their authorized agent. (Ord. 258 § 33, 1983)


13.10.350 Connections.

When public sewers become available for connection to properties utilizing a private sewage disposal system, the building drain or building sewer of such properties shall be connected to the public sewer within one year after the date of official notice from the city to connect, except where and when time extensions are granted by the city council. The private sewage disposal system shall then be abandoned in accordance with VMC 13.10.320. Time extensions may be granted on a case-by-case basis, in the council’s discretion, after consideration of the following criteria:

(1) The size, location, and elevation of the property;

(2) The condition of the private disposal system;

(3) The length of the extension under consideration; and

(4) Such other criteria as the city council may deem appropriate, upon consultation with the city engineer or public works director. (Ord. 415 § 1, 2000; Ord. 409 § 3, 1999; Ord. 258 § 34, 1983)

IV. Building Sewers


13.10.360 Unauthorized connections.

No person other than authorized city personnel shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. Such connection, opening, use, or alteration shall be done in accordance with the rules of the city. It shall be unlawful and prohibited conduct for any person to make any connection with, or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance except authorized city personnel or in accordance with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 258 § 35, 1983)


13.10.370 Permits.

(1) There shall be three classes of building sewer permits:

(a) For residential or multiple family dwellings;

(b) For commercial services; and

(c) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.

(2) In any case, the owner or owner’s agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city. Permit inspection fees for residential or commercial or industrial building sewer permits shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 258 § 36, 1983)


13.10.380 Owner responsibility – Indemnification of city.

All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, operation and maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation, operation and maintenance of the building sewer. (Ord. 409 § 4, 1999; Ord. 258 § 37, 1983)


13.10.390 Separate service.

A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building drain. (Ord. 258 § 38, 1983)


13.10.400 Old building sewers.

Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 258 § 39, 1983)


13.10.410 Specifications.

The size, slope, alignment, materials or construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code and other applicable rules and regulations of the city. (Ord. 258 § 40, 1983)


13.10.420 Elevation.

The building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the building drain, except for authorized private sewer pressure systems. No privately owned, operated and maintained pumps or sewage lift stations shall be connected to the building drain or building sewer except as authorized by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 409 § 5, 1999; Ord. 258 § 41, 1983)


13.10.430 Prohibited use.

No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, area drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which is in turn connected directly or indirectly to a sanitary sewer. No person shall allow any surface runoff or ground water to enter a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a sanitary sewer. (Ord. 258 § 42, 1983)


13.10.440 Connections.

The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements and regulations of the city. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. (Ord. 258 § 43, 1983)


13.10.450 Inspection.

The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent at least 24 hours prior to the time when the building sewer is ready for inspection or connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made only under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. (Ord. 258 § 44, 1983)


13.10.460 Barricades and lights – Restoration of public ways.

All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. (Ord. 258 § 45, 1983)

V. Use of Public Sewers


13.10.470 Discharge of stormwater and other specific unpolluted waters prohibited.

No person shall discharge, cause to be discharged, or allow to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. (Ord. 258 § 46, 1983)


13.10.480 Stormwater discharge – Industrial cooling water.

Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. Combination sewers are prohibited. All approvals shall be in accordance with local, state and federal regulations. (Ord. 258 § 47, 1983)


13.10.490 Discharge of dangerous, toxic and poisonous waters and viscous substances prohibited.

No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:

(1) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;

(2) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two mg/1 or CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer;

(3) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;

(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. (Ord. 258 § 48, 1983)


13.10.500 Controlled discharges.

No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming the superintendent’s opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:

(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius);

(2) Any water or waste containing fats, gas, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees and 65 degrees Celsius);

(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-quarter horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent;

(4) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron, pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;

(5) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the superintendent for such materials;

(6) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction of such discharge to the receiving waters;

(7) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;

(8) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;

(9) Materials which exert or cause:

(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or if dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);

(b) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);

(c) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on sewage treatment works;

(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting “slugs” as defined herein;

(10) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amendable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. (Ord. 258 § 49, 1983)


13.10.510 Acceptance of prohibited discharges.

(1) If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in VMC 13.10.490 and 13.10.500, and which in the judgment of the superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may:

(a) Reject the waste;

(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharging to the public sewers at no cost to the city;

(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or

(d) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewers charges under the provisions of VMC 13.10.560.

(2) If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. (Ord. 258 § 50, 1983)


13.10.520 Interceptors.

Interceptors, including grease, oil, and sand interceptors, etc., shall be provided when they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease, flammable wastes, sand, solids, acid or alkaline substances or other ingredients harmful to the building drainage system, the public or private sewer, building sewer or to the public or private sewage disposal. Such interceptors may be required by the superintendent, in the building permit, or at such time as there is evidence of improper material in the sewage system. All interceptors shall be of the type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (Ord. 258 § 51, 1983)


13.10.530 Preliminary treatment.

Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at owner’s expense. (Ord. 258 § 52, 1983)


13.10.540 Control manholes.

When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial or commercial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at owner’s expense and shall be maintained by owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (Ord. 258 § 53, 1983)


13.10.550 Tests and measurements.

All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the most recent edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,” published by the American Public Health Association, and may be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no control manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the sanitary sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall, be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples). (Ord. 258 § 54, 1983)


13.10.560 Special arrangements.

No statement contained in VMC 13.10.470 through 13.10.550 shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern or other user whereby industrial or other waste of unusual strength to character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the affected concern. (Ord. 258 § 55, 1983)

VI. Foliage and Trees


13.10.570 Permit to plant.

No person shall plant or allow to be planted in a public sewer right-of-way or easement a tree, shrub or plant without first obtaining a permit at least 10 days prior to planting. The type, location and spacing of trees, shrubs or plants shall be approved by the superintendent prior to issuance of a permit. (Ord. 258 § 56, 1983)


13.10.580 Foliage prohibited.

No person shall plant or cause to be planted a balm, poplar, locust, cottonwood or willow in the public right-of-way or easement. (Ord. 258 § 57, 1983)


13.10.590 Interference with sewer line.

Whenever, in the opinion of the superintendent, the roots of any tree or shrub have entered a public sewer or building sewer, and are stopping, restricting or retarding the flow of sewage therein, or allowing ground water or other material to enter the system, the superintendent shall notify the owner to remove the tree within 30 days. The superintendent may remove the tree and assess the costs against the owner of the property if action is not promptly taken. (Ord. 258 § 58, 1983)


13.10.600 Noncompliance with code.

If an owner, agent of the sewer owner or occupant of any premises adjoining and abutting a public right-of-way fails or neglects to comply with the requirements of this chapter, the city shall cause the work to be done and shall make a verified account and statement of the costs of the work and make a return and file a report with the finance officer, together with a legal description of the lot, part of lot, or acreage of the property liable for the charge, and the name of the owner or reputed owner thereof, or the name of the contract purchaser of real property of record as shown on the last available complete assessment roll in the office of the county assessor. Thereupon the amount of the costs and expense, the legal description of the property and the name of the owner, reputed owner or the contract purchaser of said real property of record as shown on the last available complete assessment roll in the office of the county assessor shall be entered in the docket of the city liens and the charges shall be a lien upon the property and shall be foreclosed in the same manner as are other liens of the city. (Ord. 258 § 59, 1983)

VII. Protection from Damage and Responsibility for Repair


13.10.610 Criminal mischief.

No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of criminal mischief. (Ord. 258 § 60, 1983)


13.10.620 Responsibility for repair.

(1) All building drains and building sewers up to and including the connection point of the building sewer to the public sewer shall be maintained and repaired by the private property owner. The owner shall not permit any rain, surface water, subsurface water or prohibited discharge to enter the building drain or building sewer unless previously approved in writing by the superintendent. The owner shall bear all costs and expenses incidental to the maintenance, upkeep and repair of the building drain or building sewer, up to and including the connection point of the building sewer to the public sewer.

(2) When two or more building sewers are connected to a private sewer line that is not a public sewer, all persons connected to the private sewer shall be mutually responsible for the upkeep, maintenance and repairs of the private sewer up to and including the connection to the public sewer. A private sewer may become a public sewer only if the public accepts title to the sewer and an easement for entry and repair has been granted to and accepted by the city. (Ord. 258 § 61, 1983)

VIII. Powers and Authority of Inspectors


13.10.630 Right of entry.

The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The superintendent or the superintendent’s representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any process, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers, waterways or facilities for waste treatment. (Ord. 258 § 62, 1983)


13.10.640 Safety – Indemnification of owner.

While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in VMC 13.10.630, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner and the owner shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the owner against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demand for personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions, as required in VMC 13.10.540. (Ord. 258 § 63, 1983)


13.10.650 Easements.

The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within that easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full compliance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 258 § 64, 1983)

IX. Penalties


13.10.660 Violations.

Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except VMC 13.10.610 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. (Ord. 258 § 65, 1983)


13.10.670 Penalty.

Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in VMC 13.10.660 shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a violation and fined in an amount not to exceed $400.00 for each violation. (Ord. 486 § 4, 2009; Ord. 258 § 66, 1983)


13.10.680 Liability of violator.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, damage or costs of repair or replacement occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. (Ord. 258 § 67, 1983)


13.10.690 Separate violations.

Each day any provision is violated or continues to be a violation after notice is given is a separate violation. Successive notices are not required for successive violations. (Ord. 258 § 68, 1983)


Chapter 13.15 PUBLIC DRAINAGE CHANNELS

Sections:

I. Definitions 

13.15.010    Impede drainage.

13.15.020    Public drainage channel.

13.15.030    Person in charge of private property.

II. Impeding Drainage 

13.15.040    Prohibition.

13.15.050    Building permits.

III. Penalties 

13.15.060    Fine.

13.15.070    Separate violations.

IV. Authorization to Remove Impediment 

13.15.080    Nuisance abatement.

I. Definitions


13.15.010 Impede drainage.

“Impede drainage” means to slow or partially or completely block drainage of water from any public drainage channel onto public or private property by any one or more of the following means or methods:

(1) Placing any rocks, fill dirt, refuse or other material inside a public drainage channel, or permitting such material to be washed or eroded into such channels;

(2) Constructing, maintaining, or, in the case of a person in charge of property, permitting to exist or to be maintained any dam, mound, pile or other structure at or near the entrance or exit of a public drainage channel, or at any other location which may cause water, mud or debris to back up and impede drainage from a public drainage channel;

(3) Raising the level of public or private lands through the use of fill dirt or other material;

(4) Attaching any pipe or other device to a public drainage channel, or altering the angle of any public drainage channel;

(5) In the case of a person in charge of private property, knowingly permitting any of the acts or conditions set forth in subsections (1) through (4) of this section to occur, exist or continue on the private property of which the person is in charge. (Ord. 390 § 4, 1998; Ord. 272 § 1, 1985)


13.15.020 Public drainage channel.

“Public drainage channel” means any pipe (manmade or natural), drainage ditch, storm sewer, tunnel, graded street, graded slope, watercourse, or other channel which is partially or entirely on public property, a public easement or a public right-of-way, and which is designed, intended or used to facilitate water drainage. (Ord. 272 § 2, 1985)


13.15.030 Person in charge of private property.

“Person in charge of private property” means any owner, occupier, lessee, tenant, licensee, contract purchaser, or agent having possession or control of the property or the supervision of any construction project on the property. (Ord. 272 § 3, 1985)

II. Impeding Drainage


13.15.040 Prohibition.

No person shall impede drainage of water from any public drainage channel. (Ord. 272 § 4, 1985)


13.15.050 Building permits.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit building any structures, grading any surfaces, placing any fill dirt or other materials on any lands, or altering the course of any public drainage channel to the extent those activities have been authorized in advance by a duly issued building permit. (Ord. 272 § 5, 1985)

III. Penalties


13.15.060 Fine.

A person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a violation and fined an amount not to exceed $360.00, together with the actual cost of removing any drainage impediment, and repairing any damage caused by the violation. (Ord. 486 § 5, 2009; Ord. 272 § 6, 1985)


13.15.070 Separate violations.

Each day any provision of this chapter is violated or continues to be violated is a separate violation. (Ord. 272 § 7, 1985)

IV. Authorization to Remove Impediment


13.15.080 Nuisance abatement.

The impediments to drainage from public drainage channels described in VMC 13.15.010 are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public health, and may be abated or summarily abated in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8.05 VMC. (Ord. 272 § 8, 1985)


Chapter 13.20       CROSS CONNECTIONS

Sections:

13.20.010    Definitions.

13.20.020    Cross connection control requirements.

13.20.030    Notices.

13.20.040    Shut-offs.

13.20.050    Inspections.

13.20.060    Fees.

13.20.070    Violation – Penalty.

13.20.080    Separate violations.


13.20.010  Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

(1) "Air gap separation" means the physical vertical separation between the free-flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and the open or nonpressure receiving vessel.

(2) "Approval" or "approved" means approved in writing.

(3) "Auxiliary water supply" means any supply of water used to augment the supply obtained from the city water system which serves the premises in question.

(4) "AWWA" means the American Water Works Association.

(5) "Backflow" means the flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow.

(6) "Backflow prevention device" or "backflow prevention device assembly" means a backflow prevention device such as a pressure vacuum breaker, a double check valve, or a reduced pressure principle device, and the attached shut-off valves on the inlet and outlet ends of the device assembled as a complete unit.

(7) "Check valve" means a valve which allows flow in only one direction.

(8) "City water system" shall mean the potable water system of the city of Veneta.

(9) "Cross connection" means any link or channel between the piping which carries drinking water and the piping or fixtures which carry other water or other substances.

(10) "Division" means the Health Division of the Oregon Department of Human Resources.

(11) "Double check valve assembly" means an assembly of two independently acting check valves with shut-off valves on each side of the check valves and test cocks for checking the watertightness of each check valve.

(12) "Owner" means any person owning a beneficial interest with a right of possession in property served by the municipal water system, any occupant of any premises served by the city water system, and any customer or water user of the city water system.

(13) "Person" includes any individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, municipal, state or federal agency, or joint stock company and includes any receiver, special master, trustee, assignee or other similar representative thereof.

(14) "Potable water" means safe drinking water.

(15) "Public works director" means the public works director for the city of Veneta or the public works director's designee.

(16) "Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (RP device)" means a device for preventing backflow which has two check valves, a differential relief valve located between the two check valves, two shut-off valves, one on the upstream side and the other on the downstream side of the check valves, and four test cocks for checking the watertightness of the check valves and the operation of the relief valve.

(17) "Safe drinking water" means water which has sufficiently low concentrations of microbiological, inorganic chemical, organic chemical, radiological or physical substances so that individuals drinking such water at normal levels of consumption will not be exposed to disease organisms or other substances which may produce harmful physiological effects.

(18) "Service connection" means the piping connection by means of which water is conveyed from a distribution main of a public water system to a customer's premises. The portion of the service connection which conveys water from the distribution main to the customer's property line, or to the service meter where provided, is owned by and under the jurisdiction of the water supplier.

(19) "Water system" means a system for the provision of piped water for human consumption. (Ord. 302 § 1, 1988)


13.20.020      Cross connection control requirements.

(1) Whenever a water user or the owner of the premises obtaining water from the city water system treats the water in any way or adds any chemical or substance to the water, such person shall immediately notify the public works director.

(2) Backflow prevention device assemblies for protecting the city water system shall be installed on the owner's side of the service connection to premises where an approved air gap does not exist and:

(a) There is an auxiliary water supply which is connected to the potable water piping;

(b) There is an auxiliary water supply which could be connected to the potable water piping, unless all of the following requirements are met:

(i) The auxiliary water supply is not, in fact, connected to the potable water piping;

(ii) The auxiliary water supply is conspicuously posted with a sign identifying it as a nonpotable water supply and prohibiting it from being connected to the city water supply or any potable water supply system on the premises. The location and contents of the sign shall be determined by the public works director;

(iii) The owner permits inspections, at such time as the public works director may determine, to determine whether the auxiliary water supply has been connected to the potable water supply system or the city water supply system;

(iv) If any inspection reveals that the auxiliary water system has been connected to the city water system or any potable water system on the premises, the public works director may, upon 30 days' written notice to the owner, require installation of a backflow prevention device assembly at the service conner, require installation of a backflow prevention device assembly at the service connection;

(c) There is intricate plumbing which makes it impractical to ascertain whether or not cross connections exist;

(d) There is back siphonage potential;

(e) Cross connections or potential cross connections exist.

(3) The type of backflow prevention device required under subsection (2) of this section shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard which exists:

(a) An approved air gap of at least twice the inside diameter, but not less than one inch, of the incoming supply line measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, or an approved reduced pressure (RP) device assembly, shall be installed where the substance which could backflow is hazardous to health, such as but not limited to sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, plating plants, hospitals, mortuaries, car washes, medical clinics;

(b) An approved double check valve assembly shall be installed where the substance which could backflow is objectionable, but does not pose an unreasonable risk to health;

(c) An approved pressure vacuum breaker or an atmospheric breaker shall be installed where the substance which could backflow is objectionable, but does not pose an unreasonable risk to health and where there is no possibility of back pressure in the downstream piping. A shut-off valve may be installed on the line downstream of a pressure vacuum breaker, but shall not be installed downstream of an atmospheric vacuum breaker.

(4) Except as set forth in subsection (6) of this section, all backflow prevention device assemblies required under this section shall be of a type or model approved by the division.

(5) All backflow prevention device assemblies shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 2 and Chapter 4, Recommended Installation Practice, Accepted Procedure and Practice in Cross Connection Control Manual, November 1985, 4th Edition published by the Cross Connection Control Committee, Pacific Northwest Section, AWWA.

(6) Backflow prevention device assemblies installed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter which were approved at the time they were installed, but are not on the current list of approved device assemblies maintained by the division, shall be permitted to remain in service provided they are properly maintained, are commensurate with the degree of hazard, are tested at least annually, and perform satisfactorily. When devices of this type are moved, or require more than minimum maintenance, they shall be replaced by device assemblies which are on the division list of approved device assemblies.

(7) The water user or the owner of the premises where one or more reduced pressured device assemblies, double check valve assemblies or pressure vacuum breakers have been installed shall have the device or devices tested, at the owner's or user's expense, at least once per year. Devices shall be tested immediately after installation and after they are moved. Reports on the test shall be prepared by the tester and copies of the reports shall be provided to the water user or the owner of the premises, to the city of Veneta, and to the division within 15 days of the date the test is conducted. Tests shall be performed by certified testers in conformance with Oregon Administrative Rule 333-61-070, governing cross connection control requirements.

(8) If any backflow prevention devices are found not to be functioning properly, the public works director shall give notice to the water user or owner of the premises. The notice shall require that the owner or water user repair the backflow prevention device within 30 days of the mailing of the notice, unless the public works director determines that the potential backflow could be hazardous to health, in which case the notice period may be shortened to such time as the public works director may determine. (Ord. 392 § 1, 1998; Ord. 302 § 2, 1988)


13.20.030      Notices.

Any notice required or permitted under this chapter shall be deemed given upon mailing to the address of the premises served or to the billing address of the water user listed with the city water department. (Ord. 302 § 3, 1988)


13.20.040      Shut-offs.

The public works director may shut off the water service to any premises when:

(1) A violation of the provisions of this chapter continues after the expiration of any notice period provided under this chapter;

(2) Immediately, upon determination that an emergency exits or that a substantial hazard exists due to the potential for backflow of hazardous substances;

(3) Immediately upon the refusal of any water user or owner of premises to permit inspection, or if the public works director is unable to contact the water user or owner to arrange for an inspection. (Ord. 302 § 4, 1988)


13.20.050      Inspections.

All water users and owners of premises served by the city water system shall permit inspections by the public works director, at such times as the public works director may designate, for purposes of determining whether the water user or owner is in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 302 § 5, 1988)


13.20.060      Fees.

Fees for inspections by the public works director, and for signs posted in accordance with VMC 13.20.020(2)(b)(ii), shall be set by resolution. Fees for turn-ons and shut-offs shall be in accordance with the fee resolution implementing Chapter 13.05 VMC. (Ord. 302 § 6, 1988)


13.20.070      Violation – Penalty.

Violations of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000. (Ord. 302 § 7, 1988)


13.20.080      Separate violations.

Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 302 § 8, 1988)


Chapter 13.20       CROSS CONNECTIONS

Sections:

13.20.010    Definitions.

13.20.020    Cross connection control requirements.

13.20.030    Notices.

13.20.040    Shut-offs.

13.20.050    Inspections.

13.20.060    Fees.

13.20.070    Violation – Penalty.

13.20.080    Separate violations.


13.20.010  Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

(1) "Air gap separation" means the physical vertical separation between the free-flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and the open or nonpressure receiving vessel.

(2) "Approval" or "approved" means approved in writing.

(3) "Auxiliary water supply" means any supply of water used to augment the supply obtained from the city water system which serves the premises in question.

(4) "AWWA" means the American Water Works Association.

(5) "Backflow" means the flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow.

(6) "Backflow prevention device" or "backflow prevention device assembly" means a backflow prevention device such as a pressure vacuum breaker, a double check valve, or a reduced pressure principle device, and the attached shut-off valves on the inlet and outlet ends of the device assembled as a complete unit.

(7) "Check valve" means a valve which allows flow in only one direction.

(8) "City water system" shall mean the potable water system of the city of Veneta.

(9) "Cross connection" means any link or channel between the piping which carries drinking water and the piping or fixtures which carry other water or other substances.

(10) "Division" means the Health Division of the Oregon Department of Human Resources.

(11) "Double check valve assembly" means an assembly of two independently acting check valves with shut-off valves on each side of the check valves and test cocks for checking the watertightness of each check valve.

(12) "Owner" means any person owning a beneficial interest with a right of possession in property served by the municipal water system, any occupant of any premises served by the city water system, and any customer or water user of the city water system.

(13) "Person" includes any individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, municipal, state or federal agency, or joint stock company and includes any receiver, special master, trustee, assignee or other similar representative thereof.

(14) "Potable water" means safe drinking water.

(15) "Public works director" means the public works director for the city of Veneta or the public works director's designee.

(16) "Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (RP device)" means a device for preventing backflow which has two check valves, a differential relief valve located between the two check valves, two shut-off valves, one on the upstream side and the other on the downstream side of the check valves, and four test cocks for checking the watertightness of the check valves and the operation of the relief valve.

(17) "Safe drinking water" means water which has sufficiently low concentrations of microbiological, inorganic chemical, organic chemical, radiological or physical substances so that individuals drinking such water at normal levels of consumption will not be exposed to disease organisms or other substances which may produce harmful physiological effects.

(18) "Service connection" means the piping connection by means of which water is conveyed from a distribution main of a public water system to a customer's premises. The portion of the service connection which conveys water from the distribution main to the customer's property line, or to the service meter where provided, is owned by and under the jurisdiction of the water supplier.

(19) "Water system" means a system for the provision of piped water for human consumption. (Ord. 302 § 1, 1988)


13.20.020      Cross connection control requirements.

(1) Whenever a water user or the owner of the premises obtaining water from the city water system treats the water in any way or adds any chemical or substance to the water, such person shall immediately notify the public works director.

(2) Backflow prevention device assemblies for protecting the city water system shall be installed on the owner's side of the service connection to premises where an approved air gap does not exist and:

(a) There is an auxiliary water supply which is connected to the potable water piping;

(b) There is an auxiliary water supply which could be connected to the potable water piping, unless all of the following requirements are met:

(i) The auxiliary water supply is not, in fact, connected to the potable water piping;

(ii) The auxiliary water supply is conspicuously posted with a sign identifying it as a nonpotable water supply and prohibiting it from being connected to the city water supply or any potable water supply system on the premises. The location and contents of the sign shall be determined by the public works director;

(iii) The owner permits inspections, at such time as the public works director may determine, to determine whether the auxiliary water supply has been connected to the potable water supply system or the city water supply system;

(iv) If any inspection reveals that the auxiliary water system has been connected to the city water system or any potable water system on the premises, the public works director may, upon 30 days' written notice to the owner, require installation of a backflow prevention device assembly at the service conner, require installation of a backflow prevention device assembly at the service connection;

(c) There is intricate plumbing which makes it impractical to ascertain whether or not cross connections exist;

(d) There is back siphonage potential;

(e) Cross connections or potential cross connections exist.

(3) The type of backflow prevention device required under subsection (2) of this section shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard which exists:

(a) An approved air gap of at least twice the inside diameter, but not less than one inch, of the incoming supply line measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, or an approved reduced pressure (RP) device assembly, shall be installed where the substance which could backflow is hazardous to health, such as but not limited to sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, plating plants, hospitals, mortuaries, car washes, medical clinics;

(b) An approved double check valve assembly shall be installed where the substance which could backflow is objectionable, but does not pose an unreasonable risk to health;

(c) An approved pressure vacuum breaker or an atmospheric breaker shall be installed where the substance which could backflow is objectionable, but does not pose an unreasonable risk to health and where there is no possibility of back pressure in the downstream piping. A shut-off valve may be installed on the line downstream of a pressure vacuum breaker, but shall not be installed downstream of an atmospheric vacuum breaker.

(4) Except as set forth in subsection (6) of this section, all backflow prevention device assemblies required under this section shall be of a type or model approved by the division.

(5) All backflow prevention device assemblies shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 2 and Chapter 4, Recommended Installation Practice, Accepted Procedure and Practice in Cross Connection Control Manual, November 1985, 4th Edition published by the Cross Connection Control Committee, Pacific Northwest Section, AWWA.

(6) Backflow prevention device assemblies installed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter which were approved at the time they were installed, but are not on the current list of approved device assemblies maintained by the division, shall be permitted to remain in service provided they are properly maintained, are commensurate with the degree of hazard, are tested at least annually, and perform satisfactorily. When devices of this type are moved, or require more than minimum maintenance, they shall be replaced by device assemblies which are on the division list of approved device assemblies.

(7) The water user or the owner of the premises where one or more reduced pressured device assemblies, double check valve assemblies or pressure vacuum breakers have been installed shall have the device or devices tested, at the owner's or user's expense, at least once per year. Devices shall be tested immediately after installation and after they are moved. Reports on the test shall be prepared by the tester and copies of the reports shall be provided to the water user or the owner of the premises, to the city of Veneta, and to the division within 15 days of the date the test is conducted. Tests shall be performed by certified testers in conformance with Oregon Administrative Rule 333-61-070, governing cross connection control requirements.

(8) If any backflow prevention devices are found not to be functioning properly, the public works director shall give notice to the water user or owner of the premises. The notice shall require that the owner or water user repair the backflow prevention device within 30 days of the mailing of the notice, unless the public works director determines that the potential backflow could be hazardous to health, in which case the notice period may be shortened to such time as the public works director may determine. (Ord. 392 § 1, 1998; Ord. 302 § 2, 1988)


13.20.030      Notices.

Any notice required or permitted under this chapter shall be deemed given upon mailing to the address of the premises served or to the billing address of the water user listed with the city water department. (Ord. 302 § 3, 1988)


13.20.040      Shut-offs.

The public works director may shut off the water service to any premises when:

(1) A violation of the provisions of this chapter continues after the expiration of any notice period provided under this chapter;

(2) Immediately, upon determination that an emergency exits or that a substantial hazard exists due to the potential for backflow of hazardous substances;

(3) Immediately upon the refusal of any water user or owner of premises to permit inspection, or if the public works director is unable to contact the water user or owner to arrange for an inspection. (Ord. 302 § 4, 1988)


13.20.050      Inspections.

All water users and owners of premises served by the city water system shall permit inspections by the public works director, at such times as the public works director may designate, for purposes of determining whether the water user or owner is in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 302 § 5, 1988)


13.20.060      Fees.

Fees for inspections by the public works director, and for signs posted in accordance with VMC 13.20.020(2)(b)(ii), shall be set by resolution. Fees for turn-ons and shut-offs shall be in accordance with the fee resolution implementing Chapter 13.05 VMC. (Ord. 302 § 6, 1988)


13.20.070      Violation – Penalty.

Violations of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000. (Ord. 302 § 7, 1988)


13.20.080      Separate violations.

Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 302 § 8, 1988)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]
Chapter 13.25 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE

Sections:

13.25.010    Purpose.

13.25.020    Scope.

13.25.030    Definitions.

13.25.040    System development charge established.

13.25.050    Methodology.

13.25.060    Authorized expenditures.

13.25.070    Expenditure restrictions.

13.25.080    Improvement plan.

13.25.090    Collection of charge.

13.25.100    Delinquent charges – Hearing.

13.25.110    Installment payment.

13.25.120    Exemptions.

13.25.130    Credits.

13.25.140    Segregation and use of revenue – Annual accounting.

13.25.150    Review procedures.

13.25.160    Prohibited connection.

13.25.170    Violation – Penalty.


13.25.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the system development charge is to impose a portion of the cost of capital improvements for water, waste water, drainage, streets, flood control, and parks upon those developments and redevelopments that create the need for or increase the demands on capital improvements. (Ord. 452 § 1, 2005)


13.25.020 Scope.

The system development charge imposed by this chapter is separate from and in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge, or fee otherwise provided by law or imposed as a condition of development. (Ord. 452 § 2, 2005)


13.25.030 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

(1) “Administrative charge” means the amount charged to each development to cover the cost of developing the methodologies, providing an annual accounting of system development charge expenditures, implementation, and operational costs associated with the system development charge program.

(2) “Capital improvements” means facilities or assets used for:

(a) Water supply, treatment and distribution;

(b) Waste water collection, transmission, treatment and disposal;

(c) Drainage and flood control;

(d) Transportation; or

(e) Parks and recreation.

(f) “Capital improvement” does not include costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvement. 

(3) “Development” means the change in character, occupancy or use of land or buildings; including redevelopment and demolishing a building for the conversion of such property to a different use.

(4) “Improvement fee” means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to VMC 13.25.040.

(5) “Land area” means the area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane, with the exception of a portion of the parcel within a recorded right-of-way or easement subject to a servitude for a public street or for a public scenic or preservation purpose.

(6) “Owner” means the owner or owners of record title, or the purchaser or purchasers under a recorded land sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in the described real property.

(7) “Parcel of land” means a lot, parcel, block, or other tract of land that is occupied or may be occupied by a structure or structures or other use, and that includes the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning, subdivision, or other development ordinances.

(8) “Qualified public improvements” means a capital improvement that is required as a condition of development approval, identified in the plan adopted pursuant to VMC 13.25.080, and either:

(a) Not located on or contiguous to property that is the subject of the development approval; or 

(b) Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee is related.

(9) “Reimbursement fee” means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements already constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to VMC 13.25.040, for which the council determines capacity exists.

(10) “System development charge” means a reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit or building permit, or at the time of connection to the capital improvement. “System development charge” includes that portion of a sewer or water system connection charge that is greater than the amount necessary to reimburse the city for its average cost of inspecting and installing connections with sewer and water facilities. “System development charge” does not include fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district assessment, a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision, expedited land division, or limited land use decision. (Ord. 467 § 1, 2006; Ord. 452 § 3, 2005)


13.25.040 System development charge established.*

(1) A system development charge shall be established and may be revised by resolution of the city council. The resolution shall set the amount of the charge, the type of charge, and, if the charge applies to a geographic area smaller than the entire city, the geographic area subject to the charge.

(2) Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter or other local or state law, a system development charge is hereby imposed upon all development within the city, upon increased usage of a capital improvement, issuance of a development permit or building permit, or connection to the capital improvement, and upon all development outside the boundary of the city that connects to or otherwise uses the sewer, water or storm sewer facilities of the city.

(3) An administrative charge associated with the cost of the city’s system development charge program, including the periodic and on-going direct and indirect costs associated with complying with the requirement of state law and the cost of administering system development charges, may be established by council resolution. (Ord. 467 § 2, 2006; Ord. 452 § 4, 2005)

* Code reviser’s note: Ord. 501, Section 1, temporarily allows for deferral of the charges established in VMC 13.25.040. In Section 6, Ord. 501 provides that it will be automatically repealed on January 1, 2013, unless extended by the city council. Ord. 501 is available for review in the city clerk’s office.


13.25.050 Methodology.

(1) The methodology used to establish or modify a reimbursement fee shall consider the cost of the then-existing facilities, prior contributions by then-existing users, gifts or grants from federal or state government or private persons, the value of unused capacity available to future system users, rate-making principals employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by the council. The methodology for establishing or modifying a reimbursement fee shall promote the objective that future system users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities.

(2) The methodology used to establish or modify an improvement fee shall consider the cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the system, the need for increased capacity required to serve future users, and be calculated to obtain the cost of capital improvements for the projected need for available system capacity for future users.

(3) The methodology used to establish or modify an improvement fee or a reimbursement fee, or both, shall be contained in a resolution adopted by the council. 

(4) The methodology used to establish or modify an improvement fee or a reimbursement fee shall not:

(a) Include or incorporate a method or system under which the payment of the fee or the amount of the fee is determined by the number of employees of an employer without regard to new construction, new development or new use of an existing structure by the employer;

(b) Include or incorporate any method or system under which the payment of the fee or the amount of the fee is based on the number of individuals hired by the employer after a specified date; or 

(c) Assume that costs are necessarily incurred for capital improvements when an employer hires an additional employee. 

(5) All methodology for establishing or modifying reimbursement or improvement fees shall be available for public inspection.

(6) A change in the amount of a reimbursement fee or an improvement fee is not a modification of the system development charge if the change in amount is based on a change in the cost of materials, labor or real property applied to the projects or project capacity as set forth in the plan adopted pursuant to VMC 13.25.080; or the periodic application of one or more specific cost indexes or other periodic data sources. 

A specific cost index or periodic data source must be: 

(a) A relevant measurement of the average change in prices or costs over an identified time period for materials, labor, real property, or a combination of the three; 

(b) Published by a recognized organization or agency that produces the index or data source for reasons that are independent of the system development charge methodology; and 

(c) Incorporated as part of the established methodology or identified and adopted in a separate city resolution or order. 

(7) A combination of a reimbursement fee and an improvement fee may be imposed, if the methodology demonstrates that the charge is not based upon providing the same system capacity. (Ord. 452 § 5, 2005)


13.25.060 Authorized expenditures.

(1) Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements associated with the systems for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to the repayment of indebtedness.

(2) Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity-increasing capital improvements, including expenditures relating to the repayment of debt for the improvements. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities or provides new facilities. The     portion of the capital improvements funded by improvement fees must be related to the need for increased capacity to provide service for future users.

(3) A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues derived from an improvement fee shall be included in the plan adopted by the city pursuant to VMC 13.25.080.

(4) Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2) of this section, system development charge revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing system development charge methodologies and providing an annual accounting of system development charge expenditures. (Ord. 452 § 6, 2005)


13.25.070 Expenditure restrictions.

(1) System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements.

(2) System development charges shall not be expended for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements. (Ord. 452 § 7, 2005)


13.25.080 Improvement plan.

Prior to the establishment of a system development charge by resolution, the council shall adopt a plan that:

(1) Lists the capital improvements that may be funded with improvement fee revenues, including the estimated cost and time of construction of each improvement, and the estimated percentage of costs eligible to be funded with revenues from improvement fees for each improvement; and

(2) Describes the process for modifying the plan. The council may modify the plan and list at any time. If a system development charge will be increased by a proposed modification of the list to include a capacity-increasing capital improvement, as referenced in VMC 13.25.060(2), the city shall provide at least 30 days’ notice of the proposed plan modification to persons who have requested written notice under VMC 13.25.150(2). A hearing on such proposed plan modifications will be held if the city receives a written request for such a hearing within seven days of the date the proposed modification is scheduled for adoption. If no such request is received within this time period, a hearing is not required, but may be held in the council’s sole discretion. (Ord. 452 § 8, 2005)


13.25.090 Collection of charge.*

(1) The system development charge is payable upon annexation or issuance of a building permit, a development permit, a development permit for development not requiring the issuance of a building permit, a permit or approval to connect to the water or sewer system, or a right-of-way access permit.

(2) If no building, development, or connection permit is required, the system development charge is payable at the time the usage of the capital improvement is increased based on changes in the use of the property.

(3) The applicant for a connection permit shall be required to state in writing the intended use of the building in sufficient detail to enable the city to determine the appropriate category of use. If the use of a building changes or if the stated use is incorrect, the occupant shall report the change of use to the city within 30 days and promptly pay any additional system development charges. If the occupant fails to report a correct statement of use or a change of use within 30 days or fails to pay the additional system development charge within 10 days after invoice, the occupant shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the balance due plus interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of 1.5 percent per month.

(4) The city shall not issue such permit or allow such connection until the charge has been paid in full, provision for installment payments has been made pursuant to VMC 13.25.110, or unless an exemption is granted pursuant to VMC 13.25.120. (Ord. 452 § 9, 2005)

* Code reviser’s note: Ord. 501, Section 1, temporarily allows for deferral of the charges regulated in VMC 13.25.090. In Section 6, Ord. 501 provides that it will be automatically repealed on January 1, 2013, unless extended by the city council. Ord. 501 is available for review in the city clerk’s office.


13.25.100 Delinquent charges – Hearing.

(1) When, for any reason, a system development charge has not been paid, the city administrator shall report to the council the amount of the uncollected charge, the description of the real property to which the charge is attributable, the date upon which the charge was due, and the name of the owner.

(2) The council shall schedule a public hearing on the matter and direct that notice of the hearing be given to each owner with a copy of the city administrator’s report concerning the unpaid charge. Notice of the hearing shall be given either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by both personal and mailed notice,     and by posting notice on the parcel at least 10 days before the date set for the hearing.

(3) At the hearing, the council may accept, reject, or modify the determination of the city administrator as set forth in the report. If the council finds that a system development charge is unpaid and uncollected, the city recorder shall docket the unpaid and uncollected system development charge in the city lien docket. Upon completion of the docketing, the city shall have a lien against the described land for the full amount of the unpaid charge, together with interest at the legal rate of 10 percent and with the city’s actual cost of serving notice of the hearing on the owners. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in Chapter 223 ORS. (Ord. 452 § 10, 2005)


13.25.110 Installment payment.

(1) The owner of the parcel of land subject to a system development charge of over $10,000 may apply for payment in installments, to include interest at the legal rate of 10 percent on the unpaid balance, in accordance with ORS 223.208. Payment may be over a period of less than 10 years, if so elected by the property owner. Otherwise, system development charges are payable over a period of 10 years, in accordance with such terms as set by the city. 

(2) The city administrator shall provide application forms for installment payments, which shall include a waiver of all rights to contest the validity of the lien, except for the correction of computational errors.

(3) An applicant for installment payments shall have the burden of demonstrating the applicant’s authority to assent to the imposition of a lien on the parcel and that the property interest of the applicant is adequate to secure payment of the lien.

(4) The city administrator shall report to the city recorder the amount of the system development charge, the dates on which payments are due, the name of the owner, and the description of the parcel.

(5) The city recorder shall docket the lien in the lien docket. From that time the city shall have a lien upon the described parcel for the amount of the system development charge, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the rate established by the council. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in Chapter 223 ORS.

(6) Upon written request of the city administrator, the city recorder is authorized to cancel assessments of system development charges, without further council action, where the new development approved by the building permit is not constructed and the building permit is cancelled.

(7) For property that has been subject to a cancellation of assessed system development charges, any future installment payment contract shall be subject to the code provisions applicable to system development charges and installment payment contracts on file on the date the new contract is received by the city. (Ord. 452 § 11, 2005)


13.25.120 Exemptions.

(1) Structures and uses established and legally existing on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are exempt from system development charges imposed hereunder, until the parcel is further developed and connects to or increases the parcel’s or structure’s use of one or more public improvement facilities.

(2) Additions to single-family dwellings that do not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the State Uniform Building Code, are exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

(3) An alteration, addition, replacement or change in use that does not increase the parcel’s or structure’s use of the public improvement facility are exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

(4) Municipal projects are exempt from all system development charges. (Ord. 467 § 3, 2006; Ord. 452 § 12, 2005)


13.25.130 Credits.

(1) A system development charge shall be imposed when a change of use of a parcel or structure occurs, but credit shall be given for the computed system development charge to the extent that prior structures existed and services were established on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The credit so computed shall not exceed the calculated system development charge. No refund shall be made on account of such credit.

(2) A credit shall also be given for construction of a qualified public improvement, upon acceptance by the city of that public improvement. The credit shall be only for the improvement fee charged for the type of improvement being constructed, and may be granted only for the cost of that portion of such improvement that exceeds the city’s minimum standard facility size or capacity needed to serve that particular development project or property. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that a particular improvement qualifies for credit under this section. The request for credit shall be filed in writing no later than 60 days after acceptance of the improvement by the city.

(3) The city may deny a credit if it demonstrates that the application is not for a qualified public improvement, as defined in this chapter, or by showing that the improvement for which credit is sought is not included in the plan adopted pursuant to VMC 13.25.080.

(4) When the construction of a qualified public improvement gives rise to a credit amount greater than the improvement fee that would otherwise be levied against the project receiving development approval, the excess credit may be applied against improvement fees that accrue in subsequent phases of the original development project. However, this subsection shall not prohibit the city from providing a greater credit, or from establishing a system providing for the transferability of credits, or from providing a credit for a capital improvement not identified in the plan adopted pursuant to VMC 13.25.080, or from providing a share of the cost of such improvement by other means, if the city so chooses. 

(5) Credit shall be used within 10 years from the date the credit is given. (Ord. 467 § 4, 2006; Ord. 452 § 13, 2005)


13.25.140 Segregation and use of revenue – Annual accounting.  

All funds derived from a particular type of system development charge are to be segregated by accounting practices from all other funds of the city. The system development charge calculated and collected shall be used for no purpose other than those set forth in VMC 13.25.060. The city shall provide an annual accounting to be completed by January 1st of each year for system development charges showing the total amount of system development charge revenues collected for each system and the projects that were funded in the previous fiscal year. The city shall include in the annual accounting a list of the amounts spent on each project funded, in whole or in part, with system development charge revenues, and the amount of revenue collected by the city from system development charges and attributed to the cost of complying with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing system development charge methodologies and providing annual accountings. (Ord. 452 § 14, 2005)


13.25.150 Review procedures.

(1) Expenditure Review. 

(a) Any citizen or other interested person may challenge an expenditure of system development charge revenues by filing a written complaint with the city describing with particularity the decision of the city and the expenditure which the person challenges. Such challenges must be filed within two years of the expenditure of the system development charge revenues. 

(b) A hearing shall be held by the council within 60 days of the filing of the complaint. After providing notice to the challenger, the council shall determine whether the expenditure was in accordance with this chapter and the applicable Oregon Revised Statutes, and may affirm, modify or overrule the decision. If the council determines that there has been an improper expenditure of system development charge revenues, the council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent.

(c) The decision of the council shall be judicially reviewed only as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100.

(2) Methodology Review. 

(a) The city shall maintain a list of persons who have made written requests for notification prior to adoption or amendment of a methodology for any system development charge. Written notice shall be mailed to persons on the list at least 90 days prior to the first hearing to establish or modify a system development charge, and the methodology supporting the system development charge shall be available at least 60 days prior to the first hearing. The failure of a person on the list to receive a notice that was mailed does not invalidate the action of the city. 

(b) The city may periodically delete names from the list, but, at least 30 days prior to removing a name from the list, must notify the person whose name is to be deleted that a new written request for notification is required if the person wishes to remain on the notification list. 

(c) Legal action intended to contest the methodology used for calculating a system development charge may not be filed after 60 days following adoption or modification of the system development charge resolution by the city. Persons shall request judicial review of the methodology used for calculating a system development charge only as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100.

(3) Other Review. 

(a) Challenges of any other decisions required or permitted to be made by the city under this chapter or associated resolutions including, but not limited to, objections to the calculation of a system development charge must be filed in writing with the city office within 20 days of the date of the decision. The complaint must describe with particularity the challenged city decision, and state:

(i) The name and address of the appellant;

(ii) The nature of the calculation being appealed;

(iii) The reason the calculation is incorrect; and

(iv) What the correct determination of the appeal should be or how the correct calculation should be derived.

A person who fails to file such a written challenge within the time permitted waives all objections, and any filed objections shall be dismissed.

An appeal fee in an amount as set by council resolution shall accompany the complaint. A separate complaint and fee must be filed for each decision being appealed.

(b) A hearing shall be held by the council within 60 days of the filing of the complaint. After providing notice to the complainant, the council shall determine whether the decision challenged is in accordance with this chapter and the applicable Oregon Revised Statutes, and may affirm, modify, or overrule the decision. 

(c) The council must advise a person making written objection to a system development charge calculation of the review procedures provided by this section, and the right to petition for review pursuant to ORS 34.010 to ORS 34.100. 

(d) A decision to increase a system development charge by modifying the plan adopted pursuant to VMC 13.25.080 may be judicially reviewed only as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100. (Ord. 467 § 5, 2006; Ord. 452 § 15, 2005)


13.25.160 Prohibited connection.

No person may increase usage of a capital improvement or connect to the water or sewer system of the city unless the appropriate system development charge has been paid, or an installment payment plan has been applied for and approved. (Ord. 467 § 6, 2006; Ord. 452 § 16, 2005)


13.25.170 Violation – Penalty.

Violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00, in addition to any other lawful remedies available to city per this chapter, or other local, state or federal law. (Ord. 467 § 6, 2006; Ord. 452 § 17, 2005)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



13.25.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the system development charge is to impose a portion of the cost of capital improvements for water, waste water, drainage, streets, flood control, and parks upon those developments and redevelopments that create the need for or increase the demands on capital improvements. (Ord. 452 § 1, 2005)


13.25.020 Scope.

The system development charge imposed by this chapter is separate from and in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge, or fee otherwise provided by law or imposed as a condition of development. (Ord. 452 § 2, 2005)


13.25.030 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

(1) “Administrative charge” means the amount charged to each development to cover the cost of developing the methodologies, providing an annual accounting of system development charge expenditures, implementation, and operational costs associated with the system development charge program.

(2) “Capital improvements” means facilities or assets used for:

(a) Water supply, treatment and distribution;

(b) Waste water collection, transmission, treatment and disposal;

(c) Drainage and flood control;

(d) Transportation; or

(e) Parks and recreation.

(f) “Capital improvement” does not include costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvement. 

(3) “Development” means the change in character, occupancy or use of land or buildings; including redevelopment and demolishing a building for the conversion of such property to a different use.

(4) “Improvement fee” means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to VMC 13.25.040.

(5) “Land area” means the area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane, with the exception of a portion of the parcel within a recorded right-of-way or easement subject to a servitude for a public street or for a public scenic or preservation purpose.

(6) “Owner” means the owner or owners of record title, or the purchaser or purchasers under a recorded land sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in the described real property.

(7) “Parcel of land” means a lot, parcel, block, or other tract of land that is occupied or may be occupied by a structure or structures or other use, and that includes the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning, subdivision, or other development ordinances.

(8) “Qualified public improvements” means a capital improvement that is required as a condition of development approval, identified in the plan adopted pursuant to VMC 13.25.080, and either:

(a) Not located on or contiguous to property that is the subject of the development approval; or 

(b) Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee is related.

(9) “Reimbursement fee” means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements already constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to VMC 13.25.040, for which the council determines capacity exists.

(10) “System development charge” means a reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit or building permit, or at the time of connection to the capital improvement. “System development charge” includes that portion of a sewer or water system connection charge that is greater than the amount necessary to reimburse the city for its average cost of inspecting and installing connections with sewer and water facilities. “System development charge” does not include fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district assessment, a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision, expedited land division, or limited land use decision. (Ord. 467 § 1, 2006; Ord. 452 § 3, 2005)


13.25.040 System development charge established.*

(1) A system development charge shall be established and may be revised by resolution of the city council. The resolution shall set the amount of the charge, the type of charge, and, if the charge applies to a geographic area smaller than the entire city, the geographic area subject to the charge.

(2) Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter or other local or state law, a system development charge is hereby imposed upon all development within the city, upon increased usage of a capital improvement, issuance of a development permit or building permit, or connection to the capital improvement, and upon all development outside the boundary of the city that connects to or otherwise uses the sewer, water or storm sewer facilities of the city.

(3) An administrative charge associated with the cost of the city’s system development charge program, including the periodic and on-going direct and indirect costs associated with complying with the requirement of state law and the cost of administering system development charges, may be established by council resolution. (Ord. 467 § 2, 2006; Ord. 452 § 4, 2005)

* Code reviser’s note: Ord. 501, Section 1, temporarily allows for deferral of the charges established in VMC 13.25.040. In Section 6, Ord. 501 provides that it will be automatically repealed on January 1, 2013, unless extended by the city council. Ord. 501 is available for review in the city clerk’s office.


13.25.050 Methodology.

(1) The methodology used to establish or modify a reimbursement fee shall consider the cost of the then-existing facilities, prior contributions by then-existing users, gifts or grants from federal or state government or private persons, the value of unused capacity available to future system users, rate-making principals employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by the council. The methodology for establishing or modifying a reimbursement fee shall promote the objective that future system users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities.

(2) The methodology used to establish or modify an improvement fee shall consider the cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the system, the need for increased capacity required to serve future users, and be calculated to obtain the cost of capital improvements for the projected need for available system capacity for future users.

(3) The methodology used to establish or modify an improvement fee or a reimbursement fee, or both, shall be contained in a resolution adopted by the council. 

(4) The methodology used to establish or modify an improvement fee or a reimbursement fee shall not:

(a) Include or incorporate a method or system under which the payment of the fee or the amount of the fee is determined by the number of employees of an employer without regard to new construction, new development or new use of an existing structure by the employer;

(b) Include or incorporate any method or system under which the payment of the fee or the amount of the fee is based on the number of individuals hired by the employer after a specified date; or 

(c) Assume that costs are necessarily incurred for capital improvements when an employer hires an additional employee. 

(5) All methodology for establishing or modifying reimbursement or improvement fees shall be available for public inspection.

(6) A change in the amount of a reimbursement fee or an improvement fee is not a modification of the system development charge if the change in amount is based on a change in the cost of materials, labor or real property applied to the projects or project capacity as set forth in the plan adopted pursuant to VMC 13.25.080; or the periodic application of one or more specific cost indexes or other periodic data sources. 

A specific cost index or periodic data source must be: 

(a) A relevant measurement of the average change in prices or costs over an identified time period for materials, labor, real property, or a combination of the three; 

(b) Published by a recognized organization or agency that produces the index or data source for reasons that are independent of the system development charge methodology; and 

(c) Incorporated as part of the established methodology or identified and adopted in a separate city resolution or order. 

(7) A combination of a reimbursement fee and an improvement fee may be imposed, if the methodology demonstrates that the charge is not based upon providing the same system capacity. (Ord. 452 § 5, 2005)


13.25.060 Authorized expenditures.

(1) Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements associated with the systems for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to the repayment of indebtedness.

(2) Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity-increasing capital improvements, including expenditures relating to the repayment of debt for the improvements. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities or provides new facilities. The     portion of the capital improvements funded by improvement fees must be related to the need for increased capacity to provide service for future users.

(3) A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues derived from an improvement fee shall be included in the plan adopted by the city pursuant to VMC 13.25.080.

(4) Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2) of this section, system development charge revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing system development charge methodologies and providing an annual accounting of system development charge expenditures. (Ord. 452 § 6, 2005)


13.25.070 Expenditure restrictions.

(1) System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements.

(2) System development charges shall not be expended for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements. (Ord. 452 § 7, 2005)


13.25.080 Improvement plan.

Prior to the establishment of a system development charge by resolution, the council shall adopt a plan that:

(1) Lists the capital improvements that may be funded with improvement fee revenues, including the estimated cost and time of construction of each improvement, and the estimated percentage of costs eligible to be funded with revenues from improvement fees for each improvement; and

(2) Describes the process for modifying the plan. The council may modify the plan and list at any time. If a system development charge will be increased by a proposed modification of the list to include a capacity-increasing capital improvement, as referenced in VMC 13.25.060(2), the city shall provide at least 30 days’ notice of the proposed plan modification to persons who have requested written notice under VMC 13.25.150(2). A hearing on such proposed plan modifications will be held if the city receives a written request for such a hearing within seven days of the date the proposed modification is scheduled for adoption. If no such request is received within this time period, a hearing is not required, but may be held in the council’s sole discretion. (Ord. 452 § 8, 2005)


13.25.090 Collection of charge.*

(1) The system development charge is payable upon annexation or issuance of a building permit, a development permit, a development permit for development not requiring the issuance of a building permit, a permit or approval to connect to the water or sewer system, or a right-of-way access permit.

(2) If no building, development, or connection permit is required, the system development charge is payable at the time the usage of the capital improvement is increased based on changes in the use of the property.

(3) The applicant for a connection permit shall be required to state in writing the intended use of the building in sufficient detail to enable the city to determine the appropriate category of use. If the use of a building changes or if the stated use is incorrect, the occupant shall report the change of use to the city within 30 days and promptly pay any additional system development charges. If the occupant fails to report a correct statement of use or a change of use within 30 days or fails to pay the additional system development charge within 10 days after invoice, the occupant shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the balance due plus interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of 1.5 percent per month.

(4) The city shall not issue such permit or allow such connection until the charge has been paid in full, provision for installment payments has been made pursuant to VMC 13.25.110, or unless an exemption is granted pursuant to VMC 13.25.120. (Ord. 452 § 9, 2005)

* Code reviser’s note: Ord. 501, Section 1, temporarily allows for deferral of the charges regulated in VMC 13.25.090. In Section 6, Ord. 501 provides that it will be automatically repealed on January 1, 2013, unless extended by the city council. Ord. 501 is available for review in the city clerk’s office.


13.25.100 Delinquent charges – Hearing.

(1) When, for any reason, a system development charge has not been paid, the city administrator shall report to the council the amount of the uncollected charge, the description of the real property to which the charge is attributable, the date upon which the charge was due, and the name of the owner.

(2) The council shall schedule a public hearing on the matter and direct that notice of the hearing be given to each owner with a copy of the city administrator’s report concerning the unpaid charge. Notice of the hearing shall be given either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by both personal and mailed notice,     and by posting notice on the parcel at least 10 days before the date set for the hearing.

(3) At the hearing, the council may accept, reject, or modify the determination of the city administrator as set forth in the report. If the council finds that a system development charge is unpaid and uncollected, the city recorder shall docket the unpaid and uncollected system development charge in the city lien docket. Upon completion of the docketing, the city shall have a lien against the described land for the full amount of the unpaid charge, together with interest at the legal rate of 10 percent and with the city’s actual cost of serving notice of the hearing on the owners. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in Chapter 223 ORS. (Ord. 452 § 10, 2005)


13.25.110 Installment payment.

(1) The owner of the parcel of land subject to a system development charge of over $10,000 may apply for payment in installments, to include interest at the legal rate of 10 percent on the unpaid balance, in accordance with ORS 223.208. Payment may be over a period of less than 10 years, if so elected by the property owner. Otherwise, system development charges are payable over a period of 10 years, in accordance with such terms as set by the city. 

(2) The city administrator shall provide application forms for installment payments, which shall include a waiver of all rights to contest the validity of the lien, except for the correction of computational errors.

(3) An applicant for installment payments shall have the burden of demonstrating the applicant’s authority to assent to the imposition of a lien on the parcel and that the property interest of the applicant is adequate to secure payment of the lien.

(4) The city administrator shall report to the city recorder the amount of the system development charge, the dates on which payments are due, the name of the owner, and the description of the parcel.

(5) The city recorder shall docket the lien in the lien docket. From that time the city shall have a lien upon the described parcel for the amount of the system development charge, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the rate established by the council. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in Chapter 223 ORS.

(6) Upon written request of the city administrator, the city recorder is authorized to cancel assessments of system development charges, without further council action, where the new development approved by the building permit is not constructed and the building permit is cancelled.

(7) For property that has been subject to a cancellation of assessed system development charges, any future installment payment contract shall be subject to the code provisions applicable to system development charges and installment payment contracts on file on the date the new contract is received by the city. (Ord. 452 § 11, 2005)


13.25.120 Exemptions.

(1) Structures and uses established and legally existing on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are exempt from system development charges imposed hereunder, until the parcel is further developed and connects to or increases the parcel’s or structure’s use of one or more public improvement facilities.

(2) Additions to single-family dwellings that do not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the State Uniform Building Code, are exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

(3) An alteration, addition, replacement or change in use that does not increase the parcel’s or structure’s use of the public improvement facility are exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

(4) Municipal projects are exempt from all system development charges. (Ord. 467 § 3, 2006; Ord. 452 § 12, 2005)


13.25.130 Credits.

(1) A system development charge shall be imposed when a change of use of a parcel or structure occurs, but credit shall be given for the computed system development charge to the extent that prior structures existed and services were established on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The credit so computed shall not exceed the calculated system development charge. No refund shall be made on account of such credit.

(2) A credit shall also be given for construction of a qualified public improvement, upon acceptance by the city of that public improvement. The credit shall be only for the improvement fee charged for the type of improvement being constructed, and may be granted only for the cost of that portion of such improvement that exceeds the city’s minimum standard facility size or capacity needed to serve that particular development project or property. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that a particular improvement qualifies for credit under this section. The request for credit shall be filed in writing no later than 60 days after acceptance of the improvement by the city.

(3) The city may deny a credit if it demonstrates that the application is not for a qualified public improvement, as defined in this chapter, or by showing that the improvement for which credit is sought is not included in the plan adopted pursuant to VMC 13.25.080.

(4) When the construction of a qualified public improvement gives rise to a credit amount greater than the improvement fee that would otherwise be levied against the project receiving development approval, the excess credit may be applied against improvement fees that accrue in subsequent phases of the original development project. However, this subsection shall not prohibit the city from providing a greater credit, or from establishing a system providing for the transferability of credits, or from providing a credit for a capital improvement not identified in the plan adopted pursuant to VMC 13.25.080, or from providing a share of the cost of such improvement by other means, if the city so chooses. 

(5) Credit shall be used within 10 years from the date the credit is given. (Ord. 467 § 4, 2006; Ord. 452 § 13, 2005)


13.25.140 Segregation and use of revenue – Annual accounting.  

All funds derived from a particular type of system development charge are to be segregated by accounting practices from all other funds of the city. The system development charge calculated and collected shall be used for no purpose other than those set forth in VMC 13.25.060. The city shall provide an annual accounting to be completed by January 1st of each year for system development charges showing the total amount of system development charge revenues collected for each system and the projects that were funded in the previous fiscal year. The city shall include in the annual accounting a list of the amounts spent on each project funded, in whole or in part, with system development charge revenues, and the amount of revenue collected by the city from system development charges and attributed to the cost of complying with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing system development charge methodologies and providing annual accountings. (Ord. 452 § 14, 2005)


13.25.150 Review procedures.

(1) Expenditure Review. 

(a) Any citizen or other interested person may challenge an expenditure of system development charge revenues by filing a written complaint with the city describing with particularity the decision of the city and the expenditure which the person challenges. Such challenges must be filed within two years of the expenditure of the system development charge revenues. 

(b) A hearing shall be held by the council within 60 days of the filing of the complaint. After providing notice to the challenger, the council shall determine whether the expenditure was in accordance with this chapter and the applicable Oregon Revised Statutes, and may affirm, modify or overrule the decision. If the council determines that there has been an improper expenditure of system development charge revenues, the council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent.

(c) The decision of the council shall be judicially reviewed only as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100.

(2) Methodology Review. 

(a) The city shall maintain a list of persons who have made written requests for notification prior to adoption or amendment of a methodology for any system development charge. Written notice shall be mailed to persons on the list at least 90 days prior to the first hearing to establish or modify a system development charge, and the methodology supporting the system development charge shall be available at least 60 days prior to the first hearing. The failure of a person on the list to receive a notice that was mailed does not invalidate the action of the city. 

(b) The city may periodically delete names from the list, but, at least 30 days prior to removing a name from the list, must notify the person whose name is to be deleted that a new written request for notification is required if the person wishes to remain on the notification list. 

(c) Legal action intended to contest the methodology used for calculating a system development charge may not be filed after 60 days following adoption or modification of the system development charge resolution by the city. Persons shall request judicial review of the methodology used for calculating a system development charge only as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100.

(3) Other Review. 

(a) Challenges of any other decisions required or permitted to be made by the city under this chapter or associated resolutions including, but not limited to, objections to the calculation of a system development charge must be filed in writing with the city office within 20 days of the date of the decision. The complaint must describe with particularity the challenged city decision, and state:

(i) The name and address of the appellant;

(ii) The nature of the calculation being appealed;

(iii) The reason the calculation is incorrect; and

(iv) What the correct determination of the appeal should be or how the correct calculation should be derived.

A person who fails to file such a written challenge within the time permitted waives all objections, and any filed objections shall be dismissed.

An appeal fee in an amount as set by council resolution shall accompany the complaint. A separate complaint and fee must be filed for each decision being appealed.

(b) A hearing shall be held by the council within 60 days of the filing of the complaint. After providing notice to the complainant, the council shall determine whether the decision challenged is in accordance with this chapter and the applicable Oregon Revised Statutes, and may affirm, modify, or overrule the decision. 

(c) The council must advise a person making written objection to a system development charge calculation of the review procedures provided by this section, and the right to petition for review pursuant to ORS 34.010 to ORS 34.100. 

(d) A decision to increase a system development charge by modifying the plan adopted pursuant to VMC 13.25.080 may be judicially reviewed only as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100. (Ord. 467 § 5, 2006; Ord. 452 § 15, 2005)


13.25.160 Prohibited connection.

No person may increase usage of a capital improvement or connect to the water or sewer system of the city unless the appropriate system development charge has been paid, or an installment payment plan has been applied for and approved. (Ord. 467 § 6, 2006; Ord. 452 § 16, 2005)


13.25.170 Violation – Penalty.

Violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00, in addition to any other lawful remedies available to city per this chapter, or other local, state or federal law. (Ord. 467 § 6, 2006; Ord. 452 § 17, 2005)


Chapter 13.20       CROSS CONNECTIONS

Sections:

13.20.010    Definitions.

13.20.020    Cross connection control requirements.

13.20.030    Notices.

13.20.040    Shut-offs.

13.20.050    Inspections.

13.20.060    Fees.

13.20.070    Violation – Penalty.

13.20.080    Separate violations.


13.20.010  Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

(1) "Air gap separation" means the physical vertical separation between the free-flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and the open or nonpressure receiving vessel.

(2) "Approval" or "approved" means approved in writing.

(3) "Auxiliary water supply" means any supply of water used to augment the supply obtained from the city water system which serves the premises in question.

(4) "AWWA" means the American Water Works Association.

(5) "Backflow" means the flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow.

(6) "Backflow prevention device" or "backflow prevention device assembly" means a backflow prevention device such as a pressure vacuum breaker, a double check valve, or a reduced pressure principle device, and the attached shut-off valves on the inlet and outlet ends of the device assembled as a complete unit.

(7) "Check valve" means a valve which allows flow in only one direction.

(8) "City water system" shall mean the potable water system of the city of Veneta.

(9) "Cross connection" means any link or channel between the piping which carries drinking water and the piping or fixtures which carry other water or other substances.

(10) "Division" means the Health Division of the Oregon Department of Human Resources.

(11) "Double check valve assembly" means an assembly of two independently acting check valves with shut-off valves on each side of the check valves and test cocks for checking the watertightness of each check valve.

(12) "Owner" means any person owning a beneficial interest with a right of possession in property served by the municipal water system, any occupant of any premises served by the city water system, and any customer or water user of the city water system.

(13) "Person" includes any individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, municipal, state or federal agency, or joint stock company and includes any receiver, special master, trustee, assignee or other similar representative thereof.

(14) "Potable water" means safe drinking water.

(15) "Public works director" means the public works director for the city of Veneta or the public works director's designee.

(16) "Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (RP device)" means a device for preventing backflow which has two check valves, a differential relief valve located between the two check valves, two shut-off valves, one on the upstream side and the other on the downstream side of the check valves, and four test cocks for checking the watertightness of the check valves and the operation of the relief valve.

(17) "Safe drinking water" means water which has sufficiently low concentrations of microbiological, inorganic chemical, organic chemical, radiological or physical substances so that individuals drinking such water at normal levels of consumption will not be exposed to disease organisms or other substances which may produce harmful physiological effects.

(18) "Service connection" means the piping connection by means of which water is conveyed from a distribution main of a public water system to a customer's premises. The portion of the service connection which conveys water from the distribution main to the customer's property line, or to the service meter where provided, is owned by and under the jurisdiction of the water supplier.

(19) "Water system" means a system for the provision of piped water for human consumption. (Ord. 302 § 1, 1988)


13.20.020      Cross connection control requirements.

(1) Whenever a water user or the owner of the premises obtaining water from the city water system treats the water in any way or adds any chemical or substance to the water, such person shall immediately notify the public works director.

(2) Backflow prevention device assemblies for protecting the city water system shall be installed on the owner's side of the service connection to premises where an approved air gap does not exist and:

(a) There is an auxiliary water supply which is connected to the potable water piping;

(b) There is an auxiliary water supply which could be connected to the potable water piping, unless all of the following requirements are met:

(i) The auxiliary water supply is not, in fact, connected to the potable water piping;

(ii) The auxiliary water supply is conspicuously posted with a sign identifying it as a nonpotable water supply and prohibiting it from being connected to the city water supply or any potable water supply system on the premises. The location and contents of the sign shall be determined by the public works director;

(iii) The owner permits inspections, at such time as the public works director may determine, to determine whether the auxiliary water supply has been connected to the potable water supply system or the city water supply system;

(iv) If any inspection reveals that the auxiliary water system has been connected to the city water system or any potable water system on the premises, the public works director may, upon 30 days' written notice to the owner, require installation of a backflow prevention device assembly at the service conner, require installation of a backflow prevention device assembly at the service connection;

(c) There is intricate plumbing which makes it impractical to ascertain whether or not cross connections exist;

(d) There is back siphonage potential;

(e) Cross connections or potential cross connections exist.

(3) The type of backflow prevention device required under subsection (2) of this section shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard which exists:

(a) An approved air gap of at least twice the inside diameter, but not less than one inch, of the incoming supply line measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, or an approved reduced pressure (RP) device assembly, shall be installed where the substance which could backflow is hazardous to health, such as but not limited to sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, plating plants, hospitals, mortuaries, car washes, medical clinics;

(b) An approved double check valve assembly shall be installed where the substance which could backflow is objectionable, but does not pose an unreasonable risk to health;

(c) An approved pressure vacuum breaker or an atmospheric breaker shall be installed where the substance which could backflow is objectionable, but does not pose an unreasonable risk to health and where there is no possibility of back pressure in the downstream piping. A shut-off valve may be installed on the line downstream of a pressure vacuum breaker, but shall not be installed downstream of an atmospheric vacuum breaker.

(4) Except as set forth in subsection (6) of this section, all backflow prevention device assemblies required under this section shall be of a type or model approved by the division.

(5) All backflow prevention device assemblies shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 2 and Chapter 4, Recommended Installation Practice, Accepted Procedure and Practice in Cross Connection Control Manual, November 1985, 4th Edition published by the Cross Connection Control Committee, Pacific Northwest Section, AWWA.

(6) Backflow prevention device assemblies installed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter which were approved at the time they were installed, but are not on the current list of approved device assemblies maintained by the division, shall be permitted to remain in service provided they are properly maintained, are commensurate with the degree of hazard, are tested at least annually, and perform satisfactorily. When devices of this type are moved, or require more than minimum maintenance, they shall be replaced by device assemblies which are on the division list of approved device assemblies.

(7) The water user or the owner of the premises where one or more reduced pressured device assemblies, double check valve assemblies or pressure vacuum breakers have been installed shall have the device or devices tested, at the owner's or user's expense, at least once per year. Devices shall be tested immediately after installation and after they are moved. Reports on the test shall be prepared by the tester and copies of the reports shall be provided to the water user or the owner of the premises, to the city of Veneta, and to the division within 15 days of the date the test is conducted. Tests shall be performed by certified testers in conformance with Oregon Administrative Rule 333-61-070, governing cross connection control requirements.

(8) If any backflow prevention devices are found not to be functioning properly, the public works director shall give notice to the water user or owner of the premises. The notice shall require that the owner or water user repair the backflow prevention device within 30 days of the mailing of the notice, unless the public works director determines that the potential backflow could be hazardous to health, in which case the notice period may be shortened to such time as the public works director may determine. (Ord. 392 § 1, 1998; Ord. 302 § 2, 1988)


13.20.030      Notices.

Any notice required or permitted under this chapter shall be deemed given upon mailing to the address of the premises served or to the billing address of the water user listed with the city water department. (Ord. 302 § 3, 1988)


13.20.040      Shut-offs.

The public works director may shut off the water service to any premises when:

(1) A violation of the provisions of this chapter continues after the expiration of any notice period provided under this chapter;

(2) Immediately, upon determination that an emergency exits or that a substantial hazard exists due to the potential for backflow of hazardous substances;

(3) Immediately upon the refusal of any water user or owner of premises to permit inspection, or if the public works director is unable to contact the water user or owner to arrange for an inspection. (Ord. 302 § 4, 1988)


13.20.050      Inspections.

All water users and owners of premises served by the city water system shall permit inspections by the public works director, at such times as the public works director may designate, for purposes of determining whether the water user or owner is in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 302 § 5, 1988)


13.20.060      Fees.

Fees for inspections by the public works director, and for signs posted in accordance with VMC 13.20.020(2)(b)(ii), shall be set by resolution. Fees for turn-ons and shut-offs shall be in accordance with the fee resolution implementing Chapter 13.05 VMC. (Ord. 302 § 6, 1988)


13.20.070      Violation – Penalty.

Violations of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000. (Ord. 302 § 7, 1988)


13.20.080      Separate violations.

Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 302 § 8, 1988)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]
Chapter 13.30 SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

13.30.010    Standard specifications.

13.30.020    Improvement procedures.

13.30.030    Filing of standard specifications.


13.30.010 Standard specifications.

(1) The city engineer shall prepare standard specifications for construction, reconstruction or repair of streets, sidewalks, sewers, storm sewers, water mains, surface drainage and storm sewer systems, broadband fiber conduit, and other utilities and public improvements to be constructed in the city of Veneta. The standard specifications of the city of Veneta, including typical sections and plans, shall be adopted by the council under separate resolution.

(2) All public improvements shall be constructed according to standard specifications of the city unless an exemption is granted by the city engineer. If the city does not have adopted design standards or specifications, an applicant who proposes to construct public improvements shall submit proposed improvement plans and specifications to the city engineer for approval. (Ord. 509 § 1, 2014; Ord. 404 § 1, 1999)


13.30.020 Improvement procedures.

Public improvements shall be installed in accordance with the following procedure:

(1) Approval of Plans. All public improvement plans, specifications and contract documents must be checked for adequacy and approved by the city engineer and city attorney prior to the award of a contract or the commencement of construction of the public improvement.

(2) Notice to Proceed. Public improvement work shall not be commenced until the city engineer has issued a written notice to proceed. If work is discontinued for any reason during the course of construction, work shall not be resumed until the city is given 24 hours’ advance written notice.

(3) Inspections. Public improvements shall be constructed under the inspection and to the satisfaction of the city engineer, or his authorized representative. The city engineer may require or authorize changes in typical sections or details in the public interest if unusual conditions arise during the course of construction.

(4) Installation of Underground Utilities. Underground utilities, sanitary sewers, storm drains, water mains, and broadband fiber conduit installed in streets shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of streets. Stubs for surface connections for underground utilities, sanitary sewers, water services, and broadband conduit shall be placed to the limits of the city right-of-way when service connections are made and the end of all stubs shall be marked for future location.

(5) As-Built Drawings. Three copies and one reproducible drawing set of as-built drawings showing the location of all public improvements as constructed, all of which have been stamped and signed by the engineer of record, shall be filed with the city upon the completion of the improvements. (Ord. 509 § 2, 2014; Ord. 404 § 2, 1999)


13.30.030 Filing of standard specifications.

One copy of the standard specifications of the city of Veneta shall be kept on file in the office of the city recorder, public works director, and city engineer for inspection by the public. (Ord. 404 § 3, 1999)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



13.30.010 Standard specifications.

(1) The city engineer shall prepare standard specifications for construction, reconstruction or repair of streets, sidewalks, sewers, storm sewers, water mains, surface drainage and storm sewer systems, broadband fiber conduit, and other utilities and public improvements to be constructed in the city of Veneta. The standard specifications of the city of Veneta, including typical sections and plans, shall be adopted by the council under separate resolution.

(2) All public improvements shall be constructed according to standard specifications of the city unless an exemption is granted by the city engineer. If the city does not have adopted design standards or specifications, an applicant who proposes to construct public improvements shall submit proposed improvement plans and specifications to the city engineer for approval. (Ord. 509 § 1, 2014; Ord. 404 § 1, 1999)


13.30.020 Improvement procedures.

Public improvements shall be installed in accordance with the following procedure:

(1) Approval of Plans. All public improvement plans, specifications and contract documents must be checked for adequacy and approved by the city engineer and city attorney prior to the award of a contract or the commencement of construction of the public improvement.

(2) Notice to Proceed. Public improvement work shall not be commenced until the city engineer has issued a written notice to proceed. If work is discontinued for any reason during the course of construction, work shall not be resumed until the city is given 24 hours’ advance written notice.

(3) Inspections. Public improvements shall be constructed under the inspection and to the satisfaction of the city engineer, or his authorized representative. The city engineer may require or authorize changes in typical sections or details in the public interest if unusual conditions arise during the course of construction.

(4) Installation of Underground Utilities. Underground utilities, sanitary sewers, storm drains, water mains, and broadband fiber conduit installed in streets shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of streets. Stubs for surface connections for underground utilities, sanitary sewers, water services, and broadband conduit shall be placed to the limits of the city right-of-way when service connections are made and the end of all stubs shall be marked for future location.

(5) As-Built Drawings. Three copies and one reproducible drawing set of as-built drawings showing the location of all public improvements as constructed, all of which have been stamped and signed by the engineer of record, shall be filed with the city upon the completion of the improvements. (Ord. 509 § 2, 2014; Ord. 404 § 2, 1999)


13.30.030 Filing of standard specifications.

One copy of the standard specifications of the city of Veneta shall be kept on file in the office of the city recorder, public works director, and city engineer for inspection by the public. (Ord. 404 § 3, 1999)


Chapter 13.20       CROSS CONNECTIONS

Sections:

13.20.010    Definitions.

13.20.020    Cross connection control requirements.

13.20.030    Notices.

13.20.040    Shut-offs.

13.20.050    Inspections.

13.20.060    Fees.

13.20.070    Violation – Penalty.

13.20.080    Separate violations.


13.20.010  Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

(1) "Air gap separation" means the physical vertical separation between the free-flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and the open or nonpressure receiving vessel.

(2) "Approval" or "approved" means approved in writing.

(3) "Auxiliary water supply" means any supply of water used to augment the supply obtained from the city water system which serves the premises in question.

(4) "AWWA" means the American Water Works Association.

(5) "Backflow" means the flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow.

(6) "Backflow prevention device" or "backflow prevention device assembly" means a backflow prevention device such as a pressure vacuum breaker, a double check valve, or a reduced pressure principle device, and the attached shut-off valves on the inlet and outlet ends of the device assembled as a complete unit.

(7) "Check valve" means a valve which allows flow in only one direction.

(8) "City water system" shall mean the potable water system of the city of Veneta.

(9) "Cross connection" means any link or channel between the piping which carries drinking water and the piping or fixtures which carry other water or other substances.

(10) "Division" means the Health Division of the Oregon Department of Human Resources.

(11) "Double check valve assembly" means an assembly of two independently acting check valves with shut-off valves on each side of the check valves and test cocks for checking the watertightness of each check valve.

(12) "Owner" means any person owning a beneficial interest with a right of possession in property served by the municipal water system, any occupant of any premises served by the city water system, and any customer or water user of the city water system.

(13) "Person" includes any individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, municipal, state or federal agency, or joint stock company and includes any receiver, special master, trustee, assignee or other similar representative thereof.

(14) "Potable water" means safe drinking water.

(15) "Public works director" means the public works director for the city of Veneta or the public works director's designee.

(16) "Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (RP device)" means a device for preventing backflow which has two check valves, a differential relief valve located between the two check valves, two shut-off valves, one on the upstream side and the other on the downstream side of the check valves, and four test cocks for checking the watertightness of the check valves and the operation of the relief valve.

(17) "Safe drinking water" means water which has sufficiently low concentrations of microbiological, inorganic chemical, organic chemical, radiological or physical substances so that individuals drinking such water at normal levels of consumption will not be exposed to disease organisms or other substances which may produce harmful physiological effects.

(18) "Service connection" means the piping connection by means of which water is conveyed from a distribution main of a public water system to a customer's premises. The portion of the service connection which conveys water from the distribution main to the customer's property line, or to the service meter where provided, is owned by and under the jurisdiction of the water supplier.

(19) "Water system" means a system for the provision of piped water for human consumption. (Ord. 302 § 1, 1988)


13.20.020      Cross connection control requirements.

(1) Whenever a water user or the owner of the premises obtaining water from the city water system treats the water in any way or adds any chemical or substance to the water, such person shall immediately notify the public works director.

(2) Backflow prevention device assemblies for protecting the city water system shall be installed on the owner's side of the service connection to premises where an approved air gap does not exist and:

(a) There is an auxiliary water supply which is connected to the potable water piping;

(b) There is an auxiliary water supply which could be connected to the potable water piping, unless all of the following requirements are met:

(i) The auxiliary water supply is not, in fact, connected to the potable water piping;

(ii) The auxiliary water supply is conspicuously posted with a sign identifying it as a nonpotable water supply and prohibiting it from being connected to the city water supply or any potable water supply system on the premises. The location and contents of the sign shall be determined by the public works director;

(iii) The owner permits inspections, at such time as the public works director may determine, to determine whether the auxiliary water supply has been connected to the potable water supply system or the city water supply system;

(iv) If any inspection reveals that the auxiliary water system has been connected to the city water system or any potable water system on the premises, the public works director may, upon 30 days' written notice to the owner, require installation of a backflow prevention device assembly at the service conner, require installation of a backflow prevention device assembly at the service connection;

(c) There is intricate plumbing which makes it impractical to ascertain whether or not cross connections exist;

(d) There is back siphonage potential;

(e) Cross connections or potential cross connections exist.

(3) The type of backflow prevention device required under subsection (2) of this section shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard which exists:

(a) An approved air gap of at least twice the inside diameter, but not less than one inch, of the incoming supply line measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, or an approved reduced pressure (RP) device assembly, shall be installed where the substance which could backflow is hazardous to health, such as but not limited to sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, plating plants, hospitals, mortuaries, car washes, medical clinics;

(b) An approved double check valve assembly shall be installed where the substance which could backflow is objectionable, but does not pose an unreasonable risk to health;

(c) An approved pressure vacuum breaker or an atmospheric breaker shall be installed where the substance which could backflow is objectionable, but does not pose an unreasonable risk to health and where there is no possibility of back pressure in the downstream piping. A shut-off valve may be installed on the line downstream of a pressure vacuum breaker, but shall not be installed downstream of an atmospheric vacuum breaker.

(4) Except as set forth in subsection (6) of this section, all backflow prevention device assemblies required under this section shall be of a type or model approved by the division.

(5) All backflow prevention device assemblies shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 2 and Chapter 4, Recommended Installation Practice, Accepted Procedure and Practice in Cross Connection Control Manual, November 1985, 4th Edition published by the Cross Connection Control Committee, Pacific Northwest Section, AWWA.

(6) Backflow prevention device assemblies installed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter which were approved at the time they were installed, but are not on the current list of approved device assemblies maintained by the division, shall be permitted to remain in service provided they are properly maintained, are commensurate with the degree of hazard, are tested at least annually, and perform satisfactorily. When devices of this type are moved, or require more than minimum maintenance, they shall be replaced by device assemblies which are on the division list of approved device assemblies.

(7) The water user or the owner of the premises where one or more reduced pressured device assemblies, double check valve assemblies or pressure vacuum breakers have been installed shall have the device or devices tested, at the owner's or user's expense, at least once per year. Devices shall be tested immediately after installation and after they are moved. Reports on the test shall be prepared by the tester and copies of the reports shall be provided to the water user or the owner of the premises, to the city of Veneta, and to the division within 15 days of the date the test is conducted. Tests shall be performed by certified testers in conformance with Oregon Administrative Rule 333-61-070, governing cross connection control requirements.

(8) If any backflow prevention devices are found not to be functioning properly, the public works director shall give notice to the water user or owner of the premises. The notice shall require that the owner or water user repair the backflow prevention device within 30 days of the mailing of the notice, unless the public works director determines that the potential backflow could be hazardous to health, in which case the notice period may be shortened to such time as the public works director may determine. (Ord. 392 § 1, 1998; Ord. 302 § 2, 1988)


13.20.030      Notices.

Any notice required or permitted under this chapter shall be deemed given upon mailing to the address of the premises served or to the billing address of the water user listed with the city water department. (Ord. 302 § 3, 1988)


13.20.040      Shut-offs.

The public works director may shut off the water service to any premises when:

(1) A violation of the provisions of this chapter continues after the expiration of any notice period provided under this chapter;

(2) Immediately, upon determination that an emergency exits or that a substantial hazard exists due to the potential for backflow of hazardous substances;

(3) Immediately upon the refusal of any water user or owner of premises to permit inspection, or if the public works director is unable to contact the water user or owner to arrange for an inspection. (Ord. 302 § 4, 1988)


13.20.050      Inspections.

All water users and owners of premises served by the city water system shall permit inspections by the public works director, at such times as the public works director may designate, for purposes of determining whether the water user or owner is in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 302 § 5, 1988)


13.20.060      Fees.

Fees for inspections by the public works director, and for signs posted in accordance with VMC 13.20.020(2)(b)(ii), shall be set by resolution. Fees for turn-ons and shut-offs shall be in accordance with the fee resolution implementing Chapter 13.05 VMC. (Ord. 302 § 6, 1988)


13.20.070      Violation – Penalty.

Violations of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000. (Ord. 302 § 7, 1988)


13.20.080      Separate violations.

Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 302 § 8, 1988)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]
Chapter 13.35 STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM

Sections:

13.35.010    Definitions.

13.35.020    Policy.

13.35.030    City responsibility.

13.35.040    Private responsibility.

13.35.050    Stormwater drainage fee.

13.35.060    Stormwater drainage utility fund.

13.35.070    Repealed.

13.35.080    Initiation of services.

13.35.090    Collection and enforcement.


13.35.010 Definitions.

Unless otherwise defined herein, terms used in this chapter have the meaning ascribed in VMC 3.20.005. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean:

(1) “Developed property” means a parcel or legal portion of real property, on which improvements exist or are being constructed. The term “improvement” includes, but is not limited to buildings, parking lots, landscaping, and outside storage.

(2) “Impervious surface” means any surface area which either prevents or retards saturation of water into the land surface, or a surface which causes water to run off the land surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions pre-existent to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, concrete or asphalt sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, graveled, oiled or macadam surfaces or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural saturation or runoff patterns which existed prior to development.

(3) “Improved premises” means any area which the city determines has been altered such that the runoff from the site or impact to water quality is greater than that which could historically have been expected. “Improved premises” does not include public ways under the jurisdiction of the city, county, state or federal government; however, it does include, but is not limited to, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.

(4) “Open drainage” means a natural or manmade path, ditch or channel which has the specific function of transmitting natural stream water or stormwater from a point of higher elevation to a point of lower elevation.

(5) “Responsible party” means the person or persons who by occupancy or contractual arrangement are responsible to pay for utility and other services provided to a billing unit, developed property or occupied unit. Unless another party has agreed in writing to pay and a copy of the writing is filed with the city, the person(s) required to pay the city’s water or sewer bill for an occupied unit shall be deemed the responsible party as to that occupied unit. For any occupied unit not otherwise required to pay a city utility bill, “responsible party” shall mean the person or persons legally entitled to occupancy of the occupied unit, unless another responsible party has agreed in writing to pay and a copy of the writing is filed with the city. Any person who has agreed in writing to pay is considered the responsible party if a copy of the writing is filed with city.

(6) “Stormwater drainage facilities” means any structure or configuration of the ground that is used or by its location becomes a place where stormwater flows or is accumulated, including but not limited to pipes, sewers, curbs, gutters, manholes, catch basins, ponds, open drainage ways and their appurtenances.

(7) “Stormwater drainage service” means the collecting of stormwater discharged from property on which development exists and its deposit directly or indirectly into public stormwater drainage facilities.

(8) “Stormwater” means water from precipitation, surface or subterranean water from any source, drainage and nonseptic waste water. (Ord. 532 § 1, 2016; Ord. 446 § 1, 2004)


13.35.020 Policy.

(1) Pursuant to the general laws of the state of Oregon and the powers granted in the Charter of the city, the council does hereby declare its intention to acquire, own, construct, reconstruct, equip, operate and maintain within the city limits of the city, and outside the city limits when consistent with the council’s adopted policies or intergovernmental agreements, stormwater drainage facilities, and also to require persons responsible to construct, reconstruct, maintain and extend stormwater drainage facilities.

(2) The improvement of both public and private stormwater drainage facilities through or adjacent to a new development shall be the responsibility of the developer. Said improvements shall comply with all applicable city ordinances, policies and standards.

(3) It is the policy of the city to participate within budgetary limits on improvements to stormwater drainage facilities when authorized by the council. To be considered for city financial participation, a facility must either:

(a) Be public and be of major benefit to the community such that the facility has capacity over that required to serve the property on which it is located and provided it is placed and sized in conformance with the stormwater drainage master plan; or

(b) Be a rehabilitation or replacement of an existing public facility.

(4) No portion of this chapter or statement herein or subsequent interpretations or policies shall relieve any property owner of assessments levied against real property for a local improvement project or for abating conditions on the property that violate any provision of the Veneta Municipal Code (VMC). (Ord. 446 § 2, 2004)


13.35.030 City responsibility.

The city shall manage public stormwater drainage facilities located on city-owned property, city right-of-way, and city easements. Other public stormwater drainage facilities that may be managed by the city include but are not limited to:

(1) A piped drainage system and its related appurtenances which have been designed and constructed expressly for use by the general public and accepted by the city;

(2) Roadside drainage ditches along unimproved city streets but not access drive culverts;

(3) Flood control facilities (levees, dikes, overflow channels, detention basins, retention basins, dams, pump stations, groundwater recharging basins, etc.) that have been designed and constructed expressly for use by the general public and accepted by the city;

(4) Retention systems constructed with city financial participation. (Ord. 446 § 3, 2004)


13.35.040 Private responsibility.

(1) A stormwater drainage facility to be managed by the person responsible includes but is not limited to:

(a) A stormwater drainage facility not located on city-owned property, city right-of-way, or city easement;

(b) A private parking lot stormwater drain;

(c) Any roof, footing or area drain;

(d) A stormwater drainage facility not designed and constructed for use by the general public;

(e) Access drive culverts in the public right-of-way or on private property;

(f) Private detention facilities or a retention system in the construction of which the city did not financially participate or did not officially accept responsibility for.

(2) Any person responsible for a facility defined in subsection (1) of this section shall maintain it so as to prevent flooding or damage to other property not owned or controlled by the person responsible and to prevent injury to any person on property not owned or controlled by the person responsible.

(3) The failure of any person responsible to comply with the obligation stated in subsection (1) or (2) of this section is a violation.

(4) The conditions on private property which may result in situations proscribed by subsection (2) of this section are declared to be a danger to public health and safety and therefore are a nuisance, to be abated as provided in Chapter 8.05 VMC. (Ord. 446 § 4, 2004)


13.35.050 Stormwater drainage fee.

(1) A stormwater drainage fee, in an amount to be set by council resolution, is hereby established and imposed upon all persons who use developed property. It is presumed that stormwater drainage services are used whenever a premises located within the city’s limits is developed, improved, contains one or more impervious surfaces, or whenever an improved premises is connected to the city’s sewer or water systems.

(2) The stormwater drainage fee will be set in an equitable amount for residential, commercial and industrial users in amounts which will provide sufficient funds to properly manage and maintain the city’s stormwater drainage facilities.

(3) The finance director shall charge the appropriate stormwater drainage fee to the responsible party for each billing unit with an active utility account or, for occupied units not connected to city water and/or sewer, to the responsible party for each occupied unit of residential and nonresidential property. The amount payable shall be redetermined if there is a change of use or development. All redeterminations based on a change in use or development shall be prospective only.

(4) The stormwater drainage fee shall be billed and collected from the responsible party identified in subsection (3) of this section. Stormwater drainage fees shall be included as part of the water and sewer bill for billing units with active utility accounts, and included on an “other utility” bill for occupied units not connected to city water or sewer services. All such bills shall be rendered regularly by the finance director and shall become due and payable upon receipt.

(5) Collections from responsible parties will be applied first to interest and penalties, second to city transportation utility fees, third to stormwater drainage fees, fourth to sanitary sewer service utilities, and last to water utilities. (Ord. 532 § 2, 2016; Ord. 446 § 5, 2004)


13.35.060 Stormwater drainage utility fund.

(1) There is hereby created a stormwater drainage utility fund, and all charges imposed under this chapter and the revenue collected therefrom shall be deposited therein.

(2) Money in the stormwater drainage utility fund shall be used for planning, design, construction, operation, maintenance and administration of stormwater drainage facilities, including repayment of indebtedness, and for all expenses for the operation and management of the stormwater drainage utility. Expenditures from this fund need not be identified to any particular revenue source. (Ord. 446 § 6, 2004)


13.35.070 Enforcement.

Repealed by Ord. 532. (Ord. 446 § 7, 2004)


13.35.080 Initiation of services.

For newly developed properties, the fees imposed under this chapter shall become due and payable from and after the earlier of the date when the developed property is occupied or when city water or sanitary sewer service is initiated. (Ord. 532 § 4, 2016; Ord. 446 § 8, 2004)


13.35.090 Collection and enforcement.

To the extent not addressed in this chapter, stormwater drainage fees and associated charges shall be billed, collected monthly, and enforced as established in Chapters 3.20 and 3.25 VMC. (Ord. 532 § 5, 2016)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



13.35.010 Definitions.

Unless otherwise defined herein, terms used in this chapter have the meaning ascribed in VMC 3.20.005. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean:

(1) “Developed property” means a parcel or legal portion of real property, on which improvements exist or are being constructed. The term “improvement” includes, but is not limited to buildings, parking lots, landscaping, and outside storage.

(2) “Impervious surface” means any surface area which either prevents or retards saturation of water into the land surface, or a surface which causes water to run off the land surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions pre-existent to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, concrete or asphalt sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, graveled, oiled or macadam surfaces or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural saturation or runoff patterns which existed prior to development.

(3) “Improved premises” means any area which the city determines has been altered such that the runoff from the site or impact to water quality is greater than that which could historically have been expected. “Improved premises” does not include public ways under the jurisdiction of the city, county, state or federal government; however, it does include, but is not limited to, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.

(4) “Open drainage” means a natural or manmade path, ditch or channel which has the specific function of transmitting natural stream water or stormwater from a point of higher elevation to a point of lower elevation.

(5) “Responsible party” means the person or persons who by occupancy or contractual arrangement are responsible to pay for utility and other services provided to a billing unit, developed property or occupied unit. Unless another party has agreed in writing to pay and a copy of the writing is filed with the city, the person(s) required to pay the city’s water or sewer bill for an occupied unit shall be deemed the responsible party as to that occupied unit. For any occupied unit not otherwise required to pay a city utility bill, “responsible party” shall mean the person or persons legally entitled to occupancy of the occupied unit, unless another responsible party has agreed in writing to pay and a copy of the writing is filed with the city. Any person who has agreed in writing to pay is considered the responsible party if a copy of the writing is filed with city.

(6) “Stormwater drainage facilities” means any structure or configuration of the ground that is used or by its location becomes a place where stormwater flows or is accumulated, including but not limited to pipes, sewers, curbs, gutters, manholes, catch basins, ponds, open drainage ways and their appurtenances.

(7) “Stormwater drainage service” means the collecting of stormwater discharged from property on which development exists and its deposit directly or indirectly into public stormwater drainage facilities.

(8) “Stormwater” means water from precipitation, surface or subterranean water from any source, drainage and nonseptic waste water. (Ord. 532 § 1, 2016; Ord. 446 § 1, 2004)


13.35.020 Policy.

(1) Pursuant to the general laws of the state of Oregon and the powers granted in the Charter of the city, the council does hereby declare its intention to acquire, own, construct, reconstruct, equip, operate and maintain within the city limits of the city, and outside the city limits when consistent with the council’s adopted policies or intergovernmental agreements, stormwater drainage facilities, and also to require persons responsible to construct, reconstruct, maintain and extend stormwater drainage facilities.

(2) The improvement of both public and private stormwater drainage facilities through or adjacent to a new development shall be the responsibility of the developer. Said improvements shall comply with all applicable city ordinances, policies and standards.

(3) It is the policy of the city to participate within budgetary limits on improvements to stormwater drainage facilities when authorized by the council. To be considered for city financial participation, a facility must either:

(a) Be public and be of major benefit to the community such that the facility has capacity over that required to serve the property on which it is located and provided it is placed and sized in conformance with the stormwater drainage master plan; or

(b) Be a rehabilitation or replacement of an existing public facility.

(4) No portion of this chapter or statement herein or subsequent interpretations or policies shall relieve any property owner of assessments levied against real property for a local improvement project or for abating conditions on the property that violate any provision of the Veneta Municipal Code (VMC). (Ord. 446 § 2, 2004)


13.35.030 City responsibility.

The city shall manage public stormwater drainage facilities located on city-owned property, city right-of-way, and city easements. Other public stormwater drainage facilities that may be managed by the city include but are not limited to:

(1) A piped drainage system and its related appurtenances which have been designed and constructed expressly for use by the general public and accepted by the city;

(2) Roadside drainage ditches along unimproved city streets but not access drive culverts;

(3) Flood control facilities (levees, dikes, overflow channels, detention basins, retention basins, dams, pump stations, groundwater recharging basins, etc.) that have been designed and constructed expressly for use by the general public and accepted by the city;

(4) Retention systems constructed with city financial participation. (Ord. 446 § 3, 2004)


13.35.040 Private responsibility.

(1) A stormwater drainage facility to be managed by the person responsible includes but is not limited to:

(a) A stormwater drainage facility not located on city-owned property, city right-of-way, or city easement;

(b) A private parking lot stormwater drain;

(c) Any roof, footing or area drain;

(d) A stormwater drainage facility not designed and constructed for use by the general public;

(e) Access drive culverts in the public right-of-way or on private property;

(f) Private detention facilities or a retention system in the construction of which the city did not financially participate or did not officially accept responsibility for.

(2) Any person responsible for a facility defined in subsection (1) of this section shall maintain it so as to prevent flooding or damage to other property not owned or controlled by the person responsible and to prevent injury to any person on property not owned or controlled by the person responsible.

(3) The failure of any person responsible to comply with the obligation stated in subsection (1) or (2) of this section is a violation.

(4) The conditions on private property which may result in situations proscribed by subsection (2) of this section are declared to be a danger to public health and safety and therefore are a nuisance, to be abated as provided in Chapter 8.05 VMC. (Ord. 446 § 4, 2004)


13.35.050 Stormwater drainage fee.

(1) A stormwater drainage fee, in an amount to be set by council resolution, is hereby established and imposed upon all persons who use developed property. It is presumed that stormwater drainage services are used whenever a premises located within the city’s limits is developed, improved, contains one or more impervious surfaces, or whenever an improved premises is connected to the city’s sewer or water systems.

(2) The stormwater drainage fee will be set in an equitable amount for residential, commercial and industrial users in amounts which will provide sufficient funds to properly manage and maintain the city’s stormwater drainage facilities.

(3) The finance director shall charge the appropriate stormwater drainage fee to the responsible party for each billing unit with an active utility account or, for occupied units not connected to city water and/or sewer, to the responsible party for each occupied unit of residential and nonresidential property. The amount payable shall be redetermined if there is a change of use or development. All redeterminations based on a change in use or development shall be prospective only.

(4) The stormwater drainage fee shall be billed and collected from the responsible party identified in subsection (3) of this section. Stormwater drainage fees shall be included as part of the water and sewer bill for billing units with active utility accounts, and included on an “other utility” bill for occupied units not connected to city water or sewer services. All such bills shall be rendered regularly by the finance director and shall become due and payable upon receipt.

(5) Collections from responsible parties will be applied first to interest and penalties, second to city transportation utility fees, third to stormwater drainage fees, fourth to sanitary sewer service utilities, and last to water utilities. (Ord. 532 § 2, 2016; Ord. 446 § 5, 2004)


13.35.060 Stormwater drainage utility fund.

(1) There is hereby created a stormwater drainage utility fund, and all charges imposed under this chapter and the revenue collected therefrom shall be deposited therein.

(2) Money in the stormwater drainage utility fund shall be used for planning, design, construction, operation, maintenance and administration of stormwater drainage facilities, including repayment of indebtedness, and for all expenses for the operation and management of the stormwater drainage utility. Expenditures from this fund need not be identified to any particular revenue source. (Ord. 446 § 6, 2004)


13.35.070 Enforcement.

Repealed by Ord. 532. (Ord. 446 § 7, 2004)


13.35.080 Initiation of services.

For newly developed properties, the fees imposed under this chapter shall become due and payable from and after the earlier of the date when the developed property is occupied or when city water or sanitary sewer service is initiated. (Ord. 532 § 4, 2016; Ord. 446 § 8, 2004)


13.35.090 Collection and enforcement.

To the extent not addressed in this chapter, stormwater drainage fees and associated charges shall be billed, collected monthly, and enforced as established in Chapters 3.20 and 3.25 VMC. (Ord. 532 § 5, 2016)


Title 14   (Reserved)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

15.05    Building Administrative Code

15.10    Abatement of Dangerous Buildings

15.12    Registration and Maintenance of Vacant Buildings and Properties

15.15    Outdoor Lighting
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

15.05    Building Administrative Code

15.10    Abatement of Dangerous Buildings

15.12    Registration and Maintenance of Vacant Buildings and Properties

15.15    Outdoor Lighting
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



15.05.010 Title, purpose and scope.

(1) Title. These regulations shall be known as the “building administrative code,” may be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this chapter.”

(2) Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Oregon Specialty Codes.

(3) Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall serve as the administrative, organizational and enforcement rules and regulations for the specialty codes which regulate site preparation and construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair, use and occupancy of buildings, structures and building service equipment within this jurisdiction.

Where, in any specific case, there is a conflict between this chapter and Oregon Revised Statutes, the statute shall govern. (Ord. 367 § 101, 1997)


15.05.020 Application to existing buildings and building service equipment.

(1) General. Buildings, structures and their building service equipment to which additions, alterations or repairs are made shall comply with all the requirements of the specialty codes for new facilities, except as specifically provided in this section.

(2) Additions, Alterations or Repairs. Additions, alterations or repairs may be made to a building or its building service equipment without requiring the existing building or its building service equipment to comply with all the requirements of the specialty codes, provided the addition, alteration or repair conforms to that required for a new building or building service equipment.

(a) Additions or alterations shall not be made to an existing building or building service equipment which will cause the existing building or building service equipment to be in violation of the provisions of the specialty codes nor all such additions or alterations cause the existing building or building service equipment to become unsafe. An unsafe condition shall be deemed to have been created if an addition or alteration will cause the existing building or building service equipment to become structurally unsafe or overloaded, will not provide adequate egress in compliance with the provisions of the building code or will obstruct existing exits, will create a fire hazard, will reduce required fire resistance, will cause building service equipment to become overloaded or exceed their rated capacities, will create a health hazard or oil otherwise create conditions dangerous to human life. A building so altered, which involves a change in use or occupancy, shall not exceed the height, number of stories and area permitted by the building code for new buildings. A building plus new additions shall not exceed the height, number of stories and area specified by the building code for new buildings.

(b) Additions or alterations shall not be made to an existing building or structure when the existing building or structure is not in full compliance with the provisions of the building code except when the addition or alteration will result in the existing building or structure being no more hazardous based on life safety, fire safety and sanitation, than before such additions or alterations are undertaken.

EXCEPTION: Alterations of existing structural elements, or additions of now structural elements, which are not required by subsection (3) of this section and which are initiated for the purpose of increasing the lateral-force-resisting structure need not be designed for forces conforming to these regulations; provided, that an engineering analysis is submitted to show that:

(i) The capacity of existing structural elements required to resist forces is not reduced; and

(ii) The lateral loading to required existing structural elements is not increased beyond their capacity; and

(iii) New structural elements are detailed and connected to the existing structural elements as required by these regulations; and

(iv) New or relocated nonstructural elements are detailed and connected to existing or new structural elements as required by these regulations; and

(v) An unsafe condition as defined above is not created.

(c) Alterations or repairs to an existing building or structure which are nonstructural and do not adversely affect a structural member or a part of the building or structure having required fire resistance may be made with the same materials of which the building or structure is constructed, subject to approval by the building official. Installation or replacement of glass shall be as required for new installations.

(d) Minor additions, alterations and repairs to existing building service equipment installations may be made in accordance with specialty codes in effect at the time the original installation was made, subject to approval of the building official, and provided such additions, alterations and repairs will not cause the existing building service equipment to become unsafe, insanitary or overloaded.

(3) Existing Installations. Building service equipment lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of the specialty codes may have their use, maintenance or repair continued if the use maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and a hazard to life, health or property has not been created by such building service equipment.

(4) Existing Occupancy. Buildings in existence at the time of the adoption of the building code may have their existing use or occupancy continued if the use or occupancy was legal at the time of the adoption of the building code, and provided continued use is not dangerous to life, health and safety. A change in the use or occupancy of any existing building or structure shall comply with the provisions of VMC 15.05.200 and Section 109 of the building code.

(5) Maintenance. Buildings, structures and building service equipment, existing and new, and parts thereof shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. Devices or safeguards which are required by the specialty codes shall be maintained in conformance with the specialty codes under which installed. The owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and their building service equipment. To determine compliance with this subsection, the building official may cause a structure to be reinspected.

(6) Moved Buildings. Building, structures and building service equipment moved into or within this jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of the specialty codes for new buildings or structures and their building service equipment.

(7) Temporary Structures. Temporary structures such as reviewing stands and other miscellaneous structures, sheds, canopies or fences used for the protection of the public around an injunction with construction work may be erected by special permit from the building official for a limited period of time. Buildings or structures erected under a special permit need not comply with the type of construction or fire-resistive time periods required by the building code. Temporary buildings or structures shall be completely removed upon the expiration of the time limit stated in the permit.

(8) Historic Buildings. Repairs, alterations and additions necessary for the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation or continued use of a building, structure, or its building service equipment may be made without conforming to the requirements of the specialty codes when authorized by the building official, provided:

(a) The building or structure has been designated by official action of the legally constituted authority of this jurisdiction as having special historical or architectural significance;

(b) Unsafe conditions as described in this chapter are corrected;

(c) The restored building or structure and its building service equipment will be no more hazardous based on life safety, fire safety and sanitation than the existing building. (Ord. 367 § 102, 1997)


15.05.030 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this section. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, copyright 1986, shall be considered as providing ordinarily accepted meanings. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine.

(1) “Addition” means an extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure.

(2) “Alter” or “alteration” is a change or modification in construction or building service equipment.

(3) “Approved,” as to materials, types of construction, equipment and systems, refers to approval by the building official as the result of investigation and tests conducted by the building official, or by reason of accepted principles or tests by recognized authorities, technical or scientific organizations.

(4) “Approved agency” is an established and recognized agency regularly engaged in conducting tests or furnishing inspection services, when the agency has been approved by the building official.

(5) “Building” is a structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering a use or occupancy.

(6) “Building code” is the Oregon Structural Specialty Code.

(7) Building, Existing. “Existing building” is a building erected prior to the adoption of this chapter, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued.

(8) “Building official” is the officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter, or a regularly authorized deputy.

(9) “Building service equipment” refers to the plumbing, mechanical, electrical and elevator equipment including piping, wiring, fixtures and other accessories which provide sanitation, lighting, heating, ventilation, cooling, refrigeration, fire fighting and transportation facilities essential to the occupancy of the building or structure for its designated use.

(10) “Dangerous buildings code” is the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted by this jurisdiction.

(11) “Dwelling code” is the Oregon One and Two Family Dwelling Specialty Code.

(12) “Electrical code” is the Oregon Electrical Specialty Code.

(13) “Elevator code” is the safety code for elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators and moving walks as adopted by this jurisdiction.

(14) “Jurisdiction,” as used in this chapter, is the city which adopts this code for administrative regulations within its area of authority.

(15) “Listed” and “listing” are terms referring to equipment and materials which are shown in a list published by an approved testing agency, qualified and equipped for experimental testing and maintaining an adequate periodic inspection of current productions and which listing states that the material or equipment complies with accepted national standards which are approved, or standards which have been evaluated for conformity with approved standards.

(16) “Manufactured home installation code” is the Oregon Manufactured Home Installation Specialty Code.

(17) “Manufactured home park code” is the Oregon Manufactured Home Park Construction Specialty Code.

(18) “Mechanical code” is the Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code.

(19) “Occupancy” is the purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used or intended to be used.

(20) “Owner” is any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property.

(21) “Permit” is an official document or certificate issued by the building official authorizing performance of a specified activity.

(22) “Person” is a natural person, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.

(23) “Plumbing code” is the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code.

(24) “Recreational vehicle park code” is the Oregon Recreational Vehicle Park Construction Specialty Code.

(25) “Repair” is the reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building, structure or building service equipment for the purpose of its maintenance.

(26) “Shall,” as used in this chapter, is mandatory.

(27) “Specialty codes” refer to those specialty codes adopted by the state of Oregon which constitute the Oregon Building Code which have been delegated to this jurisdiction for enforcement containing the provisions for design, construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of buildings and structures and building service equipment as herein defined.

(28) “Structural observation” means the visual observation of the structural system, including but not limited to the elements and connections at significant construction stages, and the completed structure for general conformance to the approved plans and specifications. Structural observation does not include or waive the responsibility for the inspections required by VMC 15.05.170 and 15.05.180.

(29) “Structure” is that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.

(30) “UBC standards” are those standards published in Volume 3 of the Uniform Building Code promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted by this jurisdiction.

(31) “Valuation” or “value,” as applied to a building and its building service equipment, shall be the estimated cost to replace the building and its building service equipment in kind, based on current replacement costs. (Ord. 367 § 103, 1997)


15.05.040 Conflicting provisions.

(1) When conflicting provisions or requirements occur between this chapter, the specialty codes and other codes or laws, the most restrictive shall govern.

(2) When conflicts occur between the specialty codes, those provisions providing the greater safety to life shall govern. In other conflicts where sanitation, life safety or fire safety are not involved, the most restrictive provisions shall govern.

(3) Where in a specific case different sections of the specialty codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. When there is conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. (Ord. 367 § 104, 1997)


15.05.050 Alternate materials, methods of design and methods of construction.

(1) The provisions of the specialty codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material, method of design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by the specialty codes, provided an alternate has been approved and its use authorized by the building official.

(2) The building official may approve an alternate, provided the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the provisions of the specialty codes and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the specialty codes in suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety and sanitation.

(3) The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate claims that may be made regarding its use. The details of an action granting approval of an alternate shall be recorded and entered in the files of the code enforcement agency. (Ord. 367 § 105, 1997)


15.05.060 Modifications.

Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of the specialty codes, the building official may grant modifications for individual cases. The building official shall first find that a special individual reason makes the strict letter of the specialty codes impractical and the modification is in conformity with the intent and purpose of the specialty codes, and that such modification does not lessen health, life safety and fire safety requirements or any degree of structural integrity. The details of actions granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the code enforcement agency. (Ord. 367 § 106, 1997)


15.05.070 Tests.

(1) Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of the specialty codes or evidence that materials or construction do not conform to the requirements of the specialty codes, the building official may require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the jurisdiction.

(2) Test methods shall be as specified by the specialty codes or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall determine test procedures.

(3) Tests shall be made by an approved agency. Reports of such test shall be retained by the building official for the period required for the retention of public records. (Ord. 367 § 107, 1997)

II. Organization and Enforcement


15.05.080 Authority.

(1) Creation of Enforcement Agency. There is hereby established in this jurisdiction a code enforcement agency which shall be under the administrative and operational control of the building official.

(2) General. Whenever the term or title “administrative authority,” “responsible official,” “building official,” “chief inspector,” “code enforcement officer,” or other similar designation is used herein or in any of the specialty codes, it shall be construed to mean the building official designated by the appointing authority of this jurisdiction. (Ord. 367 § 201, 1997)


15.05.090 Powers and duties of building official.

(1) General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and the referenced specialty codes. For such purposes, the building official shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer.

(2) Deputies. In accordance with prescribed procedures and with the approval of the appointing authority, the building official may appoint such number of technical officers and inspectors and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. The building official may deputize such inspectors or employees as may be necessary to carry out the functions of the code enforcement agency.

(3) Right of Entry. When necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter and the specialty codes, or when the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this chapter which makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter the building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this chapter; provided, that if such building or premises be occupied, that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. Should entry be refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.

(4) Stop Order. When work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the specialty codes, or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this chapter, the building official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and such persons shall forthwith stop the work until authorized by the building official to proceed with the work.

(5) Occupancy Violations. When a building or structure or building service equipment therein regulated by this chapter and the specialty codes is being used contrary to the provisions of such codes, the building official may order such use discontinued by written notice served on any person causing such use in be continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the building official after receipt of such notice to make the structure, or portion thereof, comply with the requirements of such codes.

(6) Authority to Disconnect Utilities. The building official or the building official’s authorized representative shall have the authority to disconnect a utility service or energy supplied to the building, structure or building service equipment therein regulated by this chapter or the specialty codes in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall whenever possible notify the serving utility, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or building service equipment of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action, and shall notify such serving utility, owner and occupant of the building, structure or building service equipment, in writing, of such disconnection immediately thereafter.

(7) Abatement.

(a) Authority to Abate. A condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this code or the specialty codes is a public nuisance which may be abated by any of the procedures set forth by city ordinance or state statutes.

(b) Authority to Condemn Building Service Equipment. When the building official ascertains that building service equipment regulated in the specialty codes has become hazardous to life, health or property, or has become insanitary, the building official shall order in writing that such notice itself shall fix a time limit for compliance with such order. Defective building service equipment shall not be maintained after receiving such notice.

When such equipment or installation is to be disconnected, a written notice of such disconnection and causes therefor shall be given within 24 hours to the serving utility, the owner and occupant of such building, structure or premises.

When any building service equipment is maintained in violation of the specialty codes and in violation of a notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the building official shall institute appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation.

(8) Connection After Order to Disconnect. Persons shall not make connections from an energy, fuel or power supply nor supply energy or fuel to building service equipment which has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the building official or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the building official until the building official authorizes the reconnection and use of such equipment.

(9) Liability. The building official charged with the enforcement of this chapter and the specialty codes, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby be rendered personally liable for damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of an act or omission in the discharge of the assigned duties. A suit brought against the building official or employee because of such act or omission performed by the building official or employee in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or enforced by the code enforcement agency shall be defended by this jurisdiction until final termination of such proceedings, and any judgment resulting therefrom shall be assumed by this jurisdiction. This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating or controlling a building, structure or building service equipment therein for damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the code enforcement agency or its parent jurisdiction be held as assuming such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this chapter or permits or certificates issued under this code.

(10) Cooperation of Other Official and Officers. The building official may request, and shall receive, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of this jurisdiction so far as is required in the discharge of the duties required by this chapter or other pertinent laws or ordinances. (Ord. 492 § 1, 2009; Ord. 367 § 202, 1997)


15.05.100 Unsafe buildings, structures or building service equipment.

(1) Buildings or structures regulated by this chapter and the specialty codes which are structurally inadequate or have inadequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life are, for the purpose of this section, unsafe buildings.

(2) Building service equipment regulated by such codes, which constitutes a fire, electrical or health hazard, or an insanitary condition, or is otherwise dangerous to human life is, for the purpose of this section, unsafe. Use of buildings, structures or building service equipment constituting a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is, for the purpose of this section, an unsafe use.

(3) Parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuary and other appendages or structural members which are supported by, attached to, or a part of a building and which are in a deteriorated condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads which are specified in the building code are hereby designated as unsafe building appendages.

(4) Unsafe buildings, structures or appendages and building service equipment are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures set forth in the dangerous buildings code or such alternate procedure as may be adopted by this jurisdiction. As an alternative, the building official or other employee or official of this jurisdiction as designated by the governing body may institute other appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation. (Ord. 367 § 203, 1997)


15.05.110 Board of appeals.

(1) General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretations of the specialty codes, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals consisting of the members of the city council of this jurisdiction. The building official shall be an ex officio member and shall act as secretary to said board but shall have no vote upon any matter before the board. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official.

(2) Limitations of Authority. The board of appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this chapter or the administrative provisions of the specialty codes nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of either this chapter or the specialty codes. (Ord. 367 § 204, 1997)


15.05.120 Violations and penalties.

(1) Violation. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure or building service equipment or cause or permit the same to be done contrary to or in violation of this code and the specialty codes.

(2) Penalties. Violation of a provision of this code shall be subject to an administrative civil penalty not to exceed $5,000 for each offense, or in the case of a continuing offense, not more than $1,000 for each day of the offense, and shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.

(3) Cumulative Remedies. The penalties and remedies provided in this section are not exclusive and are in addition to other penalties and remedies available under this code, other applicable city ordinances, and state law. (Ord. 492 § 2, 2009; Ord. 367 § 205, 1997)


15.05.125 Building official – Authority to impose administrative civil penalty.

(1) Civil Penalties. Upon a determination by the building official that any person, firm, corporation or other entity however organized has violated a provision of this chapter or a rule adopted thereunder, the building official may issue a notice of civil violation and impose upon the violator and/or any other responsible person an administrative civil penalty as provided by this section. For purposes of this section, a responsible person includes the violator, and if the violator is not the owner of the building or property at which the violation occurs, also includes the owner. This authority in no way precludes the building official from attempting to secure voluntary compliance prior to issuing an order to correct a violation.

(2) Order to Correct. Prior to issuing a notice of civil violation and imposing an administrative civil penalty under this section, the building official shall issue an order to correct a violation (order to correct) to one or more of the responsible persons. Except where the building official determines that the violation poses an immediate threat to health, safety, environment, or public welfare, the time for correction shall be not less than five calendar days.

(3) Notice of Civil Violation. Following the date or time by which the correction must be completed as required by an order to correct, the building official shall determine whether such correction has been completed. If the required correction has not been completed by the date or time specified in the order, the building official may issue a notice of civil violation and assess an administrative civil penalty to each responsible person to whom an order to correct was issued.

(4) Knowing, Intentional or Repeat Violations. Notwithstanding subsection (2) of this section, the building official may issue a notice of civil violation and assess an administrative civil penalty without having issued an order to correct where the building official determines that the violation was knowing, intentional, or a repeat of a similar violation.

(5) Penalty Considerations. In assessing an administrative civil penalty authorized by this section, the building official shall consider:

(a) The person’s cooperativeness and past history in taking steps to correct the violation;

(b) Any prior violations of this code, of the specialty codes, or other city ordinances;

(c) The gravity and magnitude of the violation;

(d) Whether the violation was repeated or continuous; and 

(e) Whether the violation was caused by an unavoidable accident, negligence, or an intentional act.

(6) Notice Requirements. A notice of civil violation issued under this section shall either be served by personal service or shall be sent by registered or certified mail and by first class mail. Any such notice served by mail shall be deemed received for purposes of any time computations hereunder three days after the date mailed if to an address within this state, and seven days after the date mailed if to an address outside this state. Every notice shall:

(a) Describe the alleged violation, including any relevant code provision numbers, ordinance numbers, or other identifying references; 

(b) State that the city intends to assess a civil penalty for the violation and state the amount of the civil penalty and other penalties imposed;

(c) State the date on which the order to correct was issued and the time by which correction was required, or, if the penalty is imposed pursuant to subsection (4) of this section, a short and plain statement of the basis for concluding that the violation was knowing, intentional, or repeated; 

(d) State that the party may challenge the assessment of civil penalty to the board of appeals; and

(e) Describe the process and the deadline for informing the city that the party is challenging the assessment of the civil penalty.

(7) Appeal. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity however organized who is issued a notice of civil penalty may appeal the penalty to the board of appeals. The provisions of VMC 15.05.127 shall govern any requested appeal.

(8) Penalty Final. A civil penalty imposed hereunder shall become final upon expiration of the time for filing an appeal, if no appeal is timely filed with the board of appeals.

(9) Continuing Violations. Each day the violator fails to remedy the code violation shall constitute a separate violation.

(10) Additional Penalties. The civil administrative penalty authorized by this section shall be in addition to: (a) assessments or fees for any costs incurred by the city in remediation, cleanup, or abatement, and (b) any other actions authorized by law; provided, that the city shall not issue a citation to municipal court for a violation of this code. (Ord. 492 § 3, 2009; Ord. 367 § 206, 1997)


15.05.127 Appeal procedures.

(1) Appeal Contents. Any recipient aggrieved by a notice of civil penalty may, within 14 days after receipt of the notice, appeal in writing to the board of appeals. The written appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal fee in an amount set by council resolution and shall include:

(a) The name and address of the appellant;

(b) The nature of the matter being appealed;

(c) The reason appellant claims the building official’s determination is incorrect; and

(d) Appellant’s desired determination of the appeal.

If appealed, the civil penalty shall become final, if at all, upon issuance of the board of appeals’s decision affirming the building official’s assessment.

(2) Hearing Date and Notice. Unless the appellant and the city agree to a longer period, an appeal shall be heard by the board of appeals within 30 days of the receipt of appellant’s notice of intent to appeal. At least 10 days prior to the hearing, the city shall mail notice of the time and location thereof to the appellant.

(3) Hearing Procedure. The board of appeals shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the appellant’s written statement and any additional evidence the board of appeals deems appropriate. At the hearing, the appellant may present testimony and oral argument personally or by counsel. The burden of proof shall be on the building official. The rules of evidence as used by courts of law do not apply.

(4) Decision. The board of appeals shall issue a written decision within 10 days of the hearing date. The written decision of the board of appeals is final.

(5) Fee Refundability. Other than as provided in this subsection, the appeal fee is nonrefundable. If the building official’s assessment is not affirmed, the board of appeals may refund all or part of the appeal fee upon appellant’s motion. (Ord. 492 § 3, 2009; Ord. 367 § 207, 1997)


15.05.129 Unpaid penalties.

(1) Penalty Collection. Failure to pay an administrative penalty imposed pursuant to this code within 10 days after the penalty becomes final shall constitute a violation of this code. Each day the penalty is not paid shall constitute a separate violation. The building official is authorized to collect the penalty by any administrative or judicial action or proceeding authorized by subsection (2) of this section, other provisions of this code, or state statute.

(2) Assessment Lien. If an administrative civil penalty is imposed on a responsible person because of a violation of any provision of this code resulting from a prohibited use or activity on real property, and the penalty remains unpaid 30 days after such penalty becomes final, the building official shall assess the property the full amount of the unpaid fine and shall enter such an assessment as a lien in the city’s lien docket. At the time such an assessment is made, the building official shall notify the responsible person that the penalty has been assessed against the real property upon which the violation occurred and has been entered in the city’s lien docket. The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as all city liens. Interest shall commence from the date of entry of the lien in the lien docket.

(3) Additional Penalties. In addition to enforcement mechanisms authorized elsewhere in this code, failure to pay an administrative civil penalty imposed pursuant to this code shall be grounds for withholding issuance of requested permits or licenses, issuance of a stop work order, if applicable, or revocation or suspension of any issued permits or certificates of occupancy. (Ord. 492 § 3, 2009; Ord. 367 § 208, 1997)

III. Permits and Inspections


15.05.130 Permits.

(1) Permits Required. Except as specified in subsection (2) of this section, no building, structure or building service equipment regulated by this chapter and the specialty codes shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted or demolished unless a separate, appropriate permit for each building, structure or building service equipment has first been obtained from the building official.

(2) Work Exempt from Permit. A permit shall not be required for the types of work in each of the separate classes of permit as listed below. Exemption from the permit requirements of this chapter shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the provisions of the specialty codes or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.

(a) Building Permits. A building permit shall not be required for the following:

(i) One story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the projected roof area does not exceed 120 square feet (11.15 m2);

(ii) Fences not over six feet (1,829 mm) high;

(iii) Oil derricks;

(iv) Movable cases, counters and partitions not over five feet nine inches (1,753 mm) high;

(v) Retaining walls which are not over four feet (1,219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding flammable liquids;

(vi) Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed two to one;

(vii) Platforms, walks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade and not over any basement or story below;

(viii) Painting, papering and similar finish work;

(ix) Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery;

(x) Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of Group R, Division 3, and Group M Occupancies when projecting not more than 54 inches (1,372 mm);

(xi) Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R, Division 3 Occupancy in which the pool walls are entirely above the adjacent grade and if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,925 L);

(xii) Agricultural buildings.

Unless otherwise exempted by this chapter, separate plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits will be required for the above exempted items.

(b) Plumbing Permits. A plumbing permit shall not be required for the following:

(i) The stopping of leaks in drains, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that should any concealed trap, drainpipe, soil waste or vent pipe become defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, the same shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be procured and inspection made as provided in this chapter;

(ii) The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, nor for the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.

(c) Electrical Permits. An electrical permit shall not be required for the following:

(i) To replace light bulbs, fluorescent tubes, or approved fuses, or to connect approved portable electrical equipment to permanently installed and properly wired receptacles;

(ii) For experimental electrical work or testing of electrical products in testing laboratories of electric shops, educational institutions, industrial plants, or recognized testing laboratories;

(iii) For those minor electrical installations for which the board has authorized an installation label.

(d) Mechanical Permits. A mechanical permit shall not be required for the following:

(i) A portable heating appliance;

(ii) Portable ventilating equipment;

(iii) A portable cooling unit;

(iv) A portable evaporative cooler;

(v) A closed system of steam, hot or chilled water piping within heating or cooling equipment regulated by the mechanical code;

(vi) Replacement of a component part of assembly of an appliance which does not alter its original approval and complies with other applicable requirements of the specialty codes;

(vii) Refrigerating equipment which is part of the equipment for which a permit has been issued pursuant to the requirement of the specialty codes;

(viii) A unit refrigerating system as defined in the mechanical code. (Ord. 367 § 301, 1997)


15.05.140 Permits – Application.

(1) Application. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the code enforcement agency for that purpose. Every such application shall:

(a) Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made;

(b) Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work;

(c) Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended;

(d) Be accompanied by plans, diagrams, computations and specifications and other data as required in subsection (2) of this section;

(e) State the valuation of any new building or structure or any addition, remodeling or alteration to an existing building;

(f) Be signed by the applicant or the applicant’s authorized agent;

(g) Give such other data and information as may be required by the building official.

(2) Submittal Documents. Plans, specifications, engineering calculations, diagrams, soil investigation reports, special inspection and structural observation programs and other data shall constitute the submittal documents and shall be submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. When such plans are not prepared by an architect or engineer, the building official may require the applicant submitting such plans or other data to demonstrate that state law does not require that the plans be prepared by a licensed architect or engineer. The building official may require plans, computations and specifications to be prepared and designed by an engineer or architect licensed by the state to practice as such even if not required by state law.

EXCEPTION: The building official may waive the submission of plans, calculations, construction inspection requirements and other data if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of plans is not necessary to obtain compliance with this chapter.

(3) Information on Plans and Specifications. Plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale on substantial paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this chapter and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.

Plans for buildings more than two stories in height of other than Group R, Division 3 and Group M Occupancies shall indicate how required structural and fire-resistive integrity will be maintained when a penetration will be made for electrical, mechanical, plumbing and communication conduits, pipes and similar systems.

(4) Architect or Engineer of Record. 

(a) General. When it is required that documents be prepared by an architect or engineer, the building official may require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application an architect or engineer who shall act as the architect or engineer of record. If the circumstances require, the owner may designate a substitute architect or engineer of record who shall perform all of the duties required of the original architect or engineer of record. The building official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the architect or engineer of record is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties.

The architect or engineer of record shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating all submittal documents prepared by others, including deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building. 

(b) Deferred Submittals. For the purposes of this section, “deferred submittals” are defined as those portions of the design which are not submitted at the time of the application and which are to be submitted to the building official within a specified period.

Deferral of any submittal items shall have prior approval of the building official. The architect or engineer of record shall list the deferred submittals on the plans and shall submit the deferred submittal documents for review by the building official.

Submittal documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the architect or engineer of record who shall review them and forward them to the building official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been approved by the building official.

(5) Inspection and Observation Program. When special inspection is required by VMC 15.05.180, the architect or engineer of record shall prepare an inspection program which shall be submitted to the building official for approval prior to issuance of the building permit. The inspection program shall designate the portions of the work to have special inspection, the name or names of the individuals or firms who are to perform the special inspections and indicate the duties of the special inspectors.

The special inspector shall be employed by the owner, the engineer or architect of record, or an agent of the owner, but not the contractor or any other person responsible for the work.

When structural observation is required by VMC 15.05.190, the inspection program shall name the individuals or firms who are to perform structural observation and describe the stages of construction at which structural observation is to occur.

The inspection program shall include samples of inspection reports and provide time limits for submission of reports. (Ord. 367 § 302, 1997)


15.05.150 Permits – Issuance.

(1) Issuance. The application, plans, specifications, computations and other data filed by an applicant for permit shall be reviewed by the building official. Such plans may be reviewed by other departments of this jurisdiction to verify compliance with any applicable laws under their jurisdiction. If the building official finds that the work described in an application for a permit and the plans, specifications and other data filed therewith conform to the requirements of this chapter and the specialty codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the fees specified in VMC 15.05.160 have been paid, the building official shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant.

When a permit is issued when plans are required, the building official shall endorse in writing or stamp the plans and specifications approved. Such approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization from the building official, and all work regulated by this chapter shall be done in accordance with the approved plans.

The building official may issue a permit for the construction of part of a building, structure or building service equipment before the entire plans and specifications for the whole building, structure or building service equipment have been submitted or approved, provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all pertinent requirements of the specialty codes. The holder of a partial permit shall proceed without assurance that the permit for the entire building, structure or building service will be granted.

(2) Retention of Plans. One set of approved plans, specifications and computations shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than 90 days from the date of completion of the work covered therein; and one set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant and shall be kept on the site of the building or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress.

(3) Validity of Permit. The issuance of a permit or approval of plans, specifications and computations shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the specialty codes, or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid.

The issuance of a permit based on plans, specifications and other data shall not prevent the building official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans, specifications and other data, or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of these codes or of any other ordinances of this jurisdiction.

(4) Expiration. Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of the specialty codes shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further, that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee.

A permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The building official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. Permits shall not be extended more than once.

(5) Suspension or Revocation. The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter and the specialty codes when the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of an ordinance or regulation or the provisions of these codes. (Ord. 367 § 303, 1997)


15.05.160 Fees.

(1) General. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with a fee schedule established by resolution of the Veneta city council. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of these codes shall be made by the building official. The value to be used in computing the building permit and building plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems and other permanent equipment.

(2) Plan Review Fees. When submittal documents are required by VMC 15.05.140(2), a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. Said plan review fee shall be 65 percent of the permit fee as adopted and hereafter amended by the State of Oregon Building Code.

The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the permit fees specified in subsection (1) of this section and are in addition to the permit fees.

When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items as defined in VMC 15.05.140(4)(b), an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the rate as adopted and hereafter amended by the State of Oregon Building Code.

(3) Expiration of Plan Review. Applications for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of application shall expire by limitation, and plans and other date submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. The building official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding 180 days on written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. An application shall not be extended more than once. An application shall not be extended if this chapter or any other pertinent laws or ordinances have been amended subsequent to the date of application. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee.

(4) Investigation Fees – Work without a Permit.

(a) Investigation. Whenever work for which a permit is required by this chapter has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work.

(b) Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this chapter. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum fee as adopted and hereafter amended by the State of Oregon Building Code. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt an applicant from compliance with all other provisions of either this chapter or the specialty codes nor from the penalty prescribed by law.

(5) Fee Refunds. The building official may authorize refunding of a fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.

The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this chapter.

The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.

The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. (Ord. 470 §§ 1, 2, 3, 2006; Ord. 367 § 304, 1997)


15.05.170 Inspections.

(1) General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and the construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved by the building official. In addition, certain types of construction shall have continuous inspection as specified in VMC 15.05.180.

The building official may implement additional or alternate inspection procedures or requirements by written administrative rules.

Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this chapter or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspection presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid.

It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor this jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection.

A survey of the lot may be required by the building official to verify that the structure is located in accordance with the approved plans.

(2) Inspection Record Card. Work requiring a permit shall not be commenced until the permit holder or the agent of the permit holder shall have posted or otherwise made available an inspection record card such as to allow the building official conveniently to make the required entries thereon regarding inspection of the work. This card shall be maintained available by the permit holder until final approval has been granted by the building official.

(3) Inspection Requests. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by a permit to notify the building official that such work is ready for inspection. The building official may require that every request for inspection be filed at least one working day before such inspection is desired. Such request may be in writing or by telephone at the option of the building official.

It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections required either by this chapter or the specialty codes to provide access to and means for inspection of the work.

(4) Approval Required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate that portion of the construction is satisfactory as completed or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with this chapter. Any portions which do not comply shall be corrected and such portions shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official.

There shall be a final inspection and approval of all buildings and structures when completed and ready for occupancy and use.

(5) Required Building Inspections. Reinforcing steel or structural framework of a part of a building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the following inspections:

(a) Foundation Inspection. To be made after excavations for footings are complete and required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, required forms shall be in place prior to inspection. All materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except when concrete is ready-mixed in accordance with UBC Standard 19-3, the concrete need not be on the job. When the foundation is to be constructed of approved treated wood, additional inspections may be required by the building official;

(b) Concrete Slab or Under-Floor Inspection. To be made after in-slab or under-floor building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories, and other ancillary equipment items are in place but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor;

(c) Frame Inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all pipes, chimneys and vents are complete and the rough electrical, plumbing, and heating wires, pipes, and ducts are approved;

(d) Lath and/or Wallboard Inspection. To be made after lathing and wallboard, interior and exterior, is in place but before plaster is applied or before wallboard joints and fasteners are taped and finished;

(e) Final Inspection. To be made after finish grading and the building is completed and ready for occupancy.

(6) Required Building Service Equipment Inspections.

(a) General. Building service equipment for which a permit is required by this chapter shall be inspected by the building official. Building service equipment intended to be concealed by a permanent portion of the building shall not be concealed until inspected and approved. When the installation of building service equipment is complete, and additional and final inspection shall be made. Building service equipment regulated by the specialty codes shall not be connected to the water, fuel or power supply or sewer system until authorized by the building official.

(b) Operation of Building Service Equipment. The requirements of this section shall not be considered to prohibit the operation of building service equipment installed to replace existing building service equipment serving an occupied portion of the building in the event a request for inspection of such building service equipment has been filed with the building official not more than 48 hours after the replacement work is completed, and before any portion of such building service equipment is concealed by permanent portions of the building.

(7) Other Inspections. In addition to the called inspections specified above, the building official may make or require other inspections of construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter or specialty codes and other laws which are enforced by the code enforcement agency.

(8) Reinspections. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made.

This section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of the specialty codes, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection.

Reinspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the building official.

To obtain a reinspection, the applicant shall file an application therefor in writing upon a form furnished for that purpose, and pay the reinspection fee in accordance with Tables 3-A through 3-H of the building code or as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by this jurisdiction.

In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, additional inspection of the work will not be performed until the required fees have been paid. (Ord. 367 § 305, 1997)


15.05.180 Special inspections.

(1) General. In addition to the inspections required by VMC 15.05.170, the owner or the engineer or architect of record acting as the owner’s agent shall employ one or more special inspectors who shall provide inspections during construction on the following types of work:

(a) Concrete. During the taking of test specimens and placing of reinforced concrete. See subsection (1)(l) of this section for shotcrete.

EXCEPTIONS:

(i) Concrete for foundations conforming to the minimum requirements of Table 18-A of the building code or for Group R, Division 3 or Group M, Division I Occupancies, provided the building official finds that a special hazard does not exist.

(ii) For foundation concrete, other than cast-in-place drilled piles or caissons, where the structural design is based on afc no greater than 2,500 pounds per square inch (psi)(17.2 MPa).

(iii) Nonstructural slabs on grade, including pre-stressed slabs on grade when effective prestress in concrete is less than 150 psi (0.1 MPa).

(iv) Site work concrete fully supported on earth and concrete where no special hazard exists.

(b) Bolts Installed in Concrete. Prior to and during the placement of concrete around bolts when stress increases permitted by Footnote 5 of Table 19-E or Section 1925.2 of the building code are utilized.

(c) Special Moment-Resisting Concrete Frame. As required by Section 1701.5.3 of the building code.

(d) Reinforcing Steel and Pre-Stressing Tendons.

(i) During all stressing and grouting of tendons in pre-stressed concrete;

(ii) During placing of reinforcing steel and pre-stressing tendons for concrete required to have special inspection by subsection (1)(d)(i) of this section.

EXCEPTION: The special inspector need not be present continuously during placing of reinforcing steel and pre-stressing tendons, provided inspection for conformance with the approved plans, prior to the closing of forms or the delivery of concrete to the jobsite, has been accomplished.

(e) Structural Welding.

(i) General. During the welding of any member or connection which is designed to resist loads and forces required by this chapter.

EXCEPTIONS: 

(A) Welding done in an approved fabricator’s shop in accordance with subsection (6) of this section.

(B) The special inspector need not be continuously present during welding of the following items, provided the materials, qualifications of welding procedures and welders are verified prior to the start of work, periodic inspections are made of work in progress, and a visual inspection of all welds is made prior to completion or prior to shipment of shop welding:

1. Single-pass fillet welds not exceeding 5/16-inch (7.9 mm) in size;

2. Floor and roof deck welding;

3. Welded studs when used for structural diaphragm or composite systems;

4. Welded sheet steel for cold-formed steel framing members such as studs and joists;

5. Welding of stairs and railing systems.

(ii) Special Moment-Resisting Steel Frames. During the welding of special moment-resisting steel frames. In addition to the requirements of subsection (1)(e)(i) of this section, nondestructive testing as required by Section 1703 of the building code.

(iii) Welding of reinforcing steel. During the welding of reinforcing steel.

EXCEPTION: The special inspector need not be continuously present during the welding of ASTMA A 706 reinforcing steel not larger than No. 5 bars used for embedments, provided the materials, qualifications of welding procedures and welders are verified prior to the start of work; periodic inspections are made of work in progress; and a visual inspection of all welds is made prior to completion or prior to shipment of shop welding.

(f) High-Strength Bolting. As required by UBC Standard 22-4. Such inspections may be performed on a periodic basis in accordance with the requirements of subsection (5) of this section.

(g) Structural Masonry.

(i) For masonry, other than fully grouted open-end hollow-unit masonry, during preparation and taking of all required prisms or test specimens, placing of all masonry units, placement of reinforcement, inspection of grout space, immediately prior to closing of cleanouts, and during all grouting operations.

EXCEPTION: For hollow-unit masonry where the fm is no more than 1,500 psi (10.3 MPa) for concrete units or 2,600 psi (17.9 MPa) for clay units, special inspection may be performed as required for fully grouted open-end hollow-unit masonry specified in subsection (1)(g)(ii) of this section.

(ii) For fully grouted open-end hollow-unit masonry during preparation and taking of any required prisms or test specimens, at the start of laying units, after the placement of reinforcing steel, grout space prior to each grouting operation, and during all grouting operations.

EXCEPTION: Special inspection as required in subsection (g) of this section, need not be provided when design stresses have been adjusted, as specified in Chapter 21 of the building code, to permit noncontinuous inspection.

(h) Reinforced Gypsum Concrete. When cast-in-place Class B gypsum concrete is being mixed and placed.

(i) Insulating Concrete Fill. During the application of insulating concrete fill when used as part of a structural system.

EXCEPTION: The special inspections may be limited to an initial inspection to check the dock surface and placement of reinforcing. The special inspector shall supervise the preparation of compression test specimens during this initial inspection.

(j) Spray-Applied Fireproofing. As required by UBC Standard 7-6.

(k) Piling, Drilled Piers and Caissons. During driving and testing of piles and construction of cast-in-place drilled piles or caissons. See subsection (1)(a) and (d) of this section for concrete and reinforcing steel inspection.

(l) Shotcrete. During the taking of test specimens and placing of all shotcrete and as required by Sections 1922.10 and 1922.11 of the building code.

EXCEPTION: Shotcrete work fully supported on earth, minor repairs and when, in the opinion of the building official, no special hazard exists.

(m) Special Grading, Excavation and Filling. During earthwork excavations, grading and filling operations inspection to satisfy requirements of Chapter 33 of the building code.

(n) Smoke-Control System.

(i) During erection of ductwork and prior to concealment for the purposes of leakage testing and record of device location.

(ii) Prior to occupancy and after sufficient completion for the purposes of pressure difference testing, flow measurements, and detection and control verification.

(o) Wood-Framed Diaphragms and Shear Walls. In Seismic Zones 3 and 4, whenever three-inch nominal framing is required by Table 23-J-1, 23-J-2, 23-K-1 or 23-K-2 of the building code, inspections may be performed on a periodic basis in accordance with the requirements of subsection (5) of this section.

(p) Special Cases. Work which, in the opinion of the building official, involves unusual hazards or conditions.

(2) Special Inspector. The special inspector shall be a qualified person who shall demonstrate competence, to the satisfaction of the building official, for inspection of the particular type of construction or operation requiring special inspection.

(3) Duties and Responsibilities of the Special Inspector. The special inspector shall observe the work assigned for conformance with the approved design drawings and specifications.

The special inspector shall furnish inspection reports to the building official, the engineer or architect of record, and other designated persons. Discrepancies shall be brought to the immediate attention of the contractor for correction, then, if uncorrected, to the proper design authority and to the building official.

The special inspector shall submit a final signed report stating whether the work requiring special inspection was, to the best of the inspector’s knowledge, in conformance with the approved plans and specifications and the applicable workmanship provision of these codes.

(4) Waiver of Special Inspection. The building official may waive the requirement for the employment of a special inspector if the construction is of a minor nature.

(5) Continuous and Periodic Special Inspection.

(a) Continuous Special Inspection. “Continuous special inspection” means that the special inspector is on the site at all times observing the work requiring special inspection.

(b) Periodic Special Inspection. Some inspections may be made on a periodic basis and satisfy the requirements of continuous inspection, provided this periodic scheduled inspection is performed as outlined in the project plans and specifications and approved by the building official.

(6) Approved Fabricators. Special inspections required by this section and elsewhere in this chapter or the specialty codes shall not be required where the work is done on the premises of a fabricator registered and approved by the building official to perform such work without special inspection. The certificate of registration shall be subject to revocation by the building official if it is found that work done pursuant to the approval is in violation of the specialty codes. The approved fabricator shall submit a certificate of compliance to the building official and to the engineer or architect of record stating that the work was performed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. The approved fabricator’s qualifications shall be contingent on compliance with the following:

(a) The fabricator has developed and submitted a detailed fabrication procedural manual reflecting key quality control procedures which will provide a basis for inspection control of workmanship and the fabricator plant;

(b) Verification of the fabricator’s quality control capabilities, plant and personnel as outlined in the fabrication procedural manual shall be by an approved inspection or quality control agency;

(c) Periodic plant inspections shall be conducted by an approved inspection or quality control agency to monitor the effectiveness of the quality control program;

(d) It shall be the responsibility of the inspection or quality control agency to notify the approving authority in writing of any change to the procedural manual. Fabricator approval may be revoked for just cause. Reapproval of the fabricator shall be contingent on compliance with quality control procedures during the past years. (Ord. 367 § 306, 1997)


15.05.190 Structural observation.

Structural observation shall be provided in Seismic Zone 3 or 4 when one of the following conditions exists:

The owner shall employ the engineer or architect responsible for the structural design, or another engineer or architect designated by the engineer or architect responsible for the structural design, to perform structural observation as defined in VMC 15.05.030. Observed deficiencies shall be reported in writing to the owner’s representative, contractor and the building official. The engineer or architect shall submit a statement in writing to the building official stating that the site visits have been made. (Ord. 367 § 307, 1997)


15.05.200 Connection to utilities.

(1) Energy Connections. Persons shall not make connections from a source of energy, fuel or power to building service equipment which is regulated by the specialty codes and for which a permit is required by this chapter, until approved by the building official.

(2) Temporary Connections. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building service equipment to the source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service equipment, or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 367 § 308, 1997)


15.05.210 Certificate of occupancy.

(1) Use of Occupancy. Buildings or structures shall not be used or occupied nor shall a change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this chapter or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid.

(2) Change in Use. Changes in the character or use of a building shall not be made except as specified in the building code.

(3) Certificate Issued. After the building official inspects the buildings or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this chapter or other laws which are enforced by the code enforcement agency, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy which shall contain the following:

(a) The building permit number;

(b) The address of the building;

(c) The name and address of the owner;

(d) A description of that portion of the building for which the certificate is issued;

(e) A statement that the described portion of the building has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this chapter for the group and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified;

(f) The name of the building official.

(4) Temporary Certificate. If the building official finds that substantial hazard will not result from occupancy of a building or portion thereof before the same is completed, a temporary certificate of occupancy for the use of a portion or portions of a building or structure may be issued prior to the completion of the entire building or structure.

(5) Posting. The certificate of occupancy shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises and shall not be removed except by the building official.

(6) Revocation. The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy issued under the provisions of this chapter when the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information; or when it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of an ordinance, regulation or the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 431 § 1, 2002; Ord. 367 § 309, 1997)


Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

15.05    Building Administrative Code

15.10    Abatement of Dangerous Buildings

15.12    Registration and Maintenance of Vacant Buildings and Properties

15.15    Outdoor Lighting
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



15.10.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

(1) “Dangerous building” means:

(a) A structure that, for lack of proper repairs or because of age and dilapidated condition, or poorly installed electrical wiring, chimney, gas connection, or heating apparatus, or for any other reason, is likely to cause a fire and is situated or occupied in a manner that endangers other property or human life;

(b) A structure containing flammable or explosive materials that are likely to cause fire or danger to the safety of the building or to human life;

(c) A structure in such filthy or unsanitary condition that it is likely to cause the spread of contagious or infectious disease;

(d) A structure in such weak, dilapidated or deteriorated condition that it endangers persons or property because of the probability of partial or entire collapse;

(e) A structure which, for any reason, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used;

(f) A structure which has been so damaged or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children or a harbor for vagrants, transients, or other trespassers.

(2) “Owner” means the owner of the title to real property, or the contract purchaser of real property, as shown on the last available complete assessment roll in the office of the Lane County assessor.

(3) “Person” means every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation. (Ord. 290 § 1, 1987)


15.10.020 Nuisance declared.

Every building found by the city council to be a dangerous building is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated according to the procedures specified in this chapter, or by a suit for abatement brought by the city. (Ord. 290 § 2, 1987)


15.10.030 Initial action.

When the building official, city administrator, or public works director determines that a dangerous building exists in the city, the official shall report it to the city council. The city council shall, within a reasonable time, fix a time and place for a public hearing. (Ord. 290 § 3, 1987)


15.10.040 Mailed notice.

(1) The city shall notify the owner and any occupants of the building by certified or registered mail, or by personal service. The notice shall state:

(a) That a hearing will be held concerning the nuisance character of the property;

(b) A description of the property and alleged nuisances;

(c) The time and place of the hearing.

(2) A copy of this notice shall be posted on the building. (Ord. 290 § 4, 1987)


15.10.050 Published and posted notices.

At least 10 days prior to the hearing date, the city shall publish a notice of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city or post notices in at least three public places in the city. (Ord. 290 § 5, 1987)


15.10.060 Hearings.

(1) At the hearing, the owner or other interested parties shall have the right to be heard.

(2) The city council may inspect the building and consider the facts observed in determining whether the building is dangerous.

(3) (a) If the city council determines that the building is dangerous, it may:

(i) Order the building to be demolished; or

(ii) Order the building to be made safe and prescribe what must be done to make the building safe.

(b) In the order, the city council may set a time, not less than 10 days, within which the order must be obeyed, and may prescribe time limits within which specific portions of the work must be completed. (Ord. 290 § 6, 1987)


15.10.070 City council orders – Notice.

Notice of the city council’s determination and orders shall be served by certified or registered mail, or by personal service, to the owner of the building. If the orders are not obeyed, and the building is not made safe within the time specified by the order, the city council may, in its discretion, order the building demolished or made safe at the expense of the owner of the property on which it is located. (Ord. 290 § 7, 1987)


15.10.080 Abatement by the city.

If the city council orders are not complied with, the city council may specify the demolition or work to be done and direct that it be undertaken by city personnel and equipment, or that bids be obtained according to applicable local and state contracting laws and regulations. (Ord. 290 § 8, 1987)


15.10.090 Assessment.

(1) The city shall serve upon the owner, by registered or certified mail, or personal service, a notice stating:

(a) The total cost of abatement, including the administrative costs;

(b) That the costs as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the property unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice;

(c) That if the owner objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, a written notice of objection may be filed with the city not more than 10 days from the date of the notice.

(2) No sooner than 10 days after the date of the notice of costs, the city council, in the regular course of the business, shall hear and make a decision on the objections to the costs assessed.

(3) If the costs of the abatement are not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice of costs or, if an objection was filed, within 10 days from the council determination, an assessment of the costs, as stated or decided by the council, shall be made by resolution and shall be entered in the docket of city liens. When the entry is made, it shall constitute a lien on the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated.

(4) The lien shall bear interest at a rate set by the council at the time of assessment. The interest shall begin to run from the date of entry of the lien in the lien docket.

(5) Collection of the lien shall be in accordance with ORS 223.510 through 223.595. (Ord. 290 § 9, 1987)


15.10.100 Summary abatement.

The procedures set forth in VMC 15.10.030 through 15.10.080 need not be followed if the condition of a building or structure is unmistakably dangerous and imminently endangers life or property, in which case the fire chief or his designee, any law enforcement officer, the public works director or his designee, the city administrator or his designee, or any other person authorized by the city council may summarily abate the nuisance. (Ord. 290 § 10, 1987)


15.10.110 Errors in procedure.

Any failure to conform to the requirements of this chapter that does not substantially and adversely affect the legal right of a person does not invalidate a proceeding under this chapter. (Ord. 290 § 11, 1987)


15.10.120 Violation – Penalty.

A person who owns a dangerous building and who allows the building to remain dangerous past the time established in the notice described in VMC 15.10.070 may be fined not more than $1,000. Each subsequent day that the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 290 § 12, 1987)


Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

15.05    Building Administrative Code

15.10    Abatement of Dangerous Buildings

15.12    Registration and Maintenance of Vacant Buildings and Properties

15.15    Outdoor Lighting
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



15.12.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this section. Where terms are not defined in this section or in VMC 15.05.030, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, copyright 1986, shall be considered as providing ordinarily accepted meanings. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine. 

(1) “Public nuisance” includes nuisances defined in Chapters 8.05 and 15.10 VMC, or in this chapter. 

(2) “Secured” or “securing” means effective measures have been taken or are in the process of being taken to prevent the unauthorized entry of vacant property. Such measures may be specified in this chapter or may be specified by the city administrator, or designee, according to policies and rules adopted to implement this chapter. 

(3) “Vacant” means a building or property has been continuously unoccupied and unused for at least 90 days. Conditions indicative of a vacant building or property may include:

(a) Weeds, grass higher than 10 inches, dry brush, or dead vegetation.

(b) Trash, junk, debris, building material, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, and fliers (except those required by law). 

(c) Discarded items including but not limited to furniture, clothing, appliances, printed materials, signage, containers, equipment, construction materials, or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned.

(d) Past due utility notices or disconnected utilities.

(e) Abandoned vehicles and machinery.

(f) Absence of furnishings or equipment related to commercial, industrial, or residential use.

(g) Abandoned or damaged signs and other advertising structures.

(h) Graffiti, tagging, or similar marring of a building’s exterior walls present for more than 48 hours.

(i) Statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, and government employees that the property is vacant. (Ord. 547 § 1, 2018)


15.12.020 Applicability and administration.

(1) The provisions of this chapter apply to all buildings and properties located in the city and determined to be vacant. This chapter does not relieve an owner from compliance with all other city ordinances, codes, rules, or any state or federal laws.

(2) This chapter establishes a program for identification, registration, and regulation of property that is or becomes vacant on or after the effective date of this chapter; determines the responsibilities of owners of vacant property; and provides for administration and enforcement.

(3) The city administrator, or designee, is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Further, the city administrator, or designee, may render interpretations of this chapter and adopt policies, procedures, and rules to carry out these provisions. (Ord. 547 § 1, 2018)


15.12.030 Registration required. 

Property owners are required to register their vacant buildings or properties with the city when:

(1) The property owner knows, or from all of the facts and circumstances should know, that the building or property is vacant as defined in this chapter; or

(2) Thirty days from the date the city administrator, or designee, mails a written notice to register to the property owner using the last known mailing address from the Lane County assessor’s property records. (Ord. 547 § 1, 2018)


15.12.040 Registration requirements.

(1) Property owners will register with the city and provide all of following information:

(a) The address and legal description of the property. 

(b) The current name, physical address, mailing address, email address, and telephone number for all owner(s). Corporations or corporate entities shall submit the same information for their registered agent. 

(c) The case name and number of any litigation pending concerning or affecting the building or property, including bankruptcy cases.

(d) The contact information for any currently acting, local manager within 50 miles of the vacant property or building who is authorized to accept personal service on behalf of the property owner(s).

(e) Proof of liability insurance for the property. 

(f) A completed vacant property plan, as provided in this chapter.

(g) A floor plan of the building(s) to be used by first responders in the event of a fire or other catastrophic event.

(2)     Proof that “No Trespass” placards have been posted on the property. Vacant property or building owners must provide written notice to the city no later than 30 days after a change in ownership of the property and provide a copy of the instrument effecting the change along with contact information for either the new owner or a property manager. 

(3) Owners of vacant property must renew registrations by January 31st of each year for the remainder of the time the building remains vacant and pay the required annual fee as determined by resolution.

(4) Owners of vacant property must file an amended registration within 30 days of any change in the information contained in the annual registration.

(5) Registration does not exonerate the owner from compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances, nor does it preclude any of the actions the city is authorized to take pursuant to this chapter or elsewhere in the municipal code.

(6) Owners of vacant property are required to provide the city with proof of liability insurance covering the vacant property at the time of registration and with any subsequent registrations filed as provided above. In all cases, the owner is responsible for continuously maintaining appropriate insurance for vacant properties. (Ord. 547 § 1, 2018)


15.12.050 Registration fees.

The fee for registering and re-registering a vacant property shall be set, from time to time, by resolution of the city council. The amount of the fee charges shall not exceed the reasonable estimated cost of administering the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 547 § 1, 2018)


15.12.060 Property manager or agent.

Vacant building or property owners must designate a local manager located within 50 miles for said buildings and properties and include current contact information for the designated manager. Property managers or agents will accept legal service on behalf of the building or property owner; however, the vacant property owner remains personally liable for code violations. This information will be collected on property registrations and re-registrations. (Ord. 547 § 1, 2018)


15.12.070 Determination of vacancy.

(1) Within 180 days after the effective date of this chapter, the city administrator or their designee shall evaluate all buildings in the city they believe to be unoccupied and make a determination for each as to whether or not the building is a vacant building. The city administrator or their designee may determine that a vacant building is not to be regulated under this chapter for a stated period if, upon consideration of reliable evidence, they determine that regulation of the building under this chapter would not serve the public health, welfare, and safety and make written findings in support of the decision.

(2) When the city administrator or their designee determines a building to be vacant, they shall within seven days of making the determination send notice as provided in VMC 15.12.030. Said notice of determination shall be sent certified mail, return receipt requested. Failure of delivery shall not excuse a person from complying with this chapter. The city administrator or their designee shall maintain a record of such mailing for each notice of determination sent. The notice of determination will also be posted on the property.

(3) The notice of determination shall contain a statement of the obligations of the owner of a building determined to be a vacant building, and a copy of the registration form the owner is required to file pursuant to VMC 15.12.040. (Ord. 547 § 1, 2018)


15.12.080 Boarding of buildings.

It is the policy of the city that boarding is a temporary solution to prevent unauthorized entry into a vacant building and that boarded buildings are a public nuisance. A vacant building may not remain boarded longer than three months. (Ord. 547 § 1, 2018)


15.12.090 Vacant property plan.

If a property is not in compliance with this chapter, owners shall submit an approved vacant property plan within 30 days of filing the registration form. The city administrator or their designee may prescribe a form for the plan. 

(1) The plan shall contain the following at a minimum: 

(a) A plan of action to uphold VMC 15.12.110, Maintenance and security requirements.

(b) A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other openings which are boarded up or otherwise secured/covered by any means other than conventional methods used in the design of the building and/or permitted for new construction, as noted in Chapter 15.05 VMC. Boarding shall be accomplished with materials and methods described by the city administrator or their designee. The owner shall maintain the building in an enclosed and secure state until the building is reoccupied or made available for immediate occupancy. If the owner demonstrates that securing of the building will provide adequate protection to the public, the city administrator or their designee may waive the requirement of an enclosure. 

(c) For buildings or property which are determined to be public nuisances, as defined in Chapter 15.10 VMC, the vacant property plan shall contain a plan of action to remedy such public nuisances.

(d) A time schedule identifying a date of commencement for repairs and date of completion of repair for each improperly secured opening and nuisance identified.

(e) If and when the owner proposes to demolish a vacant building or structure, then the owner shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition.

(f) A plan of action to maintain the building or property in conformance with this chapter.

(2) No plan which fails to provide for compliance with this chapter or which will not achieve compliance will be approved. 

(3) Exterior lighting shall be maintained according to standards established by the city.

(4) All ground floor windows and all display windows in unoccupied or vacant buildings shall be kept well-maintained and functional, with all business signs removed. (Ord. 547 § 1, 2018)


15.12.100 Failure to comply with vacant property plan.

If a vacant property plan is deemed necessary by the city administrator or their designee, failure to submit a plan within 30 days of filing the registration shall constitute a violation of this chapter subject to penalties. 

The city administrator or their designee will respond with either approval of the submitted plan or request revisions to address plan deficiencies. A revised plan must be submitted within 30 days of staff response. Failure to comply with the approved plan shall constitute a violation of this chapter subject to penalties. (Ord. 547 § 1, 2018)


15.12.110 Maintenance and security requirements.

The owner, or owner’s designee, of a vacant building or property will comply with all building requirements pursuant to Chapter 15.05 VMC. In addition, the city council will adopt by resolution maintenance and security requirements for registered vacant buildings and properties. The city administrator, or designee, will be responsible for maintaining the requirements in a manner that is accessible to the public and for updating the requirements as needed from time to time. The city administrator, or designee, will update the city council in a public meeting when changes to the requirements are made but no additional resolution will be required. (Ord. 547 § 1, 2018)


15.12.120 Open property and securing fee.

The city may request authorization from the property owner to enter vacant buildings or properties that are left open and accessible. If the property owner does not authorize the city to enter the property or buildings and does not secure the property or buildings within a reasonable time, then the city would seek an administrative warrant and post notice to enter the property for the sole purpose of securing the property. 

The property owner will be responsible for paying any fees and costs incurred by the city in securing the property, including legal fees. Securing the property will be considered a benefit to the property and the city may record a lien against the property for the fees and costs incurred by the city in securing the property or building. (Ord. 547 § 1, 2018)


15.12.130 Unpaid fees.

All fees hereunder that remain unpaid after 30 days’ written notice to the owner or management company shall be assessed against the property as a lien, recorded in the Lane County recorder’s office and added to the city’s lien docket. (Ord. 547 § 1, 2018)


15.12.140 Abatement.

Public nuisances as defined in Chapters 8.05 and 15.10 VMC, and in this chapter, may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in VMC 8.05.140 to 8.05.190. (Ord. 547 § 1, 2018)


15.12.150 Penalties.

A person who owns vacant buildings or property and who fails to meet the obligations outlined in this chapter may be fined per violation. Each subsequent violation will be considered a separate offense. 

If the city administrator or their designee determines a violation of this chapter exists, they may issue an administrative citation for each day a violation exists, containing fines up to $250.00 per day, per violation. (Ord. 547 § 1, 2018)


Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

15.05    Building Administrative Code

15.10    Abatement of Dangerous Buildings

15.12    Registration and Maintenance of Vacant Buildings and Properties

15.15    Outdoor Lighting
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



15.15.010 Purpose and intent.

The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement, orientation, distribution patterns and fixture types of outdoor lighting, providing standards that help minimize or reduce light pollution. It is the intent of this chapter to encourage, through the regulation of the types, kinds, construction, installation, and uses of outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices, lighting practices, and systems, to conserve energy without decreasing safety, utility, security, and productivity while enhancing nighttime enjoyment of property within the jurisdiction of the city of Veneta. It is also the intent of this chapter to minimize the intrusion of lighting across property lines (light trespass), therefore avoiding disruption of the quality of life for nearby residences. Standards in this chapter have been developed in accordance with the standards for outdoor lighting established by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA). (Ord. 420 § 1, 2000)


15.15.020 Conformance with applicable codes.

All outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, the building code, the electrical code, and the sign code of the jurisdiction as applicable and under appropriate permit and inspection. (Ord. 420 § 2, 2000)


15.15.030 Approved materials, methods of construction, or installation/ operation.

The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any design, material, or method of installation or operation not specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided any such alternate has been approved. The building and planning official may approve any such proposed alternate providing he or she finds that it:

(1) Provides at least approximate equivalence to the applicable specific requirements of this chapter;

(2) Is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of this chapter; and

(3) Has been designed or approved by a registered professional lighting engineer and that the content and function promotes the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 420 § 3, 2000)


15.15.040 Definitions.

As used in this chapter or in any conditions imposed by the city pursuant to this chapter, the following words and phrases, unless the context otherwise requires, shall mean:

(1) “Cutoff” means a function of the reflector of a fixture that provides shielding of the emitted light.

(2) “Direct glare” means the visual discomfort, annoyance, or loss of visual performance and visibility resulting from insufficiently shielded light sources in the field of view; viewing the light source, not simply its effects (distinguished from glare by including reference to limits on the field of view).

(3) “IESNA” means the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, the organization that establishes recommendations for lighting source applications.

(4) “Installed” means the attachment or permanent placement of any outdoor lighting fixture whether or not connected to a power source.

(5) “Light trespass” means any artificial light falling outside of the boundaries of the property upon which the source of light is installed.

(6) “Lumen” means a measure of light output emitted from a light source.

(7) “Luminaire” means the complete lighting unit, including the lamp, fixture, and other parts.

(8) “Outdoor lighting fixture” means outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices, outdoor lighting or reflective surfaces, lamps and similar devices, permanently installed or portable, used for illumination, decoration, or advertisement. Such devices shall include, but not be limited to, exterior lighting for the following applications:

(a) Buildings and structures;

(b) Recreational areas (parks, marinas, sports facilities/fields);

(c) Parking lots;

(d) Landscaping;

(e) Billboards and other signs;

(f) Streets;

(g) Product display areas;

(h) Building overhangs, eaves, and open canopies.

(9) “Person” means any individual, tenant, lessee, owner, or any commercial entity, including but not limited to a firm, business, partnership, joint venture, or corporation.

(10) “Person in charge of property” means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser, or other person having possession or control of the property or the supervision of any construction project.

(11) “Person responsible” means the person responsible for compliance with this chapter shall include one or all of the following:

(a) The owner;

(b) The person in charge of property, as defined in subsection (12) of this section; and

(c) The person who caused or created a violation of this chapter.

(12) “Photometric report” means the quantitative measurement of light level and distribution.

(13) “Shielded fixture” means an outdoor lighting, fixture with cutoff optics and that constrains direct light emissions (percent varies depending on full or partial shielding).

(14) “Shielding” means a technique or method of construction that causes light emitted from an outdoor light fixture to be projected below an imaginary horizontal plane passing through the fixture. (Ord. 420 § 4, 2000)


15.15.050 Shielding.

All nonexempt outdoor lighting fixtures shall have shielding as required by the shielding requirements table.

(1) Class I Lighting. All outdoor lighting, excluding residential applications used for, but not limited to, the following areas: eating, outdoor sales, recreational facilities, assembly areas, advertising displays, repair areas, billboards and other signs, and similar applications where color rendition is important.

(2) Class II Lighting. All outdoor lighting, other than Class I lighting and residential applications used for, but not limited to, illumination for walkways, roadways, equipment yards, parking areas, light outdoor security, and similar applications where color rendition is not important.

(3) Class III Lighting. Residential outdoor lighting.

(4) Fully Shielded. Outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that light rays emitted by the fixture are projected below the horizontal plane passing through the lowest point on the fixture from which light is emitted, as certified by a photometry test report.

(5) Partially Shielded. Outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that the lower edge of the shield is at or below the centerline of the light source or lamp so as to minimize the light transmission above the horizontal plane, or at least 90 percent of the emitted light projects below the horizontal plane, as evidenced by a photometry test report.

Shielding Requirements Table 

	Fixture Lamp Type	Class I	Class II	Class III

	Low pressure sodium (LPS)	Partial or full	Partial or full	Prohibited

	High pressure sodium (HPS)	Partial or full	Full	Partial or full

	Mercury vapor lamps	Prohibited	Prohibited	Regulated by nuisance ordinance

	Metal halide lamps (HID)	Partial or full	Full	Partial or full

	Fluorescent (450 watts or more)	Partial or full	Full	Partial

	Incandescent (over 150 watts per fixture)	Partial or full	Prohibited	Regulated by nuisance ordinance

	Incandescent (under 150 watts per fixture)	Partial or full	Partial or full	Regulated by nuisance ordinance

	Quartz (floodlight)	Prohibited	Prohibited	Regulated by nuisance ordinance

	Any light source under 40 watts	Unshielded permitted	Unshielded permitted	Unshielded permitted

	Low intensity neon, argon, krypton discharge tubes	Unshielded permitted	Unshielded permitted	Unshielded permitted

(Ord. 420 § 5, 2000)


15.15.060 Street lights.

(1) Key Locations. Street lights shall be positioned at the following key locations:

(a) Intersections – on radius line at point of curvature/point of tangency (PC/PT) location;

(b) Cul-de-sacs – at the entry throat;

(c) Dead-ends – near the end of the street, spaced so that the maximum street area can be lit;

(d) Horizontal curves – at the beginning and ending of each curve.

(2) Tree Separation. A minimum separation of 25 feet between trees and street light poles shall be provided.

(a) Poles. General requirements for poles will include:

(i) Height: Pole height limits of 25 or 30 feet can be ideal for most parking lots, and to avoid light trespass, luminaires near roadways and residential areas require shields on 30 foot poles.

(ii) Spacing: On straight alignments, adjust pole spacing to position the lights on projected property line locations, within photometric limitations. Locate all components of the street light system in the public right-of-way.

(iii) Materials: Street lights are installed on metal or fiberglass poles, and are supported with concrete footings. All systems have underground wiring.

(b) Luminaire Fixtures. General requirements for luminaires will include:

(i) For residential areas, specify either “cobra head” or “shoe box” type fixtures. Use only HPS vapor lamps.

(ii) For arterial streets and in commercial areas, use 200 watt and larger fixtures.

(3) Photometric Design Calculations. All calculations and photometric data necessary to evaluate a proposed lighting system’s compliance with VMC 15.15.050 shall be supplied by the applicant.

(a) Local Street Lights. Typical street lighting will include the following:

(i) Lamp: 100 watt, high pressure sodium (HPS);

(ii) Fixtures: “cobra head” or “shoe box” style/cutoff fixture;

(iii) Mounting height: 20 to 25 feet;

(iv) Pole spacing: Provide for spacing that appropriately accounts for block length, curves, lot sizes, and possible manmade or natural interference. Pole spacing shall generally be 200 to 240 feet and shall not exceed 300 feet unless natural resource impacts would result. (Ord. 454 § 1, 2005; Ord. 420 § 6, 2000)


15.15.070 Submission of plans and evidence of compliance.

(1) Submission Contents. The applicant for any permit required by any provision of the laws of this jurisdiction, in connection with proposed work involving outdoor lighting fixtures, shall submit as part of the application for permit evidence that the proposed work will comply with this chapter. The submission shall contain, but shall not necessarily be limited to the following, all or part of which may be required elsewhere in the laws of this jurisdiction upon application for the required permit:

(a) Plans indicating the location on the premises, and the type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors (a source of shielding), and other devices; description of the illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other devices. Additionally, the description may include, but is not limited to, catalog cuts by manufacturers and drawings (including sections where required);

(b) Photometry data, such as that furnished by manufacturers or similar sources showing the angle of cutoff or light emissions. Applicant may also provide point by point calculations specific to spill over on property lines.

(2) Additional Submissions. The above required plans, descriptions, and data shall be sufficiently complete to enable the building and planning official to readily determine whether compliance with the requirements of this chapter will be secured. If such plans, descriptions, and data cannot enable this ready determination, by reason of the nature or configuration of the devices, fixtures, or lamps proposed, the applicant shall additionally submit as evidence of compliance to enable such determination such certified reports of tests as will do so; provided, that these tests were performed and certified by a recognized testing laboratory.

(3) Subdivision Plan Certification. If any subdivision proposes to have installed street or other common or public area outdoor lighting, the final plan shall contain a statement certifying that said plan will adhere to the applicable provisions of this chapter.

(4) Lamp or Fixture Substitution. Should any outdoor light fixture or the type of light source therein be changed after the permit has been issued, a change request must be submitted to the building and planning official for his/her approval, together with adequate information to assure compliance with this chapter, which must be approved prior to substitution. (Ord. 420 § 7, 2000)


15.15.080 Outdoor advertising signs.

(1) Top Mounted Fixtures Required. Lighting fixtures used to illuminate any outdoor advertising sign, street sign, or directive sign, shall be mounted on the top of the sign structure. All such new fixtures shall comply with the shielding requirements of VMC 15.15.050.

Where used for on-premises or off-premises signs or for decorative effects or recreational facilities such as for building, landscape or ballfield illumination, the outdoor fixtures shall, where feasible, be shielded and/or focused to minimize light pollution.

(2) Light Spillage. Lighting fixtures used to illuminate any outdoor advertising sign, street sign, or directive sign shall not cause light to spill beyond the boundaries of such sign.

(3) Prohibitions. Prohibitions apply as set forth in VMC 15.15.090.

(4) Compliance Limit. Any and all existing outdoor structures shall be subject to compliance limits recognized in Section 5.150 (Signs), Subsection (14) of the Veneta Sign Code. (Ord. 420 § 8, 2000)


15.15.090 Prohibitions.

(1) Laser Source Lights. The use of laser source light, or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertising or entertainment, shall not be projected above the horizontal plane passing through the lowest point on the fixture from which light is emitted.

(2) Searchlights. The operation of searchlights for advertising or entertainment purposes is prohibited.

(3) Outdoor Advertising On-Site and Off-Site Signs (i.e., Billboards). Electrical illumination of outdoor advertising on-site and off-site signs is prohibited, as established by Section 5 of the Veneta Sign Code.

(4) Light Trespass. Following a grace period of two years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, light trespass without the express permission of the affected property owner is prohibited.

(5) Inoperative and Obsolete Lighting. At such time as lighting is modified, replaced, or upgraded, it must be brought into compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 420 § 9, 2000)


15.15.100 Special uses.

(1) Recreational Facilities. Any light source permitted by this chapter may be used for lighting of outdoor recreational facilities (public or private), including but not limited to, football fields, soccer fields, baseball fields, softball fields, tennis courts, parks, show areas, provided all of the following conditions are met:

(a) Lighting for parking lots and other areas surrounding the playing field, court, or track, shall comply with VMC 15.15.050.

(b) All fixtures used for event lighting shall either be fully shielded, as defined in VMC 15.15.050, or provide sharp cutoff capability, to prohibit upward light, spill-light, light trespass, and glare.

(c) All events shall be scheduled so as to complete all activity by 10:00 p.m. Under no circumstances shall any illumination of a playing field, court, slope, or track be permitted after 11:00 p.m., except to conclude a scheduled event that was in progress before 10:00 p.m. and which could not be concluded earlier.

(2) Outdoor Display Lots. Any light source permitted by this chapter may be used for lighting of outdoor display lots such as, but not limited to, automobile sales or rentals, recreational vehicle sales, or building material sales, provided all of the following conditions are met:

(a) Lighting for parking lots and other areas surrounding the display lot shall comply with VMC 15.15.050.

(b) All fixtures used for display lighting shall either be fully shielded, as defined in VMC 15.15.050, or provide sharp cutoff capability, so as to prohibit upward light, spill-light, light trespass, or direct glare.

(c) Display lot lighting shall be turned off within 30 minutes after closing the business. Under no circumstances shall full illumination of the lot be permitted after 11:00 p.m. All lighting after 11:00 p.m. shall be limited to security lighting. (Ord. 420 § 10, 2000)


15.15.110 Temporary exemptions.

(1) Any temporary emergency lighting required by law enforcement, fire protection, or any other emergency service agency, including all vehicular luminaires, are exempt from this chapter.

(2) Any hazard warning luminaires required by federal regulatory agencies are exempt from this chapter, as long as red luminaires are used which do not exceed the federal minimum lumen output requirements.

(3)(a) Any person may submit a written request to the building and planning official for a temporary exemption, on a form prepared by the jurisdiction and available at Veneta City Hall. In the discretion of that official, approval may be granted under the following conditions:

(i) The purpose proposed is not intended to extend beyond 30 days;

(ii) The proposed lighting is designed in such a manner as to minimize light pollution and trespass as much as is feasible, in compliance with VMC 15.15.050;

(iii) The proposed lighting will comply with the general intent of this chapter;

(iv) Granting the permit will promote the public interest.

(b) A temporary exemption application shall contain the following information:

(i) Name(s) and address(es) of applicant(s) and property owner(s);

(ii) Specific exemption or exemptions requested;

(iii) Type and use of the light fixture involved;

(iv) Duration of time requested exemption;

(v) Type of lamp and calculated lumens;

(vi) Total wattage of lamp or lamps;

(vii) Proposed location on premises of the light fixture(s);

(viii) Previous temporary exemptions, if any, and addresses of premises thereunder;

(ix) Physical size of light fixture(s) and type of shielding provided;

(x) Such other data and information as may be required by the building and planning official.

(4) Approval and Duration. The building and planning official shall have five business days from the date of submission of the application for a temporary exemption from this chapter to respond in writing to the request. If permitted, the exemption shall be valid for not more than 30 days from the date of issuance of the permit. The permit may be extended at the discretion of the building and planning official, but no outdoor light fixtures shall be exempt from this chapter for more than 60 days during any 12-month period.

(5) Right of Appeal. If an application for a temporary exemption is denied, the applicant may appeal the issue to the Veneta planning commission, as provided for in VMC 15.15.130. (Ord. 420 § 11, 2000)


15.15.120 Other exemptions.

(1) Street Lighting. Fixtures installed and operated prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.

(2) Fossil Fuel Light. All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly by the combustion of natural gas or other fossil fuels are exempt from all requirements of this chapter.

(3) State and Federal Facilities. Outdoor light fixtures installed on, and used in connection with, those facilities and land owned or operated by the federal government or the state of Oregon, or any department, division, agency, or instrumentality thereof, are exempt from all requirements of this chapter. Voluntary compliance with this chapter by such facilities is encouraged.

(4) Existing Poles. Poles installed prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, whether or not used as street lighting poles at that time, which subsequently have been proposed for use as a new street lighting source, are exempt from this chapter. (Ord. 420 § 12, 2000)


15.15.130 Violation notice procedures.

(1) On determination by the city administrator that a violation of this chapter exists, the city administrator shall cause notice to be posted on the premises or at the site of the violation, directing the person responsible to remedy the violation.

(2) At the time of posting, the city recorder shall cause a copy of the notice to be forwarded by first class mail to the person responsible at the person’s last known address.

(3) The notice violation shall contain:

(a) A description of the real property, by street address or otherwise, on which the violation exists;

(b) A description of the violation;

(c) A direction to correct the violation within 10 days from the date of the notice;

(d) A statement that failure to remedy the violation may warrant imposition of the fine;

(e) A statement that the person responsible may protest the notice of violation by giving notice to the city recorder within 10 days from the date of the notice. (Ord. 420 § 13, 2000)


15.15.140 Appeal to city council.

(1) The person responsible may appeal a notice of violation or the denial or conditioning of a permit to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city within 10 days from the date of a notice of violation, or the denial or conditioning of a permit application.

(2) The city council shall hold a hearing within 30 days from the filing of the appeal.

(3) The appellant shall carry the burden of providing that the requirements of this chapter have been met.

(4) Notice of violation, notice of denial or conditioning of a permit, and notice of hearing, shall be deemed to be served upon the person responsible upon the earlier of:

(a) Personal service upon the person responsible; or 

(b) Deposit of such notice in the mail with first class postage, addressed to the person responsible at the person’s last-known address. (Ord. 420 § 14, 2000)


15.15.150 Conflicts.

Where any provision of federal, state, county, or city statutes, codes, or laws conflicts with any provision of this chapter, the most restrictive shall govern, unless otherwise regulated by law. (Ord. 420 § 15, 2000)


15.15.160 Violations – Enforcement.

(1) Enforcement. City may enforce this chapter through a civil action or by prosecution for a violation.

(2) Penalties. A person found in violation of this chapter, or a permit issued under the authority of this chapter, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, in the discretion of the court.

(3) Separate Violations. Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 420 §§ 16, 17, 18, 2000)


Title 16   ENVIRONMENT

(Reserved)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



Title 17  SUBDIVISIONS

(Reserved)
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



Title 18     LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT

Chapters:

18.05  Land Use Decisions

18.10  Wetland Protection

18.15  Ballot Measure 49 Claims Processing
[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



Chapter 18.05       LAND USE DECISIONS

Sections:

18.05.010    Applicability.

18.05.020    Procedures.

18.05.030    Final action – Approval.


18.05.010      Applicability.

This chapter shall be supplemental to all land use ordinances of the city and shall apply whenever dictated by Chapter 654, Oregon Laws, 1977. (Ord. 171 § 1, 1978)


18.05.020      Procedures.

Whenever this chapter is in effect, the following procedures or procedure similar thereto shall be followed by the city staff and applicable decision-making body:

(1) Preparation of brief statement setting forth the criteria and standards considered relevant to the decision of the city staff. Such shall utilize criteria and standards found in the applicable ordinance, the comprehensive plan, and other ordinances and rules and regulations now in effect as from time to time adopted by the city council and appropriate decision-making body.

(2) The above statement shall be submitted to the decision-making body prior to or at the time the item comes before the body.

(3) After the permit request has been considered by the decision-making body, the staff shall be directed to add to the statement:

(a) Those facts relied upon in rendering the decision;

(b) The justification for the decision based upon the criteria, standards and facts set forth. (Ord. 171 § 2, 1978)


18.05.030      Final action – Approval.

Final action shall not be considered as having been made until the completed statement as required by this chapter is approved by the decision-making body. (Ord. 171 § 3, 1978)


Chapter 18.10       WETLAND PROTECTION

Sections:

18.10.010    Purpose.

18.10.020    Definitions.

18.10.030    Procedures for identifying significant wetlands.

18.10.040    Land use and permit requirements.

18.10.050    Appeals.

18.10.060    Variances.

18.10.070    Penalties.

18.10.080    Conflicts.

18.10.090    Findings of fact.

18.10.100    Amendments.


18.10.010      Purpose.

(1) The purpose of this chapter is to establish a process and standards which will minimize the degradation and destruction of significant wetlands within the city of Veneta and conserve wetland resources and their functions and values. This chapter is intended to protect and enhance local water quality; to preserve fish and wildlife habitat; to provide flood storage capacity, nutrient attenuation, and sediment trapping; and to preserve open spaces within the city of Veneta.

(2) The city of Veneta finds that significant wetlands are a community asset providing environmental, educational, recreational and aesthetic values, while contributing to long-term sustainable community development. Therefore, pursuant to ORS 660-023-0100(b), the city has chosen to restrict the filling, grading and excavation of wetlands for their protection. (Ord. 419 § 1, 2000)


18.10.020      Definitions.

As used in this chapter or in the conditions imposed by the city pursuant to VMC 18.10.030, the following words and phrases, unless the context otherwise requires, shall mean:

(1) "Enhancement" means an activity which improves one or more specific functions or values of an existing wetland.

(2) Functions and Values. "Functions" refers to the environmental roles served by wetlands and buffer areas including, but not limited to, water quality protection and enhancement, fish and wildlife habitat, flood storage, nutrient attenuation, and sediment trapping. "Values" refers to the qualities ascribed to a wetland such as educational and recreational opportunities, open space, and visual aesthetic qualities.

(3) "Restoration" means to improve a disturbed wetland by returning wetland parameters which may be missing; adding soils, water, or plants. The restoration may return a missing or damaged wetland function to achieve a desired outcome. (Ord. 419 § 2, 2000)


18.10.030      Procedures for identifying significant wetlands.

The wetland regulations contained in this chapter apply to those areas identified as significant wetlands on the comprehensive plan wetlands map exhibit, and wetland sites meeting Division of State Lands criteria. Precise wetland boundaries may vary from that shown on the comprehensive plan wetlands map exhibit if an on-site delineation or other city-approved documentation indicate more accurate boundaries. For any proposed development impacting significant wetlands or within 50 feet of identified significant wetlands, the applicant shall be required to conduct a wetland delineation to determine the precise wetland boundary for application of the Removal-Fill Law, and if applicable, the nature and extent of development impacts on adjacent wetlands. The more precise boundaries obtained through a wetland delineation can be identified, mapped, and used for review and development without a change in the comprehensive plan wetlands map exhibit. All developments proposed within or adjacent to a designated wetland area shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and site plan review pursuant to Veneta's land development ordinance. (Ord. 419 § 3, 2000)


18.10.040      Land use and permit requirements.

(1) Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted within wetlands identified as locally significant:

(a) Removal of fill and any refuse that is in violation of local, state or federal regulations. Removal of fill must be consistent with state of Oregon removal-fill regulations;

(b) Removal of non-native vegetation or invasive plant species;

(c) Planting or replanting with native plants;

(d) Channel maintenance to maintain storm water conveyance and flood control capacity, as required by local policies, state and federal regulations, or intergovernmental agreements;

(e) Site management and maintenance practices, whose purpose is to maintain or improve natural functions and values or protect public health and safety, and which are consistent with adopted plans and policies, including but not limited to perimeter mowing and other cutting necessary for hazard prevention;

(f) Wetland and natural area restoration and enhancement of natural functions and values which involve displacement, excavation or relocation of less than 50 cubic yards of earth, and which carry out the objectives of this chapter and are consistent with adopted policies and plans;

(g) Preservation and maintenance activities associated with historic structures.

(2) Uses Subject to Site Review Approval. Within locally significant wetlands the following uses are subject to site review approval in accordance with Veneta's land development ordinance:

(a) Nature interpretive centers and wetland research facilities, when specified in or consistent with adopted plans or policies;

(b) Maintenance facilities for storage of equipment and materials used exclusively for maintenance of wetlands and other natural resources;

(c) Construction of trails, boardwalks, viewing platforms, information kiosks, and trail signs;

(d) Realignments and reconfigurations of channels and pond banks, including the restoration and enhancement of natural functions and values which involve displacement, excavation or relocation of more than 50 cubic yards of earth and which carry out the objectives of this chapter;

(e) Construction of access roads for maintenance of channels, wetlands and other natural resource areas;

(f) Construction of bikeways and other paved pathways;

(g) Construction of stormwater quality treatment facilities that use biofiltration methods.

(3) Prohibited Uses. Within locally significant wetlands, practices that are specifically not allowed and would adversely affect wetland functions and values include, but are not limited to the following:

(a) New development or expansion of existing development;

(b) Storage or use of chemical pesticides, fertilizers, or other hazardous or toxic materials;

(c) Construction of new septic drainfields;

(d) Channelizing or straightening natural drainageways;

(e) Removal or destruction of rare, threatened or endangered plant species or valuable native plant species as found on a list determined by the Oregon Natural Heritage Program and kept on file at Veneta City Hall;

(f) Filling, grading, and/or excavating wetland areas.

(4) DSL Notification and Approval Required. In addition to the restrictions and requirements of this section, all proposed development activities wholly or partially within areas identified as wetland are also subject to DSL standards and approval. Where there is a difference, the more restrictive regulation shall apply. The city shall be responsible for notifying DSL whenever any portion of any wetland is proposed for development, in accordance with ORS 227.350. No action can be taken on a proposed development until such notification is provided. (Ord. 419 § 4, 2000)


18.10.050      Appeals.

Any decision by the city on a land use application concerning the wetland protection requirements herein may be appealed to the planning commission and city council pursuant to Veneta's land development ordinance. (Ord. 419 § 5, 2000)


18.10.060      Variances.

(1) For parcels that have no usable building site through application of the requirements of this chapter, a variance may be granted to allow development on the parcel; provided, that the design of the development minimizes impact to the wetland.

(2) A variance may be granted in those instances where claims of map error are verified by the Division of State Lands.

(3) A variance may be granted in those instances where the planning commission and city council jointly determine that the public need outweighs the potential adverse impacts of development in or near a locally significant wetland resource site. (Ord. 419 § 6, 2000)


18.10.070      Penalties.

Any person found to have filled, excavated or otherwise destroyed a wetland site in violation of this chapter, or who fails to comply with any condition of a wetland permit shall, upon conviction, incur a civil penalty of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000 for each violation. A violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense for each day the violation continues. Violators shall be subject to the enforcement procedures pursuant to Veneta's land development ordinance. (Ord. 419 § 6, 2000)


18.10.080      Conflicts.

To best protect important values of wetlands in the event that the requirements of this chapter conflict with other ordinance requirements, the city shall apply the requirements that best provide for the protection of the resource. (Ord. 419 § 7, 2000)


18.10.090      Findings of fact.

The city council adopts the findings of fact set out in the preamble to Ordinance No. 419 as a basis for adoption of the land use ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 419 § 8, 2000)


18.10.100      Amendments.

All amendments made to this chapter shall be in accordance with the amendment procedures set forth in Veneta's land development ordinance. (Ord. 419 § 9, 2000)


Chapter 18.15 BALLOT MEASURE 49 CLAIMS PROCESSING

Sections:

18.15.010    Findings.

18.15.020    Purpose.

18.15.030    Definitions.

18.15.040    Claim for compensation.

18.15.050    Claim completeness review.

18.15.060    City administrator review and recommendation.

18.15.070    Opportunity to comment.

18.15.080    Notice.

18.15.090    Record.

18.15.100    Final decision.

18.15.110    Burden of proof and record.

18.15.120    Ex parte contacts, conflict of interest, bias.

18.15.130    Reconsideration of waiver.

18.15.140    Procedural error.


18.15.010 Findings.

The city council for the city of Veneta finds:

(1) On December 6, 2007, Ballot Measure 49, amending ORS Chapter 197 and Ballot Measure 37, went into effect; and 

(2) Ballot Measure 49 and ORS 195.305(5) authorize local governments to adopt and apply procedures for the processing of Measure 49 claims filed under ORS 195.305 and 195.310 to 195.336. Such local procedures are in addition to and not in lieu of any Ballot Measure 49 requirements; and 

(3) Pursuant to ORS 195.312(3), cities may impose a fee for the review of a claim filed under ORS 195.310 in an amount not to exceed the actual and reasonable cost of reviewing the claim. (Ord. 480, 2008)


18.15.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures governing new Measure 49 claims filed under ORS 195.305 and 195.310 to 195.336. These provisions are in addition to and not in lieu of any such statutory requirements. (Ord. 480 § 1, 2008)


18.15.030 Definitions.

The definitions for Measure 49, set forth in ORS 195.300, are hereby incorporated by this reference. (Ord. 480 § 2, 2008)


18.15.040 Claim for compensation.

(1) Filing. All claims shall be filed with the city administrator in person or by United States mail. The filing date is the date the claim is received by the city. 

(2) Submittal Requirements. All claims:

(a) Shall be submitted for review upon forms established by the city and must include all information as required by ORS 195.312; and

(b) Must be accompanied by a fee in an amount as set by council resolution. (Ord. 480 § 3, 2008)


18.15.050 Claim completeness review.

(1) Upon receipt of a claim, the city shall:

(a) Deny the claim if:

(i) It is not filed within five years from the date the land use regulation was enacted; 

(ii) An application for a comprehensive plan or zoning amendment is approved for the subject property; or

(iii) Any submittal requirements are not met as set forth in VMC 18.15.040.

(b) Determine whether a claim is complete within 60 days after receiving the claim.

(c) Notify the claimant of any missing information within 60 days after receiving the claim. 

(2) After providing notice of missing information, the city shall:

(a) Deem the application complete if: 

(i) The claimant provides the missing information and the required fee; or 

(ii) The claimant provides the required fee and a written statement that some or all of the missing information will not be provided.

(b) Deem the application complete if the city fails to notify the claimant of missing information within 60 days after receiving the claim.

(c) Deem the application withdrawn if the claimant fails to provide the fee and the missing information, or a written statement that some or all of the information will not be provided within the time specified in the notice of missing information. (Ord. 480 § 4, 2008)


18.15.060 City administrator review and recommendation.

(1) Once a claim is deemed complete, the city administrator shall investigate the validity of the claim. After reviewing all required material and information, the city administrator may:

(a) Further investigate;

(b) Recommend denial of the claim;

(c) Forward a recommendation of approval of the claim to the city council.

(2) Notwithstanding the options in subsection (1) of this section, the city administrator may choose to forward any claim to the city council for a public hearing and decision in accordance with this chapter. In making this determination, the administrator may consider factors including but not limited to:

(a) The amount of compensation at issue;

(b) The nature of the proposed use or development, if any; and

(c) The impact of the proposed use or development.

The decision of the city administrator to forward a claim to the council is final and not subject to appeal. The council, however, may summarily and without notice or hearing elect to return the claim to the administrator for a final decision on the claim. (Ord. 480 § 5, 2008)


18.15.070 Opportunity to comment.

(1) Where the city administrator determines to recommend city council approval of a claim, a public hearing shall be held to allow an opportunity for public comments.

(2) Where the city administrator determines denial is merited based upon the submitted application material and any additional investigation conducted, the city administrator will provide an opportunity for written public comment. (Ord. 480 § 6, 2008)


18.15.080 Notice.

(1) Notice of the claim and the city administrator’s recommendation will be provided at least 30 days before a public hearing on the claim or, if there will not be a public hearing, at least 30 days before the deadline for submission of written comments to:

(a) All owners identified in the claim;

(b) Owners of record of property on the most recent property tax assessment roll where such property is located within 300 feet of the perimeter of the subject property;

(c) Neighborhood groups or community organizations officially recognized by the city council and whose boundaries include the subject property.

(d) The department of land conservation and development, unless the claim was filed with that department; 

(e) The county in which the property is located, unless the claim was also filed with the county.

(2) The notice required under subsection (1) of this section must describe the claim and state:

(a) Whether a public hearing will be held on the claim; the date, time and location of the hearing, if any; and the final date for submission of written evidence and arguments relating to the claim;

(b) That judicial review of the city’s final determination on the claim is limited to the written evidence and arguments submitted to the city; and 

(c) That judicial review is available only for issues that are raised with sufficient specificity to afford the city an opportunity to respond. (Ord. 480 § 7, 2008)


18.15.090 Record.

(1) Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, written evidence and arguments in proceedings on the claim must be submitted to the city not later than:

(a) The close of the final public hearing on the claim; or 

(b) If a public hearing is not held, the date that is specified by the city in the notice required under VMC 18.15.080.

(2) The claimant may request additional time to submit written evidence and arguments in response to testimony or submittals. The request must be made before the close of testimony or the deadline for submission of written evidence and arguments. The city, in its sole discretion, may choose to grant or deny the claimant’s request.

(3) The city shall make the record on review of a claim, including any staff reports, available to the public before the close of the record. (Ord. 480 § 8, 2008)


18.15.100 Final decision.

(1) Either the city administrator or the council shall issue a final decision on a claim, after providing notice and an opportunity to comment, within 180 days from the date the claim is deemed completed. The council may waive some regulations identified in the claim and deny waiver of others. The council may waive regulations that are not otherwise specified in the claim. The administrator or council may impose reasonable conditions on a waiver to protect the public interest. Failure to comply with any condition of approval is grounds for revocation of the administrator’s or council’s decision.

(2) The final decision shall be in writing and signed by the city administrator, or the mayor, if the decision was referred to the council. The city shall mail a copy of the final determination to the claimant and to any person who submitted written evidence or arguments before the close of the record. The city shall forward to the county, and the county shall record, a memorandum of the final determination in the deed records of the county in which the property is located.

(3) The decision of either the city administrator or council, if referred to the council, is final and not subject to local appeal. Judicial review is available only as provided by ORS 195.318. (Ord. 480 § 9, 2008)


18.15.110 Burden of proof and record.

The claimant shall have the burden of proof on all matters under this chapter. The claimant bears sole responsibility for ensuring that the record before the city contains all information and evidence necessary to support the claim. The claimant shall be precluded from submitting information or raising new issues in any subsequent proceeding unless the claimant demonstrates that the information or issue could not reasonably have been entered into the record or raised before the city. (Ord. 480 § 10, 2008)


18.15.120 Ex parte contacts, conflict of interest, bias.

The following rules govern any challenges to the city administrator’s or a member of the city council’s participation in the processing of any claim:

(1) Any factual information obtained by the city administrator or a member of the city council outside the information provided by city staff, or outside the formal written comments process or hearing, will be deemed an ex parte contact. The city administrator or a member of the city council that has obtained any material factual information through an ex parte contact must declare the content of that contact, and allow any interested party to rebut the substance of that contact. This rule does not apply to contacts between city staff and the city administrator or a member of the city council.

(2) Whenever the city administrator or a member of the city council, or any member of their immediate family or household, has a direct financial interest in the outcome of a particular demand or lives within the area entitled to notice of the claim, the city administrator or member of the city council shall not participate in the deliberation or decision on that demand.

(3) All decisions on claims must be fair, impartial and based on the applicable review standards and the evidence in the record. The city administrator or a member of the city council who is unable to render a decision on this basis must refrain from participating in the deliberation or decision on that claim. (Ord. 480 § 11, 2008)


18.15.130 Reconsideration of waiver.

The council may, in its sole discretion, reconsider a decision on a claim if it appears that the decision is inconsistent with a subsequent court ruling, administrative rule or other change in the law relating to Measure 49. The decision to reconsider may be made without notice or hearing; but the decision on reconsideration shall be made only after notice and opportunity to be heard consistent with the requirements for claim review provided under this chapter for council review. At the conclusion of the process, the city administrator or council may affirm, modify, or revoke the earlier decision. If the council modifies or revokes a decision to waive one or more land use regulations, it shall issue an order setting forth such remedy as it deems appropriate to protect the public interest. (Ord. 480 § 12, 2008)


18.15.140 Procedural error.

No procedural defect in processing a claim shall invalidate any proceeding or decision unless the party alleging the error demonstrates prejudice to a substantial right. Inadvertent failure to provide notice or complete notice shall not be grounds for invalidating a decision. (Ord. 480 § 14, 2008)



-----------------------------

The Veneta Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 555, passed December 9, 2019.

Disclaimer: The City Recorder's Office has the official version of the Veneta Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Recorder's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.venetaoregon.gov/ City Telephone: (541) 935-2191

Code Publishing Company

VENETA LAND DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE No. 493
Amended: October 9, 2019 by Ordinance No. 552 (Text & Map Amendment)
Amended: May 22, 2019 by Ordinance No. 549 and No. 550 (Text Amendment)
Amended: February 13, 2019 by Ordinance No. 548 (Text Amendment)
Amended: May 11, 2017 by Ordinance No. 542 (Text Amendment)
Amended: June 23, 2016 by Ordinance No. 528 (Text Amendment)
Amended: September 28, 2015 by Ordinance No. 523 (Text Amendment)
Amended: April 13, 2015 by Ordinance No. 519 (Text Amendment)
Amended: September 8, 2014 by Ordinance No. 514 (Text Amendment)
Amended: May 12, 2014 by Ordinance No. 511 (Text Amendment)
Amended: March 25, 2013 by Ordinance No. 508 (Text Amendment)
Amended: November 22, 2010 by Ordinance No. 499 (Map Amendment)
Adopted: January 25, 2010 by Ordinance No. 493 (Text Amendment)
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 2
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS ....................................................................................................................... 3
ARTICLE 1 - INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS ............................................................................. 6
SECTION 1.01 TITLE .................................................................................................................... 6
SECTION 1.02 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................ 6
ARTICLE 2 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS ............................................................................ 7
SECTION 2.01 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDINANCE PROVISIONS .............................................. 7
SECTION 2.02 INTERPRETATION .............................................................................................. 7
SECTION 2.03 ADMINISTRATION ............................................................................................... 7
SECTION 2.04 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND FINAL INSPECTION ............................... 7
SECTION 2.05 AUTHORIZATION OF SIMILAR USES ................................................................. 8
SECTION 2.06 FORM OF PETITIONS, APPLICATIONS, FINAL ACTION ................................... 8
SECTION 2.07 APPEALS ............................................................................................................. 9
SECTION 2.08 FILING FEES ...................................................................................................... 10
SECTION 2.09 WETLAND DEVELOPMENT ............................................................................... 11
SECTION 2.10 ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES ............................................. 11
SECTION 2.11 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING ......................................................................... 13
SECTION 2.12 CONTINUANCE, EXTENSIONS AND REOPENING PUBLIC HEARINGS ........ 14
SECTION 2.13 NOTICE OF LIMITED LAND USE ACTIONS ...................................................... 15
ARTICLE 3 - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES ............................................................................. 17
SECTION 3.01 CLASSIFICATION OF BASIC ZONES ................................................................ 17
SECTION 3.02 CLASSIFICATION OF SUB-ZONES .................................................................. 17
SECTION 3.03 LOCATION OF ZONES ...................................................................................... 17
SECTION 3.04 ZONING MAPS .................................................................................................. 18
SECTION 3.05 ZONING OF BOUNDARIES ............................................................................... 18
SECTION 3.06 ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS ......................................................................... 18
ARTICLE 4 - USE ZONES .......................................................................................................... 19
SECTION 4.01 RURAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE (RR) .................................................................... 19
SECTION 4.02 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (SFR).................................................... 22
SECTION 4.03 GENERAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE (GR) ............................................................... 25
SECTION 4.04 RESIDENTIAL-COMMERCIAL ZONE (RC ......................................................... 29
SECTION 4.05 BROADWAY COMMERCIAL .............................................................................. 31
SECTION 4.06 COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL (CC) ..................................................................... 35
SECTION 4.07 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL (HC) .......................................................................... 38
SECTION 4.08 INDUSTRIAL-COMMERCIAL (IC) ....................................................................... 40
SECTION 4.11 PUBLIC FACILITIES AND PARKS (PFP) ............................................................ 48
SECTION 4.12 GREENWAY - OPEN SPACE SUBZONE (/GW) ................................................ 50
SECTION 4.13 FLOOD PLAIN SUBZONE (/FP) .......................................................................... 54
SECTION 4.14 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SUBZONE (/PD) .................................................... 62
SECTION 4.15 SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN SUBZONE (/SDP) ........................................ 73
ARTICLE 5 - SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS ........................................................................ 78
SECTION 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING ACCESSORY USES ........................... 78
SECTION 5.02 ACCESS ............................................................................................................. 78
SECTION 5.03 CLEAR VISION AREAS ...................................................................................... 79
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 4
SECTION 5.04 RESERVED SECTION ....................................................................................... 79
SECTION 5.05 SETBACKS FOR AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS ..................................... 79
SECTION 5.06 USE OF RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES IN COMMERCIAL ZONE .................... 80
SECTION 5.07 FUTURE DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL ............................................................. 80
SECTION 5.08 EXCEPTIONS TO LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS ................................................ 80
SECTION 5.09 EXCEPTIONS TO YARD REQUIREMENTS ...................................................... 80
SECTION 5.10 EXCEPTIONS TO BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATIONS ........................................ 81
SECTION 5.11 RESERVED SECTION ...................................................................................... 81
SECTION 5.12 LANDSCAPING ................................................................................................. 81
SECTION 5.13 COMMERCIAL AND MIXED-USE DESIGN STANDARDS ................................. 84
SECTION 5.14 IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS ................................................................... 93
SECTION 5.15 SIGNS ................................................................................................................ 94
SECTION 5.16 STORMWATER DETENTION AND TREATMENT ........................................... 114
SECTION 5.17 RESERVED SECTION ..................................................................................... 115
SECTION 5.18 TIME LIMIT EXTENSION REQUEST ................................................................ 115
SECTION 5.19 RESERVED SECTION ..................................................................................... 115
SECTION 5.20 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS ..................................................... 115
SECTION 5.21 RESERVED SECTION ..................................................................................... 127
SECTION 5.22 PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE ACCESS AND CIRCULATION .......................... 127
SECTION 5.23 TRANSIT FACILITIES ...................................................................................... 128
SECTION 5.24 ACCESS MANAGEMENT ................................................................................ 129
SECTION 5.25 DEVELOPMENT ON SLOPES OF OR OVER FIFTEEN PERCENT ................. 129
SECTION 5.26 PARKLAND DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS .................................................. 130
SECTION 5.27 TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS AND MITIGATION ............................................. 133
SECTION 5.28 STREET TREES ............................................................................................... 134
SECTION 5.29 RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS ............................................................. 137
SECTION 5.30 BACKYARD CHICKENS ................................................................................... 145
SECTION 5.31 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT STANDARDS ................................................ 155
ARTICLE 6 - SITE PLAN REVIEW ........................................................................................... 157
SECTION 6.01 SITE PLAN REVIEW PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY ................................... 157
SECTION 6.02 FILING COPIES OF SITE PLAN ....................................................................... 158
SECTION 6.03 REQUIRED INFORMATION ON SITE PLAN .................................................... 158
SECTION 6.04 IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS ................................................................. 162
SECTION 6.05 APPROVAL CRITERIA ..................................................................................... 162
SECTION 6.06 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVING SITE PLANS............................................... 163
SECTION 6.07 AMENDMENTS ................................................................................................ 164
SECTION 6.08 COMPLIANCE WITH SITE PLAN REVIEW ...................................................... 165
SECTION 6.09 TIME LIMIT ON AN APPROVED SITE PLAN ................................................... 165
ARTICLE 7 - TEMPORARY USE PERMIT REGULATIONS ..................................................... 166
SECTION 7.01 PURPOSE OF TEMPORARY USE PERMIT .................................................... 166
SECTION 7.02 APPLICATION .................................................................................................. 166
SECTION 7.03 APPROVAL CRITERIA ..................................................................................... 166
SECTION 7.04 ALLOWABLE TEMPORARY USES ................................................................... 167
SECTION 7.05 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVING TEMPORARY USE PERMITS..................... 171
SECTION 7.06 PROCEDURE FOR RENEWING TEMPORARY USE PERMITS ...................... 173
ARTICLE 8 - CONDITIONAL USES ......................................................................................... 174
SECTION 8.01 PURPOSE OF CONDITIONAL USE PROCEDURE ......................................... 174
SECTION 8.02 AUTHORIZATION TO GRANT OR DENY A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. 174
SECTION 8.03 TAKING ACTION ON A CONDITIONAL USE APPLICATION........................... 175
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 5
SECTION 8.04 BUILDING PERMITS FOR AN APPROVED CONDITIONAL USE ................... 175
SECTION 8.05 TIME LIMIT ON AN APPROVED CONDITIONAL USE APPLICATION ................ 175
SECTION 8.06 TERMINATION OF A CONDITIONAL USE ...................................................... 176
SECTION 8.07 LIMITATION ..................................................................................................... 176
SECTION 8.08 TRANSFERRING A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT .......................................... 176
SECTION 8.09 RESERVED SECTION ..................................................................................... 176
SECTION 8.10 GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPROVAL........................................................ 176
SECTION 8.11 SPECIAL STANDARDS GOVERNING CONDITIONAL USES ......................... 177
SECTION 8.12 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL ......................................................................... 188
ARTICLE 9 - NONCONFORMING USES ................................................................................. 191
SECTION 9.01 INTENT ............................................................................................................ 191
SECTION 9.02 CONTINUATION OF A NONCONFORMING USE ............................................ 191
SECTION 9.03 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE .................................................................. 191
SECTION 9.04 DISCONTINUANCE OF A NONCONFORMING USE ...................................... 191
SECTION 9.05 CHANGE OF A NONCONFORMING USE........................................................ 191
SECTION 9.06 DESTRUCTION OF A NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE ................ 192
SECTION 9.07 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE ...................................................................... 192
SECTION 9.08 COMPLETION OF STRUCTURE ..................................................................... 192
ARTICLE 10 – VARIANCES ..................................................................................................... 193
SECTION 10.01 PURPOSE ........................................................................................................ 193
SECTION 10.02 AUTHORIZATION TO GRANT OR DENY VARIANCES ................................... 193
SECTION 10.03 CIRCUMSTANCES FOR GRANTING A VARIANCE ........................................ 193
SECTION 10.04 PROCEDURE FOR TAKING ACTION ON A VARIANCE APPLICATION......... 194
SECTION 10.05 BUILDING PERMITS FOR AN APPROVED VARIANCE .................................. 194
SECTION 10.06 TIME LIMIT OF AN APPROVED VARIANCE APPLICATION ........................... 194
SECTION 10.07 TERMINATION OF A VARIANCE ..................................................................... 195
SECTION 10.08 LIMITATION ..................................................................................................... 195
ARTICLE 11 - AMENDMENTS ................................................................................................. 196
SECTION 11.01 AUTHORIZATION TO INITIATE AMENDMENTS ............................................. 196
SECTION 11.02 PUBLIC HEARINGS ON AMENDMENTS ......................................................... 196
SECTION 11.03 RECORD OF AMENDMENTS .......................................................................... 196
SECTION 11.04 LIMITATIONS ................................................................................................... 197
SECTION 11.05 CRITERIA FOR AMENDMENTS ...................................................................... 197
SECTION 11.06 TRANSPORTATION PLANNING RULE COMPLIANCE ................................... 197
ARTICLE 12 - HOME OCCUPATIONS ..................................................................................... 198
SECTION 12.01 PURPOSE OF HOME OCCUPATION PERMITS ............................................. 198
SECTION 12.02 STANDARDS FOR ALL HOME OCCUPATIONS ............................................. 198
SECTION 12.03 MINOR HOME OCCUPATIONS ....................................................................... 198
SECTION 12.04 MAJOR HOME OCCUPATIONS....................................................................... 199
SECTION 12.05 PROHIBITED HOME OCCUPATION USES ..................................................... 200
SECTION 12.06 TERMINATION OF HOME OCCUPATION ....................................................... 201
ARTICLE 13 - DEFINITIONS .................................................................................................... 202
SECTION 13.01 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION .......................................................................... 202
SECTION 13.02 DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................... 202
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 6
ARTICLE 1 - INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
SECTION 1.01 TITLE
This ordinance shall be known as the VENETA LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE of
2010.
SECTION 1.02 PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish standards and procedures for the orderly
development of land within the City of Veneta; to assist in implementing the Veneta
Comprehensive Plan and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 7
ARTICLE 2 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SECTION 2.01 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDINANCE PROVISIONS
(1) Land may be used and a structure or part of a structure may be constructed,
altered, occupied or used only as this ordinance permits.
(2) No lot area, yard, off-street parking area, off-street loading area or other open space
existing on or after the effective date of this ordinance shall be reduced below the
minimum required for it by this ordinance.
(3) No lot area, yard, off-street parking area, off-street loading area or other open space
shall be used as the required lot area, yard, off-street parking area, off-street
loading area or other open space of another use, except as provided for in this
ordinance.
SECTION 2.02 INTERPRETATION
Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this ordinance are less restrictive than
comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this ordinance or any other
ordinance, the provisions which are more restrictive shall govern.
SECTION 2.03 ADMINISTRATION
The City Administrator or other official designated as the building and planning official by
the City shall have the power and duty to enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 2.04 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND FINAL INSPECTION
Building Inspector & Building and Planning Official Requirements.
(1) The Building Inspector and Planning Official shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy
for all Residential, Commercial and Industrial buildings. Certificates of Occupancy
must meet the requirements in Veneta Municipal Code 15.05.210.
(2) The Building Inspector shall conduct a final site inspection for all other construction.
(3) The Building Inspector shall provide the City with copies of all Certificates of
Occupancy and shall notify the City at the time any final inspection is completed and
approved.
(4) The Building and Planning Official shall conduct an on-site inspection of the building
site, after receiving notification of final inspection, to ensure that all requirements of
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 8
this ordinance and approved site plans have been complied with.
(5) If the Building and Planning Official or Building Inspector determines that a violation
of this ordinance or any other ordinance or law does exist, he shall immediately
notify the property owner and follow procedures in accordance with Section 2.10,
"Enforcement, Violations and Penalties" of this ordinance.
SECTION 2.05 AUTHORIZATION OF SIMILAR USES
The Building and Planning Official may permit in a particular zone a use not listed in this
ordinance, provided the use is of the same general type as the uses permitted there by this
ordinance. However, this section does not authorize the inclusion of a use in a zone,
where it is specifically listed in another zone. The decision of the Building and Planning
Official may be appealed to the Planning Commission using procedures as spelled out in
Section 2.07 of this ordinance.
SECTION 2.06 FORM OF PETITIONS, APPLICATIONS, FINAL ACTION
(1) Petitions, applications and appeals provided for in this ordinance shall be made on
forms prescribed by the City.
(2) An applicant shall be advised that all permits or zone changes necessary for a
development project may be merged into a consolidated review process. Zone
changes and permits required through the application of the overlay district and
discretionary permit procedures shall be available for a consolidated permit process.
For purposes of this ordinance, a consolidated permit process shall mean that the
hearing body shall, to the greatest extent possible, apply concurrent notice, public
hearing and decision making procedures to the permits and zone changes which
have been consolidated for review.
(3) Applications shall be accompanied by plans and specifications drawn to scale,
showing the actual shape and dimensions of the legal lot to be built upon; the sizes
and locations on the legal lot of all existing and proposed structures; the intended
use of each structure; the number of households, if any, to be accommodated
thereon; the relationship of the property to the surrounding area; a narrative
statement addressing the applicable criteria; and such other information as is
needed to determine conformance with this ordinance.
Applications that are accompanied by the required application fee will be reviewed
and, within 30 days of its receipt, the applicant will be notified as to the
completeness. If the City determines that the application is complete, the City will
process the application in accordance with the review procedures for the type of
application that has been submitted. If the City determines that the application is
incomplete, the City shall advise the applicant in writing of the necessary missing
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 9
information. Within 180 days after initial application submittal, the applicant shall
submit to the City a written statement indicating either intent to submit the missing
information or a refusal to submit the missing information. The City shall begin
review of the application when deemed complete for purposes of ORS 227.178
upon receipt of:
(a) All of the missing information;
(b) Some of the missing information and written notice from the applicant that no
other information will be provided; or
(c) Written notice from applicant that none of the missing information will be
provided.
On the 181st day after first being submitted, the application is void if the applicant
has been notified of the missing information but failed to respond pursuant to a, b, or
c above.
(4) After the Building and Planning Official or designee deems an application complete,
it shall be sent to the City Engineer, Veneta Public Works Superintendent and
affected regulatory agencies which may include but are not limited to the Lane
County Fire District No. 1, Oregon Department of Transportation, Lane County
Public Works Department, local utility companies, Division of State Lands, and US
Army Corp of Engineers.
(5) Approval or denial of a land use regulation or limited land use application shall be
based upon and accompanied by a brief statement that explains the criteria and
standards considered relevant to the decision, states the facts relied upon and
explains the justification for the decision based on the criteria standards and facts
set forth.
(6) The decision of either the Building and Planning Official or the Planning
Commission will be issued with a Final Order. If a written Notice of Appeal is not
filed within fifteen (15) days of the date the Final Order of the Building and Planning
Official or the Planning Commission decision is mailed, the decision becomes final.
(7) Final action on a permit or zone change application is required within 120 days from
the date the application is deemed complete except where parties have agreed to
mediation and for expedited land use decisions.
SECTION 2.07 APPEALS
(1) An action or ruling of the Building and Planning Official pursuant to this ordinance
may be appealed to the Veneta Planning Commission within fifteen (15) days after
the Building and Planning Official decision is mailed. An action or ruling of the
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 10
Planning Commission pursuant to this ordinance may be appealed to the City
Council within fifteen (15) days after the Planning Commission has rendered its
decision and the final order has been signed. Written notice of appeal from a
decision of either the Building and Planning Official or the Planning Commission
shall be filed with the City within fifteen (15) days of the date the final order has
been signed.
(2) Issues of appeal must be raised with sufficient specificity to have afforded the
decision maker and the applicant, if appropriate, an adequate opportunity to
respond to and resolve each issue. The failure to raise an issue in person or by
letter filed in a timely manner precludes appeal and the failure to specify to which
criterion the comment is directed, precludes appeal based on that criterion.
Appeals may only be made by an adversely affected or aggrieved person or an
affected party who appears in person or to a timely presentation of written testimony
to the Building and Planning Official or the Planning Commission and who files a
written "Notice of Appeal” within fifteen (15) days of the decision.
(3) The written notice of appeal shall:
(a) be made on the appeal form provided by the City and include applicant’s valid
signature,
(b) be filed with the appropriate fee,
(c) include all matters specifically appealed, including a brief summary of the
material presented to the Building and Planning Official or the Planning
Commission upon which the decision which is being appealed was based.
Specific statutory citations supporting the appeal shall also be included. Failure to
comply with one or more of these appeal requirements constitutes a jurisdictional
defect which precludes the Planning Commission or City Council from considering
the appeal. Any issue not specifically raised in the written appeal shall be deemed
waived and will not be heard by the Planning Commission or the City Council as
part of the appeal. If the appeal is filed, the Planning Commission or City Council
shall receive a report and recommendation thereon from the Building and Planning
Official or the Planning Commission and shall hold a public hearing on the appeal.
Review is de novo by both the Planning Commission and City Council. The
Planning Commission or City Council may continue the hearing for good cause.
Following the hearing, the Planning Commission or City Council may sustain, reject,
or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the Building and Planning Official or
Planning Commission, provided such action complies with the provisions of this
ordinance.
SECTION 2.08 FILING FEES
Application, petition and appeal fees shall be paid to the City upon filing as authorized in
Veneta Municipal Code Chapter 3.30. A separate application and fee is required for each
decision being appealed. All fees shall be established by a separate resolution adopted by
the Council.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 11
SECTION 2.09 WETLAND DEVELOPMENT
Development within a wetland is subject to compliance with Veneta’s Wetland Protection
Ordinance, Veneta Municipal Code Chapter 18.10.
(1) Notification. The City shall provide notice to the Division of State Lands (DSL) the
applicant, and the owner of record within five working days of the acceptance of any
complete application for subdivisions; building permits for new structures; other
development permits and approvals that allow physical alteration of land involving
excavation and grading, including permits for removal or fill, or both, or development
in the floodplain; conditional uses and variances that involve physical alteration of
land or construction of new structures; and planned unit development approvals that
are wholly or partially within areas identified as wetlands on the Statewide Wetlands
Inventory. This provision does not apply if a permit from DSL has been issued for
the proposed activity.
(2) Approval. Approval of any activity described above shall include one of the
following:
(a) Issuance of a permit by DSL required for the project before any physical
alteration takes place within the wetlands;
(b) Notice from DSL that no permit is required; or
(c) Notice from DSL that no permit is required until specific proposals to remove
fill or alter the wetlands are submitted.
If DSL fails to respond within 30 days of notice, the City approval may be issued
with written notice to the applicant and the owner of record that the proposed action
may require state or federal permits. The City may issue local approval for parcels
identified as or including wetlands on the Statewide Wetlands Inventory upon
providing to the applicant and owner of record a written notice of possible presence
of wetlands and the potential need for state and federal permits and providing DSL
with a copy of the notification of comprehensive plan map or zoning map
amendments for specific properties.
SECTION 2.10 ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
(1) Responsibility. In any enforcement action the person or persons owning or
occupying the premises at the time of the violation shall be presumed to be the
person or persons who constructed, moved, caused or maintained the unlawful
activity, use, condition, or structure. This presumption may be rebutted by either the
city or the defendant both of whom shall have the right to show that the offense was
committed by someone other than, or in addition to, the person charged. This
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 12
provision shall not be construed as relieving a person in possession and control of
property from any duty imposed upon him or her by this ordinance.
Records of the Lane County assessor showing the person or persons to whom the
taxes are assessed for the premises shall constitute prima facia evidence that the
person or persons are in possession or control of the premises. Evidence of the
name of a person or persons displayed on a sign or signs located on premises
which is zoned commercial or industrial shall constitute prima facia evidence that
the person or persons whose name is displayed is in possession or control of the
premises. This provision shall not be construed to relieve any agent, manager,
employee or other person who actually committed a violation from responsibility.
(2) Inspection and Right of Entry. When necessary to investigate a suspected violation
of this land development ordinance, or an application for or revocation of any permit
issued under this land development ordinance, the City Administrator and/or his
designee may enter on any site or any structure open to the public for the purpose
of investigation, provided entry is done in accordance with law. No site or structure
that is closed to the public shall be entered without the written consent of the owner
or the occupant unless a search warrant is obtained.
(3) Procedures.
(a) Within ten (10) days after notification of a violation of this ordinance, the
Building and Planning Official shall notify the property owner that such a
violation exists.
(b) Where the violation, in the opinion of the City Administrator and/or his
designee, may adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of an individual,
group or the community as a whole if not corrected immediately, action to
rectify the problem may be required immediately or within a reasonable time
as established by the City Administrator and/or his designee.
(c) Where the violation does not involve a structure, action to rectify such shall
be made within ten (10) days. Where the violation involves a structure,
action to rectify shall be made within thirty (30) days.
(d) Any use or structure established, operated, erected, moved, altered,
enlarged, painted, or maintained contrary to this land development ordinance
is unlawful and a public nuisance, and may be abated as provided in Veneta
Municipal Code Chapter 8.05. The City Administrator and/or his designee
has the discretion of referring the matter to the City Attorney to institute any
necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this land
development ordinance.
(4) Penalty. A person violating a provision of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction, be
fined not less than $105.00 nor more than $500.00 for each violation. A violation of
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 13
this ordinance shall be considered a separate offense for each day the violation
continues.
SECTION 2.11 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING
(1) Each notice of public hearing authorized by this ordinance shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City and posted at Veneta City Hall at least
ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
(2) A notice of public hearing on an amendment to a zoning map shall be mailed to all
owners of property located within not less than 500 feet from the exterior boundaries
of the property for which the zoning map amendment has been requested. Notice
shall also be provided to any neighborhood or community organization recognized
by the City and whose boundaries include the site; to public notice subscribers; to
the Lane County Assessor; and to the Lane County Land Management Division.
(3) A notice of public hearing on a quasi-judicial land use decision shall be mailed to the
property owner, applicant, anyone who has expressed interest in the application or
public notice subscribers, and all owners of property located within 300 feet of the
property, for which the quasi-judicial land use decision has been requested. A
notice shall also be posted on the property for which the land use decision has been
requested.
(4) For the purpose of mailing notices of public hearing, the applicant shall provide the
City with a list of property owners of record on the most recent property tax
assessment roll. If the applicant fails to provide a list, the City may prepare the list
and charge the applicant for the staff time involved as a part of the publication
costs.
(5) The notice of hearing shall be mailed at least:
(a) Twenty (20) days before the hearing; or
(b) If two (2) or more hearings are required, ten (10) days before the first
hearing.
(6) Failure of a person to receive the notice prescribed in this section shall not impair
the validity of the hearing.
(7) When an application is received to change the zone of any property which includes
all or part of a manufactured dwelling park, written notice by first class mail shall be
sent to each existing mailing address for tenants of the manufactured dwelling park
at least ten (10) days, before the date of the first hearing on the application.
(8) The public notice shall explain the nature of the application and the proposed use or
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 14
uses which would be authorized; list the applicable criteria from the ordinance and
the comprehensive plan that apply to the application; cite the street address or
some other easily understood geographical reference to the subject property; state
the date, time and location of the hearing; include the name and telephone number
of the City representative to contact for additional information; state that a copy of
the application, all documents and evidence relied upon by the applicant and
applicable criteria are available for inspection at no cost and will be provided at
reasonable cost and that a staff report will be available for inspection at no cost at
least seven (7) days prior to the hearing and will be provided at reasonable cost.
The notice shall also include a general explanation of the requirements for
submission of testimony and the procedure for conduct of hearings and shall state
that failure to raise an issue in a hearing, in person or by letter, or failure to provide
sufficient specificity to afford the decision maker an opportunity to respond to the
issue precludes appeal based on that issue. It shall also state that failure of the
applicant to raise constitutional or other issues relating to the proposed conditions of
approval with sufficient specificity to allow the city to respond to the issues
precludes an action for damages in circuit court.
(9) The notice provisions of this section shall not restrict the giving of notice by other
means.
(10) A notice of hearing on an amendment to a zoning map or text amendment shall be
mailed to the Land Conservation and Development Commission (LCDC) 45 days
prior to the first evidentiary hearing date.
(11) The City shall provide notice of the decision to the applicant and any person who
submits written or oral testimony. The notice of the decision must identify the
application, state the decision being made and the date it was signed, include an
explanation of appeal rights, either at the local level or to the Land Use Board of
Appeals (LUBA), and briefly summarize the local decision making process for the
decision being made.
If the City Council approves a zone change, notice of the decision shall also be
mailed to the Lane County Assessor’s Office.
SECTION 2.12 CONTINUANCE, EXTENSIONS AND REOPENING PUBLIC
HEARINGS
(1) The Planning Commission may continue the public hearing to a time, date, and
place certain if additional information is needed to make a decision.
(2) Unless there is a continuance, if a participant so requests before the conclusion of
the initial public hearing, the record shall remain open for at least seven (7) days
after the hearing. Such an extension shall be subject to the limitations of the 120-
Day Rule, unless the extension is requested or agreed to by the applicant. Unless
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 15
waived by the applicant, the City must allow the applicant at least seven (7) days
after the record is closed to all other parties to submit final written arguments in
support of the application. This seven (7) day period is not subject to the 120-Day
Rule.
(3) When a local governing body, planning commission, council or hearings officer
reopens a record to admit new evidence, arguments, or testimony, any person may
raise new issues which relate to the new evidence, testimony or criteria for decisionmaking
which apply to the matter at issue.
SECTION 2.13 NOTICE OF LIMITED LAND USE ACTIONS
Limited Land Use decisions do not require public hearings; however, the decision is subject
to the following requirements:
(1) The City shall follow the applicable procedures contained within its land use
regulations and other applicable legal requirements.
(2) Written notice shall be posted at City Hall and mailed to the property owner,
applicant and all owners of property within 300 feet of the entire contiguous site for
which the application is made. Notice shall also be provided to any neighborhood or
community organization recognized by the City and whose boundaries include the
site; anyone who has paid a public notice subscription fee; and to Lane County
Land Management Division. A notice shall also be posted on the property for which
the limited land use decision has been requested.
(3) Failure of a person to receive the notice prescribed in this section shall not impair
the validity of the decision.
(4) The public notice shall provide a fourteen (14) day period for submission of written
comments prior to the decision. The notice shall explain the nature of the
application and the proposed use or uses which would be authorized; list the
applicable criteria from the ordinance that apply to the application; cite the street
address or some other easily understood geographical reference to the subject
property; state the place, date and time that comments are due; include the name
and telephone number of the City representative to contact for additional
information; state that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence relied
upon by the applicant and applicable criteria are available for inspection at no cost
and will be provided at reasonable cost. The notice shall state that issues which
may provide the basis for an appeal to the Council shall be raised in writing prior to
the expiration of the comment period and issues shall be raised with sufficient
specificity to enable the decision maker to respond to the issue.
(5) The City shall provide notice of the decision to the applicant and any person who
submits comments within the fourteen (14) day period provided. The notice of the
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 16
decision must include an explanation of appeal rights and briefly summarize the
local decision making process for the decision being made.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 17
ARTICLE 3 - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
SECTION 3.01 CLASSIFICATION OF BASIC ZONES
For the purposes of this ordinance the following basic zones are hereby established:
ABBREVIATED
BASIC ZONES DESIGNATION
Rural Residential RR
Single-Family Residential SFR
General Residential GR
Residential-Commercial RC
Broadway Commercial BC
Community Commercial CC
Highway Commercial HC
Industrial-Commercial IC
Light Industrial LI
Medium Industrial MI
Public Facilities and Parks PFP
SECTION 3.02 CLASSIFICATION OF SUB-ZONES
(1) A sub-zone may be established in combination with a basic zone. The sub-zone
shall establish additional requirements, standards, and procedures for the use and
development of property in the basic zone. In cases of conflict between the
standards and requirements of the basic zone and the sub-zone, the standards and
requirements of the sub-zone shall apply.
(2) For the purposes of this ordinance the following sub-zones are hereby established:
ABBREVIATED
SUB-ZONES DESIGNATION
Greenway - Open Space /GW
Flood Hazard /FH
Planned Development /PD
Specific Development Plan /SDP
SECTION 3.03 LOCATION OF ZONES
The boundaries for Specific Development Plan sub-zones are indicated on the Veneta
Zoning Map, dated November 23, 2009, which is hereby adopted by reference and made a
part of this ordinance. The Flood Hazard Zone is delineated from the Federal Emergency
Management Agency’s Lane County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance
Rate Map. The Greenway - Open Space sub-zone and Flood Hazard sub-zone are shown
on the Veneta Zoning Map.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 18
SECTION 3.04 ZONING MAPS
A zoning map adopted by section 3.03 of this ordinance or an amendment thereto shall be
dated with the effective date of the ordinance that adopts the map or map amendment. A
certified print of the adopted map or map amendment shall be maintained in the office of
the City Recorder as long as this ordinance remains in effect.
SECTION 3.05 ZONING OF BOUNDARIES
Unless otherwise specified, zone boundaries are section lines, subdivision lines, lot lines,
center lines of street or railroad right-of-way or such lines extended except where a
boundary line clearly divides a lot; then the boundary line shall be determined by use of the
scale designated on the zoning map. Where a boundary line divides a lot, the boundary
line shall be considered as the lot line for purposes of determining area and setback
requirements for each zone.
SECTION 3.06 ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS
All areas annexed to the City shall be placed in the Rural Residential (RR) zone unless
specifically placed in another zone by the City Council at the time of annexation. The
Council shall request a recommendation from the Planning Commission prior to zoning
any annexed area other than RR.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 19
ARTICLE 4 - USE ZONES
SECTION 4.01 RURAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE (RR)
In an RR zone the following regulations shall apply:
(1) Purpose. To maintain areas outside the City's service boundary for limited rural
development within the carrying capacity of the natural resources until conversion to
urban residential uses.
(2) Uses Permitted Outright. In an RR zone the following uses and their accessory
uses are permitted subject to compliance with state and local health and sanitation
requirements. As described in Section 6.01, some development activities or
changes in use, including those on properties located within subzones or properties
with physical characteristics which may be affected by the development, may
require a Site Plan Review.
(a) One (1) detached single-family dwelling per buildable legal lot, provided
adequate water and sewage disposal are available.
(b) A maximum of one Accessory Dwelling Unit per legal single-family detached
dwelling subject to standards in Section 5.31.
(c) Commercial horticulture.
(d) Non-commercial animal husbandry including the raising of fowl, bees and
domestic farm animals, except pigs (including potbellied pigs), not conducted
on a commercial basis subject to the following provisions:
1. The total number of animals allowed on a lot shall be limited to the
square footage of the lot divided by the total minimum area required
for each animal.
Cows, horses, sheep or goats can be kept on lots having an area of
20,000 square feet per animal (other than their young under the age
of six (6) months)
The number of chickens, other fowl and/or rabbits (over the age of six
(6) months) shall not exceed one for each 500 square feet of property,
provided that no roosters over the age of six (6) months shall be kept.
The number of young chickens, other fowl and/or rabbits (under the
age of six (6) months) allowed on the property at any one time shall
not exceed three (3) times the allowable number of chickens, other
fowl and/or rabbits over the age of six (6) months.
The number of colonies of bees allowed on a lot shall be limited to
one colony for each 1,000 square feet of lot area.
Animal runs or farm building for housing livestock or animals, chicken
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 20
or other fowl pens and colonies of bees shall be located behind the
house, not less than 100 feet from any residence, nor closer than
twenty (20) feet to the interior property line of an abutting property.
2. Animals, chickens and/or other fowl shall be properly caged or
housed, and proper sanitation shall be maintained at all times. All
animal or poultry food shall be stored in metal or other rodent proof
receptacles.
3. When a RR zone is reclassified to another zone, all those land uses
granted under item (c) above shall be completely discontinued within
a period of six (6) months from the date of reclassification except for
properties one acre in size or larger and zoned SFR or GR.
(e) Registered or Certified Family Daycare.
(f) Adult Foster Home.
(g) Accessory structures not exceeding 2500 square feet in size.
(3) Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review. In a RR zone, the following uses and
their accessory uses are permitted subject to site plan review, as described in
Section 6.01:
(a) Public and semi-public uses, including transit facilities and transportation
improvements conforming to the City of Veneta Transportation System.
(4) Conditional Uses. In a RR zone, the following uses and their accessory uses may
be permitted subject to the provisions of Article 8, Conditional Uses. Some
Conditional Uses are also subject to the provisions of Article 6, Site Plan Review.
As described in Section 6.01, some development activities or changes in use may
require Site Plan Review if the property is located within a subzone or has physical
characteristics which may be affected by the development.
(a) Major home occupations. See Article 12 for Home Occupation
Requirements.
(b) Commercial animal husbandry.
(c) Commercial dog kennel.
(d) Accessory dwelling to relieve a temporary medical hardship.
(e) Accessory structures exceeding 2,500 square feet in size.
(f) Public structures or uses of land for public utility facilities such as:
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 21
1. Electric substation or transformer.
2. Public or community sewage disposal plant or pumping station.
3. Radio or television tower or cell tower transmitter.
4. Telephone exchange.
5. Transportation improvements not identified by the City of Veneta
Transportation System Plan.
(g) Day care facilities.
(5) Lot Size. Except as provided in Articles 5, 6, and 8, the minimum lot size in an RR
zone shall be as follows:
(b) When residential development is proposed for a lot that is twice the minimum
lot size which also has potential for future division, the applicant must submit
a shadow plat to show how the lot could be further developed to urban
densities, including minimum yard setbacks and future street extensions.
(6) Yards. Except as provided elsewhere in this Article and in Articles 5, 6 and 8, in an
RR zone, yards shall be as follows:
(a) Front yards shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet.
(b) Back and side yards shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet.
(c) Yards shall be landscaped as provided in Section 5.12.
(d) See Section 5.09 for additional setbacks on designated streets.
(e) Yard requirements are in addition to any planned road right-of-way widths in
order to permit the eventual widening of streets, or construction of new
streets.
(f) See Veneta Tree Preservation and Protection Ordinance for possible
setback exemptions for the preservation of heritage trees.
(7) Lot Coverage. All buildings, including accessory structures, shall not occupy more
than 30 percent of the legal lot area.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 22
(a) The minimum lot size is one (1) acre, or larger as needed to permit
compliance with the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Quality for the location of on-site disposal systems and domestic wells.
Determination of minimum legal lot size and land division approval will be
made on a case-by-case basis by the Planning Commission based on the
carrying capacity of the land, availability of sewage disposal systems and
type of water supply.
(8) Building Height. Except as provided in Articles 5, 6 and 8, or as otherwise required
by Section 4.01, in a RR zone, no building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(9) For additional requirements see Article 5 - Supplementary Provisions.
SECTION 4.02 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (SFR)
In an SFR zone, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) Purpose. To provide areas suitable and desirable for primarily single-family and
public service uses, with options and flexibility to provide a variety of housing
through clustering and planned developments, including the provision of limited
multi-family use subject to lot size and density standards. The net density in the
SFR zone shall not exceed eight (8) dwelling units per acre. Lots in the SFR zone
are subject to the minimum lot area and dimensional standards of the zone.
(2) Uses Permitted Outright. In a SFR zone, the following uses and their accessory
uses are permitted outright:
(a) One detached single-family dwelling per buildable legal lot.
(b) One duplex on a corner lot, provided driveway access is taken from an alley
or from two local streets; i.e., one for each dwelling unit. Access from a
collector street may be approved where the driveway access is setback at
least 50 feet from the street intersection and the City Engineer finds that
applicable sight distance requirements are met.
(c) A maximum of one Accessory Dwelling Unit per legal single-family detached
dwelling subject to standards in Section 5.31.
(d) Domestic horticulture.
(e) Adult Foster Home.
(f) Registered or certified family daycare.
(g) The keeping of backyard chickens on lots less than one acre in size, in
compliance with Section 5.30.
(h) Uses similar to the above permitted uses as provided by Section 2.05.
(3) Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review. In a SFR zone, the following uses and
their accessory uses are permitted subject to site plan review, as described in
Section 6.01:
(a) Public and semi-public uses, including transit facilities and transportation
improvements conforming to the City of Veneta Transportation System.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 23
(b) Accessory structures not exceeding 2500 square feet in size.
(c) Residential facilities.
(d) Non-commercial animal husbandry on properties one acre in size or larger.
See Section 4.01 (2) (c) for requirements.
(e) The garage of a single-family dwelling within a subdivision may be used as a
temporary sales office before permanent occupancy. The sales office must
be converted to a garage before permanent occupancy.
(f) Uses similar to the above permitted uses as provided by Section 2.05.
(4) Conditional Uses. In a SFR zone, the following uses and their accessory uses may
be permitted subject to the provisions of Article 8, Conditional Uses. Conditional
Uses may also be subject to the provisions of Article 6, Site Plan Review.
(a) Major home occupation. See Article 12 for Home Occupation Requirements.
(b) Neighborhood commercial centers.
(c) Multi-family housing or Residential facilities. Approval must be based upon a
development plan, subject to Site Review procedures per Article 6 and
Conditional Use standards of Article 8.
(d) Public structures or uses of land for public utility facilities such as:
1. Electric substation or transformer.
2. Public or community sewage disposal plant or pumping station.
3. Radio or television tower or cell tower transmitter.
4. Telephone exchange.
5. Transportation improvements not identified by the City of
Veneta Transportation System Plan.
(e) Day care facilities.
(f) Accessory structure larger than 2,500 square feet.
(g) Uses similar to the above conditional uses as provided by Section 2.05.
(5) Lot Size and Width. Except as provided in Articles 5, 6 and 8, the minimum lot size
and width in an SFR zone shall be as follows:
(a) The minimum lot area is 6,000 square feet, except 7,500 square feet is
required for duplex lots and 18,000 square feet is required for multifamily
lots; an additional 2,000 square feet is required for all proposed lots with an
average pre-development slope of 15% or greater (See Section 5.25).
Smaller lots may be approved through a Specific Development Plan or
Planned Unit Development.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 24
(b) The minimum lot width is sixty (60) feet. Lot widths may be reduced to thirty
(30) feet for single-family attached homes, provided that not more than four
(4) dwellings are consecutively attached.
(c) The Planning Commission may require larger lot areas, at the time a land
division is granted, when it determines that it is necessary to do one of the
following:
1. Protect natural drainage-ways.
2. Provide drainage or utility easements.
3. Protect future right-of-way.
4. Protect un-buildable steep slope areas above the 450-foot
elevation level.
5. Protect flood plain hazard areas.
(d) Smaller lots may be allowed if public space in addition to that required by
section 5.26 Parkland Dedication Requirements, is dedicated or otherwise
permanently preserved to protect natural resources or provide recreational
opportunities. When the provisions of this section are utilized to develop
smaller lots than would otherwise be allowed by the base zone, the following
standards shall apply and shall supersede the standards for the base zone.
1. In no case shall the gross density of the development exceed
the maximum gross density of the site if it were developed with
standard minimum lot sizes for the base zone, irrespective
of wetland or Greenway areas.
2. In no case will the minimum lot size be less than 70% of the
minimum lot size for the base zone.
3. Developments seeking to qualify for such a density bonus may
be required to relocate structures currently within the Greenway
subzone to less sensitive areas.
4. Side yards shall be no less than 5 feet on a side.
5. Front yard setbacks shall be no less than ten (10) feet, except
garage and carport openings shall be setback at least twenty
(20) feet.
6. Exceptions to these setback requirements may be allowed
when necessary to provide a larger buffer between
waterways or other natural resources and development.
(e) When residential development is proposed for a lot that is twice the minimum
lot size which also has potential for future division, the applicant must submit
a shadow plat to show how the lot could be further developed to urban
densities.
(6) Yards. Except as provided in Articles 5, 6 and 8, or as otherwise allowed under
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 25
Section 4.02 (5) (c), in an SFR zone, yards shall be as follows:
(a) Front yards shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet.
(b) Back and side yards shall be a minimum of 5 feet when the building elevation
closest to the property line is 22 feet or less in building height, and a
minimum of 10 feet when the building elevation closest to the property line is
greater than 22 feet in building height.
(c) Yards shall be landscaped as provided in Section 5.12.
(d) See Section 5.09 for additional setbacks on designated street, or
construction of new streets. Yard requirements are in addition to any planned
road right-of-way widths in order to permit the eventual widening of streets,
or construction of new streets.
(e) See Veneta Tree Preservation and Protection Ordinance for possible
setback exemptions for the preservation of heritage trees.
(7) Lot Coverage. In an SFR zone, all buildings shall not occupy more than forty
percent (40%) percent of the lot area. In the case that any portion of the primary
dwelling is taller than twenty-two (22) feet, the maximum allowable lot coverage is
thirty percent (30%). When lots smaller than 6,000 square feet are approved under
subsection 4.02(5)(d), an additional ten percent (10%) of each such lot may be
covered by buildings.
(8) Building Height. Except as provided in Articles 5, 6 and 8, or as otherwise required
by Section 4.02, in a SFR zone, no building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(9) Residential Design Standards. All residential developments, including land divisions,
individual dwelling units, and residential care homes, as applicable, and projects
that are subject to Site Plan Review or Planned Unit Development review, shall
conform to the design standards in Section 5.29.
(10) For additional requirements, see Article 5 - Supplementary Provisions.
SECTION 4.03 GENERAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE (GR)
In a GR zone, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) Purpose. To provide areas suitable and desirable for a variety of housing types and
densities with provisions for associated public service uses and open space, and
allowing flexibility through planned developments and other options under controlled
conditions. The net density in the GR zone shall not exceed fifteen (15) dwelling
units per net acre and twenty (20) units in planned developments, and are subject to
the minimum lot area and dimensional standards of the zone.
(2) Uses Permitted Outright. In a GR zone, the following uses and their accessory uses
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 26
are permitted outright:
(a) One detached single-family dwelling per buildable legal lot.
(b) One duplex per legal buildable lot.
(c) A maximum of one Accessory Dwelling Unit per legal single-family detached
dwelling subject to standards in Section 5.31.
(d) Domestic horticulture.
(e) Registered or certified family daycare.
(f) Adult Foster Home.
(g) The keeping of backyard chickens on lots less than one acre in size, in
compliance with Section 5.30.
(h) Uses similar to the above permitted uses as provided by Section 2.05.
(3) Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review. In a GR zone, the following uses and
their accessory uses are permitted subject to site plan review, as described in
Section 6.01:
(a) Public and semi-public uses, including transit facilities and transportation
improvements conforming to the City of Veneta Transportation System.
(b) Multi-family dwellings.
(c) Residential facilities.
(d) Accessory structures not exceeding 2,500 square feet in size.
(e) Non-commercial animal husbandry on properties one acre in size or larger.
See Section 4.01 (2) (c) for requirements.
(f) The garage of a single-family dwelling within a subdivision may be used as a
temporary sales office before permanent occupancy. The sales office must
be converted to a garage before permanent occupancy.
(g) Attached single-family dwellings (townhouse or rowhouse).
(h) Uses similar to the above permitted uses as provided by Section 2.05.
(4) Conditional Uses. In a GR zone, the following uses and their accessory uses may
be permitted subject to the provisions of Article 8, Conditional Uses. Some
Conditional Uses are also subject to the provisions of Article 6, Site Plan Review.
(a) Major home occupation. See Article 12 for Home Occupation Requirements.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 27
(b) Neighborhood commercial centers.
(c) Day care facilities.
(d) Manufactured dwelling parks, subject to Site Plan Review provisions of
Article 6. Manufactured dwelling parks are also subject to state regulations
under Oregon Revised Statutes Chapter 446.
(e) Public structures or uses of land for public utility facilities such as:
1. Electric substation or transformer.
2. Public or Community sewage disposal plant or pumping
station.
3. Radio or television tower or cell tower transmitter.
4. Telephone exchange.
5. Transportation improvements not identified by the City of
Veneta Transportation System Plan.
(f) Accessory structures larger than 2,500 square feet.
(g) Uses similar to the above conditional uses as provided by Section 2.05.
(5) Lot size and Width. Except as provided in Articles 5, 6 and 8, the minimum lot size
and width in a GR zone shall be as follows:
(a) For any housing type, the maximum density allowed per legal lot is one
dwelling per 6,000 square feet (5,400 in the downtown area on the
Comprehensive Plan map), two (2) dwellings per 7,500 square feet, plus
2,000 square feet for each additional dwelling unit.
(b) Lot sizes smaller than 6,000 square feet are allowed for single-family
attached homes that do not exceed the overall net density allowed for multifamily
housing. Lots for single-family attached homes do not need to meet
the minimum lot width.
(c) The minimum lot width is sixty (60) feet. Lot widths may be reduced to thirty
(30) feet for single-family attached homes, provided that not more than four
(4) dwellings are consecutively attached.
(d) The Planning Commission may require larger lot areas, at the time a land
division is granted, when it determines that it is necessary to do one of the
following:
1. Protect natural drainage-ways
2. Provide drainage or utility easements.
3. Protect future right-of-way.
4. Protect unbuildable steep slope areas above the 450-foot
elevation level.
5. Protect flood plain hazard areas.
(e) Smaller lots may be allowed if public space in addition to that required by
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 28
section 5.26 Parkland Dedication Requirements, is dedicated or otherwise
permanently preserved to protect natural resources or provide recreational
opportunities. When the provisions of this section are utilized to develop
smaller lots than would otherwise be allowed by the base zone, the following
standards shall apply and shall supersede the standards for the base zone.
1. In no case shall the gross density of the development exceed
the maximum gross density of the site if it were developed with
standard minimum lot sizes for the base zone, irrespective
of wetland or Greenway areas.
2. In no case will the minimum lot size be less than 70% of the
minimum lot size for the base zone.
3. Developments seeking to qualify for such a density bonus
may be required to relocate structures currently within the
Greenway subzone to less sensitive areas.
4. Side yards shall be no less than 5 feet on a side.
5. Front yard setbacks shall be no less than ten (10) feet, except
garage and carport openings shall be setback at least twenty
(20) feet.
6. Exceptions to these setback requirements may be allowed
when necessary to provide a larger buffer between
waterways or other natural resources and development.
(f) When residential development is proposed for a lot that is twice the minimum
lot size which also has potential for future division, the applicant must submit
a shadow plat to show how the lot could be further developed to urban
densities.
(6) Yards. Except as provided in Articles 5 and 6, or as otherwise allowed under
Section 4.03 (5) (e), in a GR zone, yards shall be as follows:
(a) Front yards shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet except that an
unenclosed front porch may extend eight (8) feet into a required front or
street side yard.
(b) Back and side yards shall be a minimum of 5 feet when the building elevation
closest to the property line is 22 feet or less in building height, and a minimum
of 10 feet when the building elevation closest to the property line is greater
than 22 feet in building height.
(c) Yards shall be landscaped as provided in Section 5.12.
(d) See Section 5.09 for additional setbacks on designated streets. Yard
requirements are in addition to any planned road right-of-way widths in order
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 29
to permit the eventual widening of streets, or construction of new streets.
(7) Lot Coverage. In a GR zone, where the primary dwelling is twenty two (22) feet or
less in height, the total area covered by all buildings shall not occupy more than fifty
percent (50%) percent of the lot area; where the primary dwelling is taller than
twenty-two (22) feet, the maximum allowable lot coverage is forty percent (40%).
Where lots smaller than 6,000 square feet are approved under subsection
4.03(5)(e) an additional ten percent (10%) of each such lot may be covered by
buildings.
(8) Building Height. Except as provided in Articles 5, 6 and 8, or as otherwise required
by Section 4.03, in a GR zone, no building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(9) Residential Design Standards. All residential developments, including land divisions,
individual dwelling units, residential care homes and care facilities, and projects that
are subject to Site Plan Review or Planned Unit Development review, as applicable,
shall conform to the design standards in Section 5.29.
(10) For additional requirements, see Article 5 - Supplementary Provisions.
SECTION 4.04 RESIDENTIAL-COMMERCIAL ZONE (RC)
In a RC zone, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) Purpose. To provide areas suitable and desirable for a mixture of residential and
commercial uses within walking distance of downtown Veneta with provisions for
associated public service uses, and other uses, under specific standards that
promote land use compatibility and transportation-efficient development.
(2) Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review. In a RC zone, the following uses and
their accessory uses are permitted. As described in Section 6.01, some
development activities or changes in use, including those on properties located
within subzones or properties with physical characteristics which may be affected by
the development, may require a Site Plan Review.
(a) All uses allowed as permitted uses in Section 4.03(2) and (3) of the General
Residential Zone.
(b) All uses allowed as permitted uses in Section 4.05(2) and (3) of the
Broadway Commercial Zone.
(c) All uses allowed as permitted uses in Section 4.06(2) and (3) of the
Community Commercial Zone.
(3) Conditional Uses. In a RC zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are
permitted subject to the provisions of Article 6, Site Plan Review, and Article 8,
Conditional Uses (except drive-thru facilities):
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 30
(a) All uses allowed as conditional uses in Section 4.03(4) of the General
Residential Zone.
(b) All uses allowed as conditional uses in Section 4.05(4) of the Broadway
Commercial Zone.
(c) All uses allowed as conditional uses in Section 4.06 (4) of the Community
Commercial Zone.
(4) Lot Size and Width. In the RC zone, minimum lot sizes and widths shall be as
follows:
(a) Detached single family residential uses shall have a minimum lot size of
5,000 square feet and a minimum lot width of 50 feet wide; Duplex: 6,000
square feet and 60 feet wide; Multi-family use 9,500 square feet and 60 feet
wide; Attached single family (townhome) use 3,000 square feet and 30 feet
wide.
(b) Except as otherwise provided by Articles 5, 6 and 8, the minimum lot area for
non-residential uses is 3,000 square feet.
(c) When residential development is proposed for a lot that is twice the minimum
lot size which also has potential for future division, the applicant must submit
a shadow plat to show how the lot could be further developed in
conformance with the minimum lot sizes, densities, and other applicable
requirements of Articles 4 and 5, including but not limited to future streets,
alleys and utility extensions, as applicable.
(5) Yards.
(a) Front yards for dwellings not contained in a mixed-use building shall be a
minimum of fifteen (15) feet, except unenclosed front porches may extend
eight (8) feet into required front yards. Garage and carport openings shall be
setback at least twenty (20) feet or otherwise oriented away from the street
(e.g., side-loaded entrances).
(b) Front yards for buildings containing commercial uses, including mixed-use
buildings, shall be a minimum of five (5) feet and a maximum of twenty (20)
feet; the maximum setback is met when at least fifty (50) percent of a
building’s front elevation is placed within 5-20 feet of the ultimate planned
street right-of-way line. Additional setbacks may be required pursuant to
Articles 5, 6, or 8. For the purpose of this subsection, buildings designated as
containing commercial uses shall have a minimum floor-to-ceiling height on
the ground floor of fourteen (14) feet and conform to the commercial design
standards in Section 5.13.
(c) Front yards abutting a residential zone (RR, SFR, GR) shall be twenty (20)
feet, except unenclosed front porches may extent eight (8) feet into required
front yards.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 31
(d) Back and side yards, abutting a residential zone (RR, SRF, and GR) shall be
five (5).
(e) Yards for off-street parking areas shall be a minimum of five (5) feet;
additional yard area may be required under Articles 5, 6, or 8; e.g., for clear
vision and compatibility with abutting uses. This standard does not apply to
parking spaces in driveways for individual dwellings, except that driveways
shall be designed so that parked vehicles do not encroach into the public
right-of-way.
(f) Yards shall be landscaped pursuant to Section 5.12. Within the downtown
area, up to eighty percent (80%) of required landscapes may be improved
with hardscape features, subject to Site Plan Review.
(g) See Section 5.09 for additional setbacks on designated streets, or
construction of new streets.
(h) See Veneta Tree Preservation and Protection Ordinance for possible
setback exemptions for the preservation of heritage trees.
(6) Lot Coverage. In a RC zone, the maximum lot coverage is fifty percent (50%)
percent; except sixty percent (60%) percent coverage is allowed on lots that receive
vehicular access from and have off-street parking oriented to a dedicated alley (i.e.,
where access and egress is provided via a public access easement or public rightof-
way). An additional ten percent (10%) lot coverage may be approved for mixeduse
developments (residential above or on the same parcel with commercial space).
(7) Building Height. Except as provided in Articles 5, 6 and 8, in a RC zone, no building
shall exceed a height of 35 feet.
(8) Building Orientation and Design. New residential developments, including land
divisions, individual dwelling units and projects that are subject to Site Plan Review
or Planned Unit Development review, shall conform to the design standards in
Section 5.29. All other developments, including commercial, institutional, and
vertical mixed-use (residential above commercial) projects, shall comply with the
building design standards in Section 5.13.
(9) Pedestrian Access. A sidewalk shall provide safe, convenient pedestrian access
from the street to the primary building entrance. If the sidewalk must cross a
parking lot or driveway, it shall be paved, raised and/or marked with durable
materials in a manner that calls attention to the sidewalk.
(10) For additional requirements, see Article 5 - Supplementary Provisions.
SECTION 4.05 BROADWAY COMMERCIAL
In the BC zone, the following regulations shall apply:
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 32
(1) Purpose. Create a pedestrian friendly environment within the downtown area with a
mixture of land uses that provides direct, safe, and convenient access from
residential areas to commercial services, public spaces, and transit connections
while maintaining access for automobiles and bikes.
(2) Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review. In a BC zone, the following uses and
their accessory uses are permitted subject to the site plan review provisions of
Article 6, provided all operations except off-street parking, recreational facilities,
common areas (e.g., plazas), and permitted temporary activities associated with an
allowed use shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building (excludes drivethru
facilities):
(a) Retail stores or shops exceeding 10,000 square feet and contained in a
mixed-use building where residential uses are located above commercial
space.
(b) Retail store or shops not exceeding 10,000 square feet including:
1. Restaurants, tasting rooms, catering and other food services
(excluding drive-thru facilities).
2. Bakeries (with retail outlet).
4. Medical Marijuana Facility, when not located within 1,000 feet of real
property comprising a public park.
For purposes of this subsection, “within 1,000 feet” means a straight line
measurement in a radius extending for 1,000 feet or less in every
direction from any point on the boundary line of the real property
comprising an existing, public park. This buffer shall not apply to new
parks located within 1,000 feet of an existing Medical Marijuana Facility.
6. Personal service establishments such as beauty and barber shops, shoe
repair shops and tailor or dress-making shops.
(c) Personal or business services.
(d) Museums and art galleries.
(e) Professional, financial and business offices.
(f) Medical, dental clinics, or medical laboratories.
(g) Financial institutions.
(h) Indoor commercial amusement or recreation establishments.
(i) Community buildings and social organizations, including but not limited to
senior centers.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 33
(j) Bed and breakfast; boarding, lodging or rooming home.
(k) Manufacturing and production of jewelry, candy or other similar items (less
than 5,000 sq. ft. with retail outlet that is a minimum of twenty-five (25)
percent the size of the manufacturing area).
(l) Laundromat or cleaning agencies.
(m) Technical support and telemarketing centers.
(n) Residential uses contained in a mixed-use building (e.g., apartments or
condominiums above commercial space, or residential use in a live-work
building) where residential uses are located above commercial space.
(o) Low impact public and semi-public uses, including transit facilities and
transportation improvements conforming to the City of Veneta Transportation
System Plan.
(p) Registered or certified family daycare in an existing structure currently used
as a residence.
(q) Residential uses within a commercial structure, provided the residential use
does not occupy more than 50 percent of the ground floor space in the
structure if the any previous use of the structure has been commercial.
Residential shall not occupy the front 25 feet of ground floor space abutting a
principal commercial street (Broadway or Territorial Road), except that
residential use may be accessed via a breezeway, lobby, or similar entrance.
(r) Uses similar to the above permitted uses as provided by Section 2.05.
(3) Conditional Uses. Except as provided in Section 4.05 (5) below, the following uses
and their accessory uses are permitted in the BC zone subject to the provisions of
Article 6, Site Plan Review, and Article 8, Conditional Uses:
(a) Open display or storage outside exceeding 180 days.
(b) Parking lots and parking garages when not accessory to a primary permitted
use, and screened in accordance with Section 5.12 Landscaping.
(c) Transportation improvements not identified by the City of Veneta
Transportation System Plan.
(d) Uses similar to the above conditional uses as provided by Section 2.05.
(4) Prohibited Uses.
(a) Drive-thru facilities (e.g., banks, eating and drinking establishments, and
others).
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 34
(5) Lot Size and Width. In the BC zone, minimum lot sizes and widths shall be as
follows:
(a) Lot Size: 3,000 square feet.
(b) Lot Width: twenty (20) feet.
(6) Yards. Except as provided in Articles 5, 6 and 8, in a BC zone, and as required
below, there are no minimum yards:
(a) Yards for off-street parking areas shall be a minimum of five (5) feet;
additional yard area may be required under Articles 5, 6, or 8; e.g., for clear
vision and compatibility with abutting uses. This standard does not apply to
parking spaces in driveways for individual dwellings, except that driveways
shall be designed so that parked vehicles do not encroach into the public
right-of-way.
(b) Yards shall be landscaped pursuant to Section 5.12.
(c) See Section 5.09 for additional setbacks on designated streets.
(d) Yard requirements are in addition to any planned road right-of-way widths in
order to permit the eventual widening of streets.
(7) Lot Coverage. In the BC zone, the maximum allowable lot coverage by buildings is
seventy percent (70%). Up to eighty percent (80%) coverage may be approved for
mixed-use developments incorporating residential and commercial uses. All lot
areas not covered by buildings, parking lots, walkways etc. shall be landscaped
pursuant to Section 5.12.
(8) Building Height. Except as provided in Articles 5, 6 and 8, in a BC zone, the
maximum building height is forty-five (45) feet; up to fifty-five (55) feet in height is
allowed for mixed-use buildings that contain dwellings at a minimum density of
twenty (20) units per acre; dwellings must be located above a ground floor
commercial space that has a floor-to-ceiling height of at least fourteen (14) feet.
(9) Building Orientation and Design. All development, including new structures and
exterior remodels to existing structures or developments, shall comply with the
design standards in Section 5.13. Multi-family buildings and attached single-family
buildings, where allowed, shall comply with the design standards in Section 5.29.
(10) Pedestrian Access. A sidewalk shall provide safe, convenient pedestrian access
from the street to the primary building entrance. If the sidewalk must cross a
parking lot or driveway, it shall be paved, raised and/or marked in a manner that
calls attention to the sidewalk.
(11) Parking Requirements. Within the BC zone, the following parking provisions apply:
(a) Credit for On-Street Parking. The off-street parking standards of Section
5.20 may be reduced by one parking space for every one on-street parking
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 35
spaces located adjacent to the subject site, provided the parking spaces
meet the applicable dimensional standards.
(b) Off-Site Parking. To allow flexibility in the location of required parking and to
encourage efficient utilization of land, required parking may be located up to
800 feet from the development. Such parking shall be designated and
signed as assigned to the remote development. Confirmation of the parking
assignment shall be required prior to occupancy of the development.
(c) Shared Parking. Required parking facilities for two or more uses, structures,
or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking facilities used jointly
as described in 5.20(3)(a).
(12) For additional requirements see Article 5- Supplementary Provisions.
SECTION 4.06 COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL (CC)
In the CC zone, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) Purpose. To provide areas suitable and desirable for a wide range of small
commercial and business facilities to serve the Fern Ridge community.
(2) Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review. In a CC zone, the following uses and
their accessory uses are permitted subject to the site plan review provisions of
Article 6, provided all operations except off-street parking, recreational facilities,
common areas (e.g., plazas), and permitted temporary activities associated with an
allowed use shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building (excludes drivethru
facilities):
(a) Retail stores or shops exceeding 10,000 square feet and contained in a
mixed-use building where residential uses are located above commercial
space.
(b) Retail store or shops not exceeding 10,000 square feet.
(c) Personal or business service.
(d) Household appliance and small equipment repair and maintenance service
(retail outlet required).
(e) Eating and drinking establishments.
(f) Museums and art galleries.
(g) Professional, financial and business offices.
(h) Medical, dental clinics or medical laboratories.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 36
(i) Medical Marijuana Facility, when not located within 1,000 feet of real
property comprising a public park.
For purposes of this subsection, “within 1,000 feet” means a straight line
measurement in a radius extending for 1,000 feet or less in every direction
from any point on the boundary line of the real property comprising an
existing, public park. This buffer shall not apply to new parks located
within 1,000 feet of an existing Medical Marijuana Facility.
(j) Mortuary or crematorium.
(k) Financial institutions.
(l) Indoor commercial amusement or recreation establishments.
(m) Hotel, motel, bed and breakfast; boarding, lodging or rooming home.
(n) Public and semi-public uses, including transit facilities and transportation
improvements conforming to the City of Veneta Transportation System.
(o) Day care facilities or registered or certified family daycare.
(p) Parking lots and parking garages when not accessory to a primary permitted
use, and screened in accordance with Section 5.12 Landscaping.
(q) Plant nursery, provided uses and activities not enclosed in a building and
exceeding 200 square feet of lot area (e.g., display of plants, landscape
supplies, etc.) requires conditional use approval.
(r) Residential uses contained in a mixed-use building (e.g., apartments or
condominiums above commercial space, or residential use in a live-work
building) where residential uses are located above commercial space.
(s) Residential uses within commercial structures, provided the residential use
does not occupy more than 50 percent of the structure and no dwelling unit
occupies the front 25 feet of ground floor principal commercial street except
that residential use may be allowed off the principal commercial street at the
ground floor.
(t) Transportation facilities, consistent with the City of Veneta Transportation
System Plan, including but not limited to public parking structures and transit
facilities.
(u) Uses similar to the above permitted uses as provided by Section 2.05.
(3) Conditional Uses. In a CC zone, the following uses and their accessory uses may
be permitted subject to the provisions of Article 6, Site Plan Review, and Article 8,
Conditional Uses:
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 37
(a) Open display, sales or storage outside exceeding 180 days.
(b) Uses listed in (3) above that exceed the thresholds (e.g., floor space) or
other conditions provided in (3) above.
(c) Parking lots and parking garages when not accessory to a primary permitted
use, and screened in accordance with Section 5.12 Landscaping.
(d) Drive-thru facilities (e.g., banks, eating and drinking establishments, and
others).
(e) Transportation improvements not identified by the City of Veneta
Transportation System Plan.
(f) Uses similar to the above conditional uses as provided by Section 2.05.
(4) Lot Size and Width. In the CC zone, minimum lot sizes and widths shall be as
follows:
(a) Lot Size: 3,000 square feet.
(b) Lot Width: twenty (20) feet.
(5) Yards. Except as provided in Articles 5, 6 and 8, in a CC zone, and as required
below, there are no minimum yards:
(a) Front yards abutting a residential zone (RR, SFR, and GR) shall be a
minimum of twenty (20) feet.
(b) Back and side yards abutting a residential zone (RR, SFR, and GR) shall be
ten (10) feet.
(c) Yards for off-street parking areas shall be a minimum of five (5) feet;
additional yard area may be required under Articles 5, 6, or 8; e.g., for clear
vision and compatibility with abutting uses. This standard does not apply to
parking spaces in driveways for individual dwellings, except that driveways
shall be designed so that parked vehicles do not encroach into the public
right-of-way.
(d) Yards shall be landscaped pursuant to Section 5.12. Up to eighty percent
(80%) of the required yard may consist of hardscape features, subject to Site
Plan Review.
(e) See Section 5.09 for additional setbacks on designated streets.
(f) Yard requirements are in addition to any planned road right-of-way widths in
order to permit the eventual widening of streets.
(6) Lot Coverage. In the CC zone, the maximum allowable lot coverage by buildings is
seventy percent (70%). Up to eighty percent (80%) coverage may be approved for
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 38
mixed-use developments incorporating residential and commercial uses. All lot
areas not covered by development shall be landscaped pursuant to Section 5.12.
(7) Building Height. Except as provided in Articles 5, 6 and 8, in a CC zone, the
maximum building height is forty-five (45) feet; up to fifty-five (55) feet in height is
allowed for mixed-use buildings that contain dwellings at a minimum density of
twenty (20) units per acre; dwellings must be located above a ground floor
commercial space that has a floor-to-ceiling height of at least fourteen (14) feet.
(8) Building Orientation and Design. All development, including new structures and
exterior remodels to existing structures or developments, shall comply with the
design standards in Section 5.13.
(9) Pedestrian Access. A sidewalk shall provide safe, convenient pedestrian access
from the street to the primary building entrance. If the sidewalk must cross a
parking lot or driveway, it shall be paved, raised and/or marked in a manner that
calls attention to the sidewalk.
(10) For additional requirements see Article 5 - Supplementary Provisions.
SECTION 4.07 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL (HC)
In the HC zone, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) Purpose. To provide services to accommodate travelers and to provide large scale
commercial services needed to serve the Fern Ridge area.
(2) Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review. In a HC zone, the following uses and
their accessory uses are permitted subject to Site Plan Review under Article 6,
provided all operations except off-street parking, recreational facilities, common
areas (e.g., plazas), and permitted temporary activities associated with an allowed
use shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building (excludes drive-thru
facilities).
(a) Hotel or motel.
(b) Retail stores or shops.
(c) Personal or business service.
(d) Repair and maintenance service; excluding those which involve automobiles,
trucks, motorcycles, buses, recreational vehicles, boats, and heavy
equipment.
(e) Eating and drinking establishments.
(f) Plant nursery.
(g) Museums and art galleries.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 39
(h) Professional, financial and business offices.
(i) Medical, dental clinics or medical laboratories.
(j) Medical Marijuana Facility, when not located within 1,000 feet of real
property comprising a public park.
For purposes of this subsection, “within 1,000 feet” means a straight line
measurement in a radius extending for 1,000 feet or less in every direction
from any point on the boundary line of the real property comprising an
existing, public park. This buffer shall not apply to new parks located
within 1,000 feet of an existing Medical Marijuana Facility.
(k) Financial institutions.
(l) Indoor commercial amusement or recreation establishments.
(m) Bed and breakfast; boarding, lodging or rooming home.
(n) Low impact public and semi-public uses, including transit facilities and
transportation improvements conforming to the City of Veneta Transportation
System.
(o) Parking lots and parking garages when not accessory to a primary permitted
use, and screened in accordance with Section 5.12 Landscaping.
(p) Outdoor sales of plants and pre-packaged garden supplies.
(q) Uses similar to the above permitted uses as provided by Section 2.05.
(3) Conditional Uses. In an HC zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are
permitted subject to the provisions of Article 6, Site Plan Review, and Article 8,
Conditional Uses.
(a) Recreational vehicle parks.
(b) Open display, sales or storage outside exceeding 180 days.
(c) Commercial dog kennels.
(d) Outdoor commercial amusement or recreation establishments.
(e) Drive-thru facilities (e.g., banks, eating and drinking establishments, and
others).
(f) Automobile service stations, including maintenance and repair.
(g) Gas stations including truck fuel sales, truck servicing and overnight trucking
facilities.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 40
(h) Car or truck washes.
(i) Vehicle sales, rental or repair.
(j) Heavy equipment and truck rental/sales and repair.
(k) Material recycling operations excluding metal salvage yards and automobile
junkyards.
(l) Caretaker or watch person dwelling on the premises of a non-residential use.
(n) Transportation improvements not identified by the City of Veneta
Transportation System Plan.
(o) Uses similar to the above conditional uses as provided by Section 2.05.
(4) Yards. Except as provided in Articles 5, 6 and 8, in an HC zone, no yards are
required except as follows:
(a) No front yards are required.
(b) Back and side yards abutting a residential zone shall be ten (10) feet.
(c) Yards for off-street parking areas shall be a minimum of five (5) feet;
additional yard area may be required under Articles 5, 6, or 8; e.g., for clear
vision and compatibility with abutting uses and shall be landscaped in
pursuant to Section 5.12.
(d) See Section 5.09 for additional setbacks on designated streets. Yard areas
may be required for planned road right-of-way widths in order to permit the
eventual widening of streets.
(5) Pedestrian Access. A sidewalk shall provide safe, convenient pedestrian access
from the street to the building entrance. If the sidewalk crosses the driveway, it
shall be paved, raised and/or marked in a manner that calls attention to the
sidewalk.
(6) For additional requirements see Article 5 -Supplementary Provisions.
SECTION 4.08 INDUSTRIAL-COMMERCIAL (IC)
In an IC zone, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Purpose. To provide areas suitable for limited manufacturing, warehousing, and
commercial activities which have minimal emissions or nuisance characteristics.
(2) Uses Permitted subject to Site Plan Review. In an IC zone, the following uses and
accessory uses are permitted, subject to the provisions of Article 6, Site Plan
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 41
Review. All operations except off-street parking and temporary activities associated
with the established businesses shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed
building:
(a) Small scale manufacturing, wholesaling, compounding, assembling, and
processing.
(b) Plant-based food processing.
(c) Storage and warehousing, including mini-storage rental units.
(d) Research and development and testing laboratories and facilities.
(e) Construction businesses.
(f) Automotive, truck and heavy equipment repair service.
(g) Media productions, including but not limited to TV and radio broadcasting,
motion picture production, and newspaper/book publishing.
(h) Offices for business, labor, scientific, and professional organizations.
(i) Professional, financial and business offices.
(j) Personal or business services.
(k) Eating and drinking establishments (excluding drive-thru facilities).
(l) Medical Marijuana Facility, when not located within 1,000 feet of real
property comprising a public park.
For purposes of this subsection, “within 1,000 feet” means a straight line
measurement in a radius extending for 1,000 feet or less in every direction
from any point on the boundary line of the real property comprising an
existing, public park. This buffer shall not apply to new parks located within
1,000 feet of an existing Medical Marijuana Facility.
(m) Parking lots and parking garages, including truck parking.
(n) Low impact public and semi-public uses, including transit facilities and
transportation improvements conforming to the City of Veneta
Transportation System Plan.
(o) Interim agricultural cultivation on undeveloped land provided the spraying,
dust, odors and other side effects such uses do not interfere with the
successful operations of adjacent land uses.
(p) Rental storage units.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 42
(q) Retail stores or shops not exceeding 40,000 square feet. The square
footage of a multi-tenant building shall not exceed 40,000 in total.
(r) Outdoor sales of plants and pre-packaged garden supplies.
(s) Uses similar to the above permitted uses as provided by Section 2.05.
(3) Conditional Uses. In an IC zone, the following uses and accessory uses are
permitted, subject to the provisions of Article 6, Site Plan Review and Article 8,
Conditional Uses.
(a) All conditional uses in the Light-Industrial zone.
(b) Open display, sales or storage outside exceeding 180 days.
(c) Outdoor commercial amusement or recreation establishments.
(d) Drive-thru facilities (e.g., banks, eating and drinking establishments, and
others).
(e) Commercial dog kennels.
(f) Plant nursery.
(g) Automobile service stations, including maintenance and repair.
(h) Gas Stations, including truck - fuel sales, truck servicing and overnight
trucking facilities.
(i) Car or truck washes.
(j) Heavy equipment and truck rental/sales.
(k) Material recycling operations excluding metal salvage yards and automobile
junkyards.
(l) Outdoor sales of bulk landscaping and rock products.
(m) Caretaker or watch person dwelling on the premises of a non-residential use.
(n) Uses similar to the above conditional uses as provided by Section 2.05.
(4) Yards. In an IC zone, yards shall be as follows:
(a) Front yards shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet, except when a lot abuts a
residential zone the minimum setback shall be twenty (20) feet.
(b) Back and side yards shall be a minimum of five (5) feet from property line,
except when a lots abuts a residential zone the minimum setback shall be
twenty (20) feet.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 43
(c) Side yard requirements may be waived on common lot lines when adjoining
lot owners enter into a joint development agreement for coordinated
vehicular access and parking development and party wall or adjoining
building walls meeting required fire separation requirements of the State
Structural Specialty Code and Fire and Life Safety Code.
(d) Yard requirements are in addition to any planned road right-of-way widths in
order to permit the eventual widening of streets.
(e) See Veneta Tree Preservation and Protection Ordinance for possible
setback exemptions for the preservation of heritage trees.
(5) Lot Coverage. Eighty percent (80%) lot coverage is allowed, provided the
requirements of Articles 5, 6, and 8, as applicable, are met.
(6) Off-street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in
Section 5.20 of this ordinance.
(7) Performance Standards.
(a) Water Supply. All industrial uses must connect to the City of Veneta water
system. Projected water use must be shown to be within Veneta's water
system capabilities and approved by the City Engineer.
(b) Waste Water Standards. All industrial uses must be connected to the City
of Veneta sanitary sewerage system. Veneta's sanitary sewerage system
must be shown to be capable of treating the projected amount and quality
of waste water and approved by the City Engineer.
(c) Stormwater Drainage. The development site, its operations and
improvements thereon shall detain and treat all stormwater as required by
Section 5.16 of this ordinance. There shall be no contamination of
stormwater from solid or other wastes.
(d) Solid Waste Containers. Garbage collection areas, service facilities and air
conditioning facilities located outside the building shall be appropriately
screened and landscaped to obscure view from beyond the boundary of the
development site. No hazardous wastes may be collected or stored within
the development site.
(e) Odor Standards. No emission or odorous matter shall be produced in such
a manner to cause a public nuisance or contribute to a condition of air
pollution. An odor nuisance may be measured as an emission that occurs
for sufficient duration or frequency so that two (2) measurements made
within a period of one (1) hour, separated by not less than fifteen (15)
minutes, are equal to or greater than a Centimeter No. O or equivalent
dilution measured at the property line.
(f) Noise Standards. Operations must demonstrate, by noise production
methods, that it shall not exceed DEQ standards set forth in Oregon
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 44
Administrative Rules, Chapter 340, Division 35: "Oregon State Noise
Control Regulations for Industry and Commerce," and the Veneta Noise
Ordinance No. 299.
(g) Dust and Fugitive Emission Standards. Open operations on the
development site require a paved dust-free and adequately drained durable
surface of asphaltic concrete or Portland cement or other approved
materials.
Vegetative screens or buffers shall be required to minimize dust "drift" onto
abutting properties. Buffers are to be installed as required under parking
area standards, Section 5.20.
(h) Aesthetic Standards: Landscaping shall be installed around building areas
and outdoor uses as required by the approved site plan or conditional use
permit. Natural landscaping shall positively project the identity and image
of the firm and of the City. Landscaping shall meet the standards
established in Section 5.12.
(8) For additional requirements, see Article 5 - Supplementary Provisions.
SECTION 4.09 MEDIUM INDUSTRIAL (MI)
In an MI zone, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) Purpose. To allow industrial uses which cater to the more traditional sectors.
These include secondary work products manufacturing and processing, other
durable manufacturing enterprises.
(2) Uses Permitted subject to Site Plan Review. In an MI zone, the following uses and
accessory uses are permitted subject to Site Plan Review. All uses must meet and
continually comply with the Performance Standards listed for the LI zone. Any uses
specifically listed as only allowed in an MI zone (except item (a)) are not allowed in
a LI zone.
(a) Manufacturing, wholesaling, compounding, assembling, and processing.
(b) Plant based food processing.
(c) Storage and warehousing, including mini-storage rental units.
(d) Research and development and testing laboratories and facilities.
(e) Construction businesses.
(f) Automotive, truck and heavy equipment repair and service.
(g) Media productions, including but not limited to TV and radio broadcasting,
motion picture production, and newspaper/book publishing.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 45
(h) Offices for business, labor, scientific, and professional organizations.
(i) Professional, financial, and business offices.
(j) Retail sales in conjunction with manufacturing, provided the sales area is
not greater than 25% of the total floor area.
(k) Offices in conjunction with an industrial use.
(l) Personal or business services.
(m) Eating and drinking establishments (excluding drive-thru facilities).
(n) Medical Marijuana Facility, when not located within 1,000 feet of real
property comprising a public park.
For purposes of this subsection, “within 1,000 feet” means a
straight line measurement in a radius extending for 1,000 feet or
less in every direction from any point on the boundary line of the
real property comprising an existing, public park. This buffer shall
not apply to new parks located within 1,000 feet of an existing
Medical Marijuana Facility.
(o) Parking lots and parking garages, including truck parking
(p) Low impact public and semi-public uses, including transit facilities and
transportation improvements conforming to the City of Veneta
Transportation System.
(q) Interim agricultural cultivation on undeveloped land provided the spraying,
dust, odors and other side effects of such uses do not interfere with the
successful operations of adjacent land uses.
(r) Recycling facilities.
(s) Manufacturing, assembling, and/or storage of:
1. Chemicals and chemical products
2. Lumber, wood, and paper products
3. Metal and metal alloy products
4. Paints, varnishes, lacquers, enamels and allied products
5. Concrete blocks, cinder blocks
6. Septic tanks
(t) Animal-based food processing (slaughter houses not allowed)
(u) Transportation improvements identified by the City of Veneta Transportation
System Plan.
(v) Uses similar to the above permitted uses as provided by Section 2.05.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 46
(3) Conditional Uses Permitted. In the MI zone, the following conditional uses are
permitted subject to the provisions of Article 8. All uses must meet and continually
comply with the Performance Standards of Section 4.08 (4), unless specifically
exempted. All conditional uses are subject to Site Plan Review provisions of Article
6.
(a) Any of the above uses requiring relaxation of one or more of the performance
standards.
(b) Open display, sales or storage outside exceeding 180 days.
(c) Caretaker or watch person dwelling on the premises of a non-residential use.
(d) Transportation improvements not identified by the City of Veneta
Transportation System Plan.
(e) Uses similar to the above conditional uses as provided by Section 2.05.
(4) Prohibited Uses. Heavy industrial uses are not allowed in the MI district, or
anywhere in Veneta. The city does not have the utilities or services to support
heavy industry, nor are there adequate locations to site these uses where they will
not become a public nuisance or health and safety risk. Prohibited uses include but
are not limited to:
(a) Manufacturing, assembly, and/or distribution of explosives or fireworks.
(b) Batch plants for asphaltic or Portland cement concrete.
(c) Bulk plants or distribution facilities for refined flammable liquids.
(d) Foundries and stamping plants.
(e) Incineration or reduction of garbage, dead animals, offal and refuse.
(f) Leather tanning and finishing.
(g) Slaughter houses.
(h) Wrecking yards, metal salvage yards and automobile junkyards.
(5) Yards. In an MI zone, yards shall be as follows:
(a) Front yards shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet.
(b) Back and side yards shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from property line,
except when a lot abuts a residential zone the minimum setback shall be
twenty (20) feet.
(c) Side yard requirements may be waived on common lot lines when adjoining
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 47
lot owners enter into a joint development agreement for coordinated
vehicular access and parking development and party wall or adjoining
building walls meeting required fire separation requirements of the State
Structural Specialty Code and Fire and Life Safety Code.
(d) Yard requirements are in addition to any planned road right-of-way widths in
order to permit the eventual widening of streets.
(e) See Veneta Tree Preservation and Protection Ordinance for possible
setback exemptions for the preservation of heritage trees.
(6) Lot Coverage. One hundred percent lot coverage will be allowed when minimum
parking standards, loading space and required yards are provided and all
performance standards are met.
(7) Off-street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking shall be provided as
specified in Section 5.20 of this ordinance.
(8) Performance Standards.
(a) Water Supply. All industrial uses must connect to the City of Veneta water
system. Projected water use must be shown to be within Veneta's water
system capabilities and approved by the City Engineer.
(b) Waste Water Standards. All industrial uses must be connected to the City of
Veneta sanitary sewerage system. Veneta's sanitary sewerage system must
be shown to be capable of treating the projected amount and quality of waste
water and approved by the City Engineer.
(c) Stormwater Drainage. The development site, its operations and
improvements thereon shall detain and treat all stormwater as required by
Section 5.16 of this ordinance. There shall be no contamination of
stormwater from solid or other wastes.
(d) Solid Waste Containers. Garbage collection areas, service facilities and air
conditioning facilities located outside the building shall be appropriately
screened and landscaped to obscure view from beyond the boundary of the
development site. No hazardous wastes may be collected or stored within
the development site.
(e) Odor Standards. No emission or odorous matter shall be produced in such
a manner to cause a public nuisance or contribute to a condition of air
pollution. An odor nuisance may be measured as an emission that occurs
for sufficient duration or frequency so that two (2) measurements made
within a period of one (1) hour, separated by not less than fifteen (15)
minutes, are equal to or greater than a Centimeter No. O or equivalent
dilution measured at the property line.
(f) Noise Standards. Operations must demonstrate, by noise production
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 48
methods, that it shall not exceed DEQ standards set forth in Oregon
Administrative Rules, Chapter 340, Division 35: "Oregon State Noise Control
Regulations for Industry and Commerce," and the Veneta Noise Ordinance
No. 299.
(g) Dust and Fugitive Emission Standards. Open operations on the
development site require a paved dust-free and adequately drained durable
surface of asphaltic concrete or Portland cement or other approved
materials.
Vegetative screens or buffers shall be required to minimize dust "drift" onto
abutting properties. Buffers are to be installed as required under parking
area standards, Section 5.20.
(h) Aesthetic Standards: Landscaping shall be installed around building areas
and outdoor uses as required by the approved site plan or conditional use
permit. Natural landscaping shall positively project the identity and image of
the firm and of the City. Landscaping shall meet the standards established in
Section 5.12.
(9) For additional requirements, see Article 5 - Supplementary Provisions.
SECTION 4.11 PUBLIC FACILITIES AND PARKS (PFP)
In a PFP zone, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) Purpose. To provide for public facilities and parks, and allow for construction of new
facilities as the community grows.
(2) Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review. In a PFP zone, the following uses and
their accessory uses are permitted subject to the site plan review provisions of
Article 6:
(a) Educational institutions.
(b) Government buildings.
(c) Parks.
(d) Low impact recreation and transportation facilities such as playgrounds,
sports fields, bicycle and pedestrian ways.
(e) Nature preserves.
(f) Cemeteries.
(g) Community centers.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 49
(h) Museums and interpretive centers.
(i) Commercial horticulture.
(j) Public structures or uses of land for public utilities such as:
1. Electric substations or transformers.
2. Public or community sewage disposal plant or pumping station.
3. Radio, television, or cell tower or transmitter.
4. Telephone exchange.
5. School bus garage.
6. Shop or storage yard.
(k) Low impact public and semi-public uses, including transit facilities and
transportation improvements conforming to the City of Veneta
Transportation System Plan
(l) Uses similar to the above permitted uses as provided by Section 2.05.
(3) Conditional Uses Permitted. In a PFP zone, the following uses and their accessory
uses may be permitted subject to the provisions of Article 6, Site Plan Review and
Article 8, Conditional Uses:
(a) High impact recreation facilities such as sports complexes, stadiums,
equestrian arenas, golf courses, and swimming pools.
(b) High impact transportation facilities such as heliports, helistops and bus or
train terminals.
(c) Transportation improvements inconsistent with the City of Veneta
Transportation System Plan.
(d) Uses similar to the above conditional uses as provided by Section 2.05.
(4) Lot Size and Width. There are no minimum lot sizes in the PFP zone.
(5) Yards. Except as provided in Articles 5, 6, and 8, in a PFP zone, yards shall be as
follows:
(a) Front yards abutting a residential zone shall be a minimum of twenty (20)
feet.
(b) Back and side yards abutting a residential zone shall be a minimum of five
(5) feet.
(c) Yards shall be landscaped as provided in Section 5.12.
(d) See Section 5.09 for additional setbacks on designated streets.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 50
(e) Yard requirements are in addition to any planned road right-of-way widths in
order to permit the eventual widening of streets, or construction of new
streets.
(f) See Veneta Tree Preservation and Protection Ordinance for possible
setback exemptions for the preservation of heritage trees.
(6) Pedestrian Access. If a building is open to the public, a sidewalk shall provide safe,
convenient pedestrian access from the street to the building entrance. If the
sidewalk crosses the driveway, it shall be raised or marked in a manner that calls
attention to the sidewalk.
(7) For additional requirements, see Article 5 - Supplementary Provisions.
SECTION 4.12 GREENWAY - OPEN SPACE SUBZONE (/GW)
In the GW subzone, the following regulations shall apply in addition to those of the basic
zone. If the requirements of the subzone are stricter than the basic zone, the requirements
of the subzone shall apply:
(1) Purpose. To implement the Open Space - Greenway Overlay in the Veneta
Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Boundaries.
(a) The boundaries of the GW subzone are shown on the Veneta Zoning Map,
updated November 23, 2009, and hereby adopted by reference. In instances
where the Greenway boundary shown on the Veneta Zoning Map and the
boundary as defined herein are different, the language of this section shall
take precedence.
(b) Upon receiving a new wetland delineation and concurrence from the Division
of State Lands (DSL), the GW boundary shall be located a minimum of fifty
(50) linear feet from the edge of all significant wetlands. Wetlands whose
status has not yet received concurrence from the Department of State Lands
shall also have a buffer of 50 ft.
(c) In cases where areas not associated with wetlands are necessary to provide
for pedestrian/ bicycle connectivity, protection of other natural resources, or
to provide a buffer between uses, the boundaries of the Greenway shall be
as shown on the Veneta zoning map.
(3) Permitted Uses. In a GW subzone, the following uses are permitted subject to
compliance with all state and local requirements, including the development
standards of Section 4.12(6) of this ordinance.
(a) Public accesses such as bicycle and walk ways, streets, lookout points, and
access roads for maintenance of channels, wetlands, and other natural
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 51
resource areas.
1. A path, walkway or running trail shall be constructed as far from
significant wetlands as practicable with the toe of slope falling no
closer than 15 feet from the boundary of a significant wetland.
2. All paths shall be designed and constructed according to City
standards.
3. Streets shall be constructed as far from significant wetlands as
practicable with the toe of slope falling no closer than 15 feet from the
boundary of a significant wetland.
(b) Stormwater facilities.
1. All stormwater facilities constructed in the Greenway must be designed
according to City standards and shall be designed to enhance the water
quality, habitat, and aesthetic values of the Greenway as determined by
the City.
2. Stormwater detention and pre-treatment facilities excluding piping and
outfall structures may be located no closer than 15 ft from any
significant wetland unless the facility will enhance wetland values as
defined in VMC 18.10 as determined by the City.
(c) Utility installations.
(d) Mitigation of development activities.
(e) Restoration of previously disturbed or degraded areas.
(f) Removal of vegetation
1. Vegetation removal is limited to the removal of:
a. Native vegetation for the purpose of facilitating or encouraging
the growth of native vegetation, or enhancement of habitat
values and/or other natural resource values.
b. Nonnative or invasive plant species
c. Dead or dying trees or shrubs that are an imminent danger to
public health and safety as determined by the City.
d. Dead or dried native plants or grasses only when they
constitute an imminent fire hazard as determined by the City
(g) Planting and Replanting
1. Replanting of areas cleared of existing vegetation must be completed
within 90 days unless otherwise approved by the City.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 52
2. Planting and replanting with seed shall be timed so that germination
occurs prior to November 15, unless the specific seed used requires
otherwise, in which case germination shall be accomplished at the
earliest date practicable.
(h) Removal of fill and any refuse that is in violation of local, state, or federal
regulations. Removal of fill must be consistent with state of Oregon removalfill
regulations.
(i) Channel maintenance to maintain storm water conveyance and flood control
capacity, as required and/or allowed by local policies, state and federal
regulations, or intergovernmental agreements.
(j) For lots with residential development existing prior July 2006, maintenance,
additions, alterations, rehabilitation and replacement of existing lawful
structures, private accesses, or other associated development and
construction of new accessory structures, decks, and other development
incidental to the residence are permitted provided that:
1. The proposed improvements cannot be located outside of the
Greenway because of topographic or physical constraints or required
compliance with other regulations.
2. No new development shall occur on previously undeveloped areas of
greenway within 15 ft of significant wetlands. For the purposes of this
subsection, undeveloped shall be defined as retaining a natural grade
and vegetation.
(k) Structures or development granted a variance to Veneta’s Wetland
Protection Ordinance found in VMC Section 18.10. Impacts to the Greenway
shall be the minimum necessary to construct those improvements for which
the wetlands variance was granted.
(4) Conditional Uses Permitted. Subject to the criteria found in Article 8 of this
ordinance.
(5) Prohibited Uses.
(a) Any new structures or development (including fences), other than those
allowed as permitted uses or approved as conditional uses, construction or
ground disturbing activities, gardens, lawns, dumping of materials of any
kind, and operation of heavy machinery.
(b) Storage of hazardous materials as defined by the Department of
Environmental Quality.
(c) Application of herbicides, pesticides, fertilizer or other chemical products
without first contacting City Hall.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 53
(d) Removal of existing vegetation except as specified in 3(f) of this Section.
(e) Planting or establishment of nonnative or invasive species.
(f) Removal of trees without an approved permit. Standards for granting a
permit to remove trees within the Greenway shall be those found in Veneta
Municipal Code 8.10.080. These standards shall apply to the removal of any
tree within the boundaries of the Greenway. When practicable, trees
removed under this section shall be replaced by planting an equal number of
native trees within the remaining greenway.
(6) Application and Construction Standards.
No ground disturbing activities shall take place in the greenway without City
approval. In order to limit disturbance to the Greenway, the following activities shall
take place prior to any ground disturbing activities,
(a) The applicant shall submit a revegetation plan containing the following
information:
1. A description of adverse impacts that will be caused as a result of
development.
2. An explanation of how disturbed areas, including cut and fill slopes will
be revegetated with native species to the degree necessary to control
erosion and reduce the impacts of the development to the maximum
extent practicable.
3. A list of all responsible parties including, but not limited to, the owner,
applicant, contractor or other persons responsible for revegetation work
on the development site.
4. An implementation schedule, including timeline for construction,
revegetation, monitoring, and reporting.
(b) Prior to construction, construction areas and areas to remain undisturbed
shall be flagged, fenced, or otherwise clearly marked. Such markings shall
be maintained until construction is complete.
(c) To the maximum extent practicable, native vegetation shall be protected and
left in place. Trees in the Greenway shall not be used as anchors for
stabilizing construction equipment.
(d) Where existing vegetation has been removed, or the original land contours
disturbed, the site shall be revegetated with native vegetation as approved by
the City, and the vegetation shall be established as soon as practicable.
Interim erosion control shall be used to avoid erosion on bare areas during
revegetation.
(7) Enforcement. No prohibited use, construction activity including grading and/or
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 54
excavation, clearing of vegetation, or stockpiling of fill shall be permitted prior to
approval of proposed development. If any development generates an unauthorized
disturbance within the Greenway-Open Space overlay zone, the development
project shall revegetate the disturbed area with native plants. Revegetation shall be
conducted according to a plan developed by a qualified biologist, landscape
architect, or engineer, and submitted to the City for review and approval.
Revegetation plans shall include provisions for monitoring and reporting on a yearly
basis until such time that full restoration can be confirmed by a qualified biologist,
landscape architect, or engineer and approved by the City. Violations are also
subject to the provisions of Section of 2.10 of this ordinance.
SECTION 4.13 FLOOD PLAIN SUBZONE (/FP)
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the Flood Plain Subzone is to promote public health,
safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas through provisions designed to:
(a) Protect human life and health;
(b) Minimize the expenditure of public money on costly flood control projects;
(c) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding,
generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(d) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(e) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
(f) Ensure that potential buyers are aware, if property is within an area of
special flood hazard; and
(g) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
The Flood Plain Subzone shall be applied in any zone hereinafter set forth where
the area is subject to inundation by flooding or surface water. The area subject to
flooding shall be shown on the Lane County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas Flood
Insurance Rate Map, which designate regulated floodways and areas subject to a
1% or 100-year flood.
(2) Methods. In order to accomplish such purposes, this subzone includes methods
and provisions for:
(a) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 55
(b) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such
uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(c) Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural
protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
(d) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage;
(e) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or may increase flood hazards in other areas;
(f) Establishing requirements for the placement and construction of buildings
and development site improvements in areas that may be subject to flooding
or surface water;
The Flood Plain subzone shall be any zone in combination with the symbol "/FP" as
an overlay district of special concern. For example, SFR/FP means a single family
residential zone (SFR) which is also subject to Flood Plain subzone Regulations.
The regulations governing the "/FP" subzone shall be those of the zone in which it
lies and, additionally, the provisions of this Section applicable to the development.
In cases of conflicts between standards of the basic zone and the "/FP" subzone,
the standards of the "/FP" subzone shall apply.
(3) Flood Plain Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this Section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
"AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD" means the land in the flood plain within the
City subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in a given year.
Designation on the Flood Insurance Rate Map always includes the letters A or V.
"BASE FLOOD" means the flood has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the 100- year flood. Designation
on maps always includes the letters A or V.
"DEVELOPMENT" means any human made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavating or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or
materials located within the area of special flood hazard.
"FLOOD" or "FLOODING" means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
(b) The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface waters from any
source.
"FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)" means the official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood
hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 56
"FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY" means the official report provided by the Federal
Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Boundary-Floodway
Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
"LOWEST FLOOR" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not
considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as
to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design
requirements of this ordinance found in Section 4.12 (7) (a) 2.
"MANUFACTURED DWELLING" means a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For flood
plain management purposes the term "manufactured dwelling" also includes park
trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than
180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term "manufactured dwelling"
does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.
"NEW CONSTRUCTION" means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this ordinance.
"START OF CONSTRUCTION" includes substantial improvement, and means the
date of the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the
permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured dwelling on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundation or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
"STRUCTURE" means a walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground.
"SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT" means any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the
market value of the structure either:
(a) Before the improvement or repair is started; or
(b) If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 57
occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure.
The term does not, however, include:
(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(b) Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places
or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
(4) General Provisions.
(a) Lands to Which the Flood Plain Regulations Apply: The "/FP" subzone
regulations shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the City of Veneta.
(b) Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of
special flood hazard identified by the Flood Insurance Administration in a
scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for
Lane County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas,” dated June 2, 1999, and as
amended, with accompanying Flood Insurance Maps, as amended, are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance.
The Flood Insurance Study is on file at the City Administrative Center. The
best available information for flood hazard identification as outlined in
Section 4.12(5)(d)2 shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is
issued which incorporates the data utilized under Section 4.12(5)(d)2.
(c) Compliance. No structure or land within the flood plain subzone shall
hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
(d) Interpretation. In the interpretation of this subzone, all provisions shall be
considered as minimum requirements.
(d) Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required
by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by humanmade
or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the
areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability
on the part of the City of Veneta, any officer or employee thereof, or the
Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 58
(5) Administration.
(a) Development Permit Required: A development permit shall be obtained
before construction or development begins within the flood plain subzone.
The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured dwellings, as set
forth in the "Definitions,” Section 4.13 (3), and for all development including
fill and other activities, also set forth in the definition Section 4.13 (3).
(b) Application for Development Permit: Application for a development permit
shall be made on forms furnished by the City of Veneta and may include but
not be limited to plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the
location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be
flood proofed;
3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
flood proofing methods for any non-residential structure meet the
flood proofing criteria in Section 4.13 (7) (b); and
4. Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
(c) Designation of Local Administrator: The Building and Planning Official is
hereby appointed to administer and implement this ordinance by granting or
denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
(d) Duties and Responsibilities of the Building and Planning Official: The duties
of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Permit Review:
a. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied.
b. Review all development permits to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal,
State, or local government agencies from which prior approval
is required.
2. Use of Other Base Flood Data: When base flood elevation data has
not been provided in accordance with Section 4.13 (4) (b), "Basis for
Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard,” the Building and
Planning Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or
other source, in order to administer Section 4.13 (7), "Specific
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 59
Standards".
3. Information to be Obtained and Maintained:
a. Where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood
Insurance Study or required as in Section 4.12 (5) (d) 2, obtain
and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the
structure contains a basement.
b. For all new or substantially improved flood proofed structures:
(i) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level), and
(ii) Maintain the flood proofing certifications required in
Section 4.13 (5) (b) 3.
c. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this ordinance.
4. Alteration of Watercourses:
a. Notify adjacent communities, the Department of Land
Conservation and Development, and the Division of State
Lands prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse,
and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Insurance Administration.
b. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood carrying
capacity is not diminished.
5. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries: Make interpretations where
needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the area of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation. Such appeals shall be
granted consistent with the standards of Section 60.6 of the rules and
regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program (44CFR 59-76).
(6) Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction-General Standards. In all areas of special
flood hazards, the following standards are required:
(a) Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 60
2. All manufactured dwellings must likewise be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using
methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring
methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors (Reference FEMA's "Manufactured
Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas" guidebook for additional
techniques).
(b) Construction Materials and Methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
3. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
(c) Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and,
3. On-site sewage disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(d) Land Division Proposals.
1. All land division proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
2. All land division proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such
as sewer, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
3. All land division proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
4. Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not
available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 61
all partition and subdivision proposals and other proposed
developments which contain at least five (5) acres.
(e) Review of Building Permits. Where elevation data is not available either
through the Flood Insurance Study or from another authoritative source
Section 4.12 (5) (d) 2, applications for building permits shall be reviewed to
assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The
test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical
data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available.
Failure to elevate at least two (2) feet above grade in these zones may result
in higher insurance rates.
(7) Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction--Specific Standards. In all areas of special
flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in
Section 4.13 (4) (b), Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, or
Section 4.13 (5) (d) 2, Use of Other Base Flood Data, the following provisions are
required:
(a) Residential Construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
one foot above the base flood elevation.
2. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and
exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must be
either certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or
must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
a. A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
are subject to flooding shall be provided.
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwater.
(b) Non-residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at or above the base
flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
1. Be flood proofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water.
2. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 62
3. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based
on their development and/or review of the structural design,
specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided as set
forth in Section 4.13 (5) (d) 3.b.
4. Non-residential structures that are elevated, not flood proofed, must
meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as
described in Section 4.13 (7) (a) 2.
5. Applicants flood proofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that
flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot
below the flood proofed level (e.g. a building constructed to the base
flood elevation will be rated as one foot below that level).
(c) Manufactured Dwellings. All manufactured dwellings to be placed or
substantially improved shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the underside of the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated
one foot above the base flood elevation or as is required by the Oregon
Manufactured Dwelling Standard. The manufactured home shall be securely
anchored to an adequately designed foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.
(d) Recreational Vehicles. Recreation vehicles placed within the floodplain shall
either:
1. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or
3. Meet the requirements above for manufactured dwellings.
(8) Encroachments.
The cumulative effect of any proposed development, where combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation
of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
SECTION 4.14 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SUBZONE (/PD)
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the /PD subzone is to provide opportunities to create
more desirable environments such as co-housing through the application of flexible
and diversified land development standards under a comprehensive plan and
program professionally prepared. The /PD subzone is intended to be used to
encourage the application of new techniques and new technology to community
development which will result in superior living or development arrangements with
lasting values. It is further intended to achieve economies in land development,
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 63
maintenance, street systems and utility networks while providing building groupings
for privacy, usable and attractive open spaces, safe circulation and the general
well-being of the inhabitants and to acquire and protect solar access.
(2) Establishment of a /PD Subzone in Combination with a Basic Zone. A /PD subzone
may be established in combination with any basic zone. In cases of conflict
between standards of the basic zone and the /PD subzone, the standards of the
/PD subzone will apply.
(3) Procedure for Preliminary Approval. The applicant shall submit at least fifteen (15)
copies of a preliminary development plan to the Planning Commission for approval
of the project in principle. The plan shall be submitted to the Building and Planning
Official at least 30 days prior to the Planning Commission meeting, at which time the
proposal shall be first discussed. The proposal shall consist of a preliminary plan in
schematic fashion and a written program with consideration given to the following
elements:
(a) Elements of the Plan.
1. Vicinity map showing location of streets and lots in the area within 500
feet of the proposed development.
2. Existing land uses and zoning of property and vicinity.
3. Proposed land uses including housing unit densities (number of units
per acre, type of residence and number of bedrooms by type of
residence).
4. Building types and approximate bulk.
5. Vehicular and pedestrian access, circulation and parking pattern.
Status of street ownership.
6. Parks, playgrounds and open spaces.
7. Existing natural features such as trees, streams and topography. If the
plan calls for tree removal which would require a tree removal permit
pursuant to Veneta Municipal Code Chapter 8.10.030, a tree removal
permit, together with the required filing fee, must be submitted.
8. Landscaping, screening and fencing proposals.
9. Proposed method of solid waste disposal.
10. Proposed method for provisions of water supply and sewage disposal.
11. Proposed method for the handling of surface water drainage.
12. Proposed grading patterns.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 64
13. Street and open space lighting proposals.
(b) Elements of the Program.
1. Proposed ownership pattern; verification of ownership.
2. Operation and maintenance proposal, such as condominium, co-op or
Homeowner's Association.
3. Commercial facilities such as shopping; community facilities such as
schools or parks.
4. Timetable of the development, to include expected starting dates,
projection of completion time and project phasing, if anticipated.
Method of public improvements financing, if any.
5. The proposal shall be prepared by one or more persons with
professional qualifications in such design-related fields as Architecture,
Landscape Architecture, Urban Planning and Civil Engineering.
Names(s) of professional persons should be provided.
(c) Planning Commission Review of Preliminary Development Plan.
1. The Planning Commission shall informally review the Preliminary
Development Plan and Program and may recommend either
preliminary approval in principal, with or without modifications or
denial. Such action shall be based upon the City's Comprehensive
Plan, the standards of this ordinance and other regulations and the
suitability of the proposed development in relation to the physical
characteristics of the area and the development characteristics of the
neighborhood.
2. Approval in principle of the Preliminary Development Plan and
Program shall be limited to the preliminary acceptability of the land
uses proposed and their interrelationships and shall not be construed
to endorse the precise location of uses nor engineering feasibility. The
Planning Commission may require the submission of other information
than that specified for submittal as part of the General Development
Plan and Program.
3. Informal review of the Preliminary Development Plan and Program
shall be held at a regular Planning Commission meeting but does not
require a public hearing.
4. The Planning Commission shall evaluate design team needs and may
recommend additional members, depending upon the scope of the
proposal, to facilitate preparation of the General Development Plan
and Program.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 65
5. The Planning Commission shall determine the extent of any
environmental assessment to be included in the General Development
Plan and Program.
(4) General Development Plan and Program.
(a) After receiving approval in principle of the Preliminary Development Plan and
Program, the applicant shall submit a General Development Plan and
Program to the Building and Planning Official at least 45 days prior to the date
of public hearing.
(b) The applicant shall petition for an amendment to the zoning map as specified
in Article 11. Ten (10) copies of the General Development Plan and Program
shall be submitted to the Building and Planning Official at least 45 days prior
to the date of public hearing. The Building and Planning Official shall notify
Lane County about applications that may have a potential impact or effect on
lands, services or facilities outside the City limits.
(c) Upon receipt of the re-zone petition accompanied by the General
Development Plan and Program, the Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing in accordance with the provisions of Article 11. At the public hearing
the applicant shall present the General Development Plan and Program.
(d) The General Development Plan and Program shall contain the following
elements:
1. Plan Elements.
a. General development plan in conformance with the approved
preliminary plan, including a vicinity map showing the
circulation pattern within and adjacent to the proposed
development, integration of water, sewer and other
underground utilities with existing utilities and the integration of
proposed sites drainage with existing drainage systems.
b. Existing and proposed contour map of the site to a scale
commensurate with the size of the development.
c. Location, widths and names of all existing or platted streets or
other public ways, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks or
other public open spaces and land uses within 500 feet of the
development.
d. Existing sewer, water and other underground utilities within
and adjacent to the development and their certified capacities.
e. Proposed location and capacity of sewers or other disposal
facilities, water mains and other underground utilities.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 66
f. Proposed system for the handling of storm drainage.
g. A preliminary subdivision plan if the property is proposed to be
subdivided.
h. A land use plan indicating the uses planned for the
development.
i. Areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for interior
circulation, public parks, playgrounds, school sites, public
buildings, bikeways or other uses dedicated or reserved to the
public, if any.
j. Open space that is to be maintained and controlled by the
owners of the property and the proposed users thereof.
k. A traffic flow map showing the circulation pattern within and
adjacent to the proposed development, including fire
equipment access and turnarounds.
l. Location, and dimensions of bikeways, pedestrian walkways,
malls and trails or easements.
m. Location, arrangement, number and dimensions of automobile
garages and parking spaces, width of aisles, bays and angle of
parking.
n. Location, arrangement and dimensions of truck loading and
unloading spaces, if any.
o. Preliminary architectural plans and elevations of typical
buildings and structures, indicating the general height, bulk,
appearance and number of dwelling units.
p. A preliminary tree planting and landscaping plan. All existing
trees over six (6) inches in diameter and groves of trees shall
be shown. Trees to be removed by development shall be so
marked.
q. The approximate location, height, materials of all walls, fences
and screen planting. Elevation drawings of typical walls and
fences shall be included.
r. Location, size, height and means of illumination of all proposed
signs.
s. The stages, if any, of development construction. Such stages
shall be clearly marked on the General Development Plan.
t. Specifications of the extent of emissions and potential hazard
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 67
or nuisance characteristics caused by the proposed use,
including approvals of all regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction. Uses which possess nuisance characteristics or
those potentially detrimental to the public health, safety and
general welfare of the community such as noise, vibration,
smoke, odor, fumes, dust, heat, glare or electromagnetic
interference shall not be permitted unless additional
safeguards are specified by the Planning Commission. The
applicant shall accurately specify the extent of emissions and
nuisance characteristics relative to the proposed use.
Misrepresentation or omission of required data shall be
grounds for termination of a Certificate of Occupancy.
u. Any such other data as may be necessary to permit the
Planning Commission to make the required findings.
2. Program Elements.
a. Narrative statement of the basic purposes of the planned
development.
b. A completed environmental assessment if required by the
Planning Commission.
c. Tables showing the total number of acres and the percentage
of the total area which is designated for each type of use
including each dwelling type, off-street parking, streets, parks,
playgrounds, schools and open spaces as shown on the
proposed development plan.
d. Tables showing the overall density of the proposed residential
development and showing density by dwelling types and any
proposals for the limitation of density.
e. Drafts of appropriate restrictive covenants and drafts of
documents providing for the maintenance of any common
open space or required dedications or reservations of public
open spaces and of any dedications of development rights.
f. A timetable indicating when utility and drainage facilities
intended to serve the development are to be installed. If the
development is to be constructed in stages, the timetable shall
reflect this.
(5) Action and Findings by Planning Commission and Council.
(a) Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission, after public
hearing on an amendment to the zoning map in accordance with the
provisions of Article 11, may recommend approval of the /PD subzone and
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 68
the General Development Plan and Program, with or without modifications or
may deny the application. A decision to recommend approval of a /PD
subzone shall be based on the following findings:
1. That the proposed development is in substantial conformance with the
Veneta Comprehensive Plan.
2. That exceptions from the standards of the underlying zone are
warranted by the design and amenities incorporated in the
development plan and program.
3. That the system of ownership and the means of developing,
preserving and maintaining open spaces is suitable to the proposed
development, to the neighborhood and to the City as a whole as
required in Section 4.15 (7) (g) "Ownership and Maintenance of the
Planned Development" and in accordance with restrictive covenants
or improvement agreements approved by the City Attorney and
Veneta Planning Commission.
4. That the proposed development or a unit thereof can be substantially
completed within one year of final approval or completed in
accordance with an approved development plan timetable.
5. That the streets are adequate to support the anticipated traffic and
that the development will not overload the streets outside the planned
development area.
6. That the proposed utility and drainage facilities are adequate for the
population densities and type of development proposed and will not
create a drainage or pollution problem outside the planned area. That
the timing of installation of utility and drainage facilities will be closely
coordinated with development construction and that it will not create a
hardship to residences either within or outside the planned area.
7. That the density in the proposed development will not result in any
substantial negative impact on any public facility or utility.
(b) City Council Action. After receiving the recommendation from the Planning
Commission, the City Council shall hold a hearing on the proposal for a /PD
subzone and the General Development Plan and Program, in accordance
with the provisions of Article 11. The City Council shall either approve the
application, with or without modifications, or deny it.
(c) Conditions for Approval. The Planning Commission or City Council may
require conditions for approval which may include but are not limited to the
following:
1. Increasing the required setbacks.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 69
2. Limiting the height of buildings.
3. Controlling the location and number of vehicular access points.
4. Establishing new streets, increasing the right-of-way or roadway width
of existing streets, requiring curbs and sidewalks and, in general,
improving the traffic circulation system.
5. Requiring additional improvements for utilities or storm drainage
facilities.
6. Increasing the number of parking spaces and improving design
standards for parking areas.
7. Limiting the number, size, location and lighting of signs.
8. Designating sites for open space and recreation and, in general,
improving landscaping requirements.
9. Requiring additional view-obscuring screening or fencing.
10. Establishing any special time limits for completion of all or any portion
of the project, including, but not limited to, utilities, drainage facilities,
streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas, landscaping, fencing,
screening, recreation areas or community buildings.
11. Requiring a special contractual agreement with the City to assure
development of streets, sidewalks, drainage facilities, utilities and
other improvements to standards which are acceptable to the City.
(d) Any condition specified shall be placed on the official design plan and signed
by the owners. Where applicable, the requirements may be made part of
any existing or future deed as a covenant.
(6) Final Plan and Program.
(a) Following approval of the /PD subzone by the City Council, the applicant
shall prepare a Final Plan and Program and shall submit five (5) copies to
the Building and Planning Official to check for compliance with the approved
General Development Plan and Program.
(b) If the Final Plan and Program is found to be in compliance, it shall be so
certified by the Planning Commission Chairman and recorded by the
applicant in the office of the City Recorder as the Final Development Plan
along with all documents relating to dedications, improvements, agreements,
restrictions and associations which shall constitute the Final Program.
(c) The procedures set forth in the City's Land Division Ordinance shall be
followed if the property is to be divided or streets are to be dedicated unless
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 70
exceptions have been formally granted by the Planning Commission and City
Council.
(d) All public site dedications, development rights to open spaces or other
dedications for the entire site or approved staged portion shall be recorded
prior to the issuance of any building permits.
(e) Final copies of all approved articles governing operation and maintenance
shall be placed on file with the City Recorder's office prior to the issuance of
any building permit.
(f) After an area has been placed in the /PD subzone, all building permits shall
only be issued on the basis of the Final Plan and Program as recorded in the
office of the City Recorder. The area shall henceforth be shown on the
official zoning map as a /PD subzone in addition to the basic zone.
(7) Development Standards.
(a) Minimum Site Size. A /PD subzone shall not be established on less than two
(2) acres unless the Planning Commission and City Council find less area
suitable by virtue of its unique character.
(b) Compatibility with Neighborhood.
1. The plans and programs shall present an organized arrangement of
buildings, service facilities, open spaces and improvements such as
recreation facilities and fencing to insure compatibility with the Veneta
Comprehensive Plan and the character of the neighborhood.
2. Periphery yards of a /PD subzone shall be at least as deep as those
required by the yard regulations of the underlying zone unless the
Planning Commission finds that equal protection will be accorded
through specific features of the approved plan.
(c) Lot Coverage and Building Height. Lot coverage and building height shall be
no greater than for the underlying zone unless the Planning Commission
finds that an exception is warranted in terms of the character and amenities
proposed in the total development.
(d) Open Space. Open space in a /PD subzone means the land area to be used
for scenic or open recreational purposes within the development.
1. Open space does not include street right-of-way, driveways, parking
areas, required setbacks or public service easements unless these
areas have some special recreational design or purpose.
2. Open space shall be adequate for the recreational and leisure use of
the population occupying the planned unit development and designed
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 71
to enhance the present and future value of the development.
3. To the maximum extent possible, the plan and program shall assure
that natural features of the land are preserved and landscaping is
provided.
4. In order to assure that open space will be permanent; dedication of
development rights to the City for other than open space may be
required.
5. Instruments guaranteeing the maintenance of open space shall be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission. Documents
dedicating development rights and provisions for maintenance of
open space shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney.
(e) Density. Greater overall density, may be allowed under a /PD subzone but
only by recommendation of the Planning Commission and approval of the
City Council based on the entire development design. Areas dedicated to
the public shall be excluded when determining the net density of the
development. In any PUD subzone, established in a SFR basic zone, the
net density shall not exceed 3,000 square feet of site area per dwelling unit.
In any PUD subzone, established in a GR basic zone, the net density shall
not exceed 2,200 square feet of site area per dwelling unit.
(f) Subdivision Lot Sizes. Minimum area, width, depth and frontage
requirements for subdivision lots in a /PD subzone may be less than the
minimum specified in the basic zone if in accordance with the approved
General Development Plan and Program and the density standards of this
section.
(g) Ownership and Maintenance of the Planned Development. Except as
provided herein, the area in a proposed planned development must be in
single ownership or under the development control of a joint application of
owners or option holders of the property involved. Dwelling units or
individual portions of a planned development may be transferred to additional
parties provided:
1. The Planning Commission finds that the purpose of the planned
development regulations and the findings and conditions of approval
at each step have been satisfied and approves of the transfer based
thereon; and
2. Documents necessary to assure permanent maintenance of buildings,
common use facilities, landscaping, open space and outdoor living
areas at no expense to the City have been approved by the City
Attorney.
(8) Phased Development.
(a) The applicant may elect to develop the site in successive stages in a manner
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 72
indicated in the General Development Plan and Program. Each such stage
shall be substantially complete within itself.
(b) The Planning Commission may require that development be done in stages if
public facilities are not adequate to service the entire development initially.
(9) Permitted Uses in Residential Zones Combined with /PD Subzone. The following
uses and their accessory uses are permitted in a /PD subzone which has been
combined with a residential zone.
(a) Residential use of land.
(b) Related commercial uses which are designed to serve the development of
which they are a part, when approved by the Planning Commission and City
Council.
(c) Related community service uses which are designed to serve the
development of which they are a part, when approved by the Planning
Commission and City Council. Such community service uses may also be
designed to serve the adjacent area if considered desirable upon review of
the overall proposal.
(10) Bonding.
(a) A developer may be required to post one of the following instruments, to
assure full and faithful performance in completion of the approved plan:
1. A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact
business in the State of Oregon. The bond shall be in a form
approved by the City.
2. In lieu of said bonds:
a. The developer may deposit with the City Recorder cash money
in an amount fixed by the Building and Planning official and the
City Engineer.
b. The developer may provide certification by a bank or other
reputable lending institution that money is being held to cover
the cost of the improvement and that it will be released only
upon authorization of the City Engineer.
(b) If the developer fails to carry out the project as approved and the City has
un-reimbursed costs or expenses resulting from such failure, the City shall
call on the bond or cash deposit for reimbursements. If the amount of the
bond or cash deposit is less than the cost and expense incurred by the City,
the developer shall be liable to the City for the difference.
(11) Proposed Changes in Approved Plans.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 73
(a) Major Changes. Major changes in the General Development Plan and
Program after it has been adopted shall be considered as a new petition and
shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified above.
(b) Minor Changes. Minor changes in an approved General Development Plan
and Program may be approved by the Building and Planning Official
provided that such changes:
1. Do not change the character of the development or the population
density.
2. Do not change the boundaries of the /PD subzone.
3. Do not change any use, such as residential to commercial.
4. Do not change the location or amount of land devoted to a specific
land use.
5. Do not relax dimensional standards or other specific requirements
established by the Planning Commission or City Council as a
condition of approval.
(12) Expiration.
(a) If substantial construction or development has not taken place within one (1)
year from the date of final approval by the City Council of the General
Development Plan and Program the /PD Subzone shall become null and
void.
(b) Upon abandonment of a particular Planned Development or if it is specified
in the General Plan and Program, it may be determined by the Planning
Commission and the City Council, after the appropriate public hearings, that
the granting of approval be nullified and the re-zone repealed and further use
of the property and structures thereon shall be in accordance with the
existing basic zone, unless a request to extend the time limit is approved.
SECTION 4.15 SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN SUBZONE (/SDP)
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the “/SDP” subzone is to allow the development and
approval of specific development plans in the City of Veneta. A specific
development plan is a master plan applied to one or more parcels to coordinate and
direct development in terms of transportation, utilities, open space, and land use.
The purpose is also to streamline the land use review process and encourage
development that is consistent with the specific development plan. Specific
development plans are intended to promote coordinated planning and pedestrianoriented
mixed-use development.
(2) Plan Development and Approval Process.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 74
(a) Initiation. The process to establish a specific development plan shall be
initiated by the City Council. The Planning Commission or interested
property owners may submit requests to the City Council to initiate the
specific development plan process. If owners request initiation of a specific
development plan process, the City Council may require an application fee to
cover the cost of creating the plan.
(b) Steering Committee. The City Council shall appoint a steering committee to
guide development of the plan. The steering committee should include
persons representing affected property owners, agencies, and the
community at large.
(c) Draft Specific Development Plan. The Steering Committee shall develop a
draft plan to submit to the Planning Commission and City Council for review,
modification, and approval.
(d) Specific Development Plan Components. A specific development plan shall
include text and a diagram or diagrams which specify all of the following in
detail:
1. Plan Objectives. The narrative shall set forth the goals and
objectives of the plan.
2. Site and Context. A map of the site and context shall indicate existing
land use, slope, natural features and property ownership.
3. Land Use Plan. The distribution, location and extent of the uses of
land, including open space and parks, within the area covered by the
specific development plan.
4. Circulation Plan. The proposed street pattern, including pedestrian
pathways and bikeways. Design standards and street cross-sections
shall be included.
5. Development Standards. Description and illustration of key
development standards such as housing types, lot sizes, setbacks,
building orientation, etc.
6. Infrastructure Plan. The proposed location and extent of major
components of sewage, water, drainage and other essential facilities
needed to support the land uses described in the plan.
(e) Public Hearings and Decisions. The Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing on the specific development plan and shall make a
recommendation to the City Council. The City Council shall have final
approval authority. The hearing process to be followed shall be the same as
that set forth for zoning map amendments in Section 11.02 of this Ordinance.
(3) Approval Criteria. Adoption of the specific development plan and its related overlay
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 75
district shall be based on compliance with the following approval criteria:
(a) The specific development plan is consistent with the general land uses and
potential gross density allowed by the Comprehensive Plan designation, or a
plan amendment is approved in conjunction with the specific development
plan.
(b) The specific development plan will increase the efficiency of land use and
provide for compact development.
(c) The specific development plan will provide a mix of compatible land uses
offering a variety of activities and destinations within the project area that
respond to existing and future market conditions.
(d) The specific development plan will create a pedestrian friendly environment
that provides direct, safe, and convenient access to public spaces and transit
while maintaining access for automobiles and bikes. The circulation plan
includes connections to surrounding properties.
(e) The specific development plan provides adequate public spaces such as
small parks, greenways, or plazas where people can meet or relax.
(f) The specific development plan incorporates natural features such as creeks,
wetlands, and large trees into the plans for the site.
(g) The specific development plan promotes building and site design
that contributes positively to a sense of community and to the overall
streetscape.
(4) Plan Implementation.
(a) Subzone. The specific development plan shall be implemented as a
subzone. The specific development plan (including the land use plan,
circulation plan and illustrative plan) shall be adopted by reference as an
exhibit to the /SDP subzone.
(b) New Construction. New construction under Site Plan Review or building
permit review shall meet the special development and design standards of
the specific development plan.
(c) Priority of Standards and Procedures. Unless otherwise noted, the standards
and procedures of the specific development plan subzone shall supplement
and supersede the standards and procedures of the Land Development
Ordinance and the Land Division Ordinance.
(5) Amendments to the Specific Development Plan. Amendments to the
specific development plan are classified as minor or major amendments as
follows:
(a) Minor amendments are those which result in any of the following:
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 76
1. Changes in the circulation plans that require a public street,
easement, or pathway to be shifted by up to 100 feet in any direction.
2. A change in the land use plan that requires a shift in land uses
(including park sites) by up to 100 feet in any direction.
3. A modification in the street or utility plan that is required on the basis
of more detailed engineering and grading plans. Overall connections
identified in the specific development plan are maintained.
(b) Major amendments are those which result in any of the following:
1. A change in the development standards.
2. Changes in the circulation plan that results in a shift of a public street,
easement, or pathway by more than 100 feet, or result in the
elimination of any public street, easement, or pathway.
3. A change in the land use plan that results in the elimination or
reduction of a proposed land use or a shift in land uses (including
park sites) by more than 100 feet in any direction.
(c) The Building and Planning Official may approve a minor amendment to a
specific development plan. The Building and Planning Official’s decision
shall include findings that demonstrate that the change will not adversely
affect the purpose, objectives, or function of the specific development plan.
(d) A major amendment to a specific development plan shall be approved by the
City Council following a public hearing. The Planning Commission shall
make a recommendation to the Council following a public hearing based on
findings demonstrating that the change will not adversely affect the purpose,
objectives, or function of the specific development plan.
(6) Interim Development. To encourage platting in conformance with the specific
development plan, the Building and Planning Official may grant the following
modifications to land division standards:
(a) Temporary Dead-ends. The Building and Planning Official may authorize
temporary cul-de-sacs or vehicle turn-around where a through street will
eventually be provided. Due to their temporary nature, the dimensions and
improvement requirements may vary from standards set forth in the Land
Division Ordinance.
(b) Half-Street Improvements. Half-width streets may be provided temporarily to
access lots where a full street will eventually be provided when all abutting
lots are developed.
(7) Specific Development Plan Standards. Standards for specific development plans
are listed below. The standards shall be utilized in conjunction with the specific
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 77
development plan adopted as an exhibit to the “/SDP” subzone. This section will be
amended as new specific development plans are adopted.
(a) Southwest Neighborhood Center
Plan Adopted: The Southwest Area Specific Development Plan and Plan
Map dated April 10, 2006 is hereby adopted by reference. All development
within the boundaries shown on the Plan Map shall be in substantial
conformance with the objectives and standards described in the Plan.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 78
ARTICLE 5 - SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
SECTION 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING ACCESSORY USES
An accessory use shall comply with all requirements for a principal use, except where
specifically modified by this section. Accessory uses shall not be used for human
habitation. Accessory uses shall comply with the following standards.
(1) Fences, hedges and walls may be located within required yards but shall not exceed
48" (four (4) feet) in height in any required front yard which abuts a street other than
an alley nor 2-1/2 feet in height in a vision clearance area. Elsewhere, fences,
hedges and walls shall not exceed six (6) feet in height in residential and
commercial zones and eight (8) feet in height in industrial zones. Swimming pools,
tennis courts, and other accessory recreational structures may have fences that
exceed six (6) feet, provided they are not located within the front yard, but may be
allowed within the side and rear yards.
(2) No sales shall be made from a greenhouse or hothouse maintained as an
accessory to a dwelling in a residential zone unless the sales have been approved
as a home occupation.
(3) The highest point of the roof of an accessory or structure shall not exceed a building
height of 24 feet in a residential zone.
(4) A garage shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from front lot line in a
residential zone except in an RC zone and as specified in Section 5.09(1). Parking
requirements as specified in Section 5.20 continue to apply to lots with reduced
setbacks. Garages must also meet the requirements of Article 13, Section 13.02
Dwelling, Single-Family (8).
(5) Except for garages and carports, accessory structures in the SFR, GR, and RC
zones, including those not requiring a building permit, shall not be located between
any front or side street and a principal building and must comply with the minimum
yard setbacks for the zone in which they are located.
(6) Boats, trailers, detached campers, motorized dwellings and similar recreation
equipment may be stored, but not used for human habitation, on a lot as an
accessory use to a dwelling provided that storage shall not be permitted in a front
yard.
(7) All buildings that are accessory structures shall have a minimum roof pitch of 2:12.
SECTION 5.02 ACCESS
All lots shall be provided with access according to the standards of Article 6, Section 6.04
of the Veneta Land Division Ordinance.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 79
SECTION 5.03 CLEAR VISION AREAS
In all zones except the BC zone a clear vision area shall be maintained on the corners of
all property at the intersections of two (2) streets, a street-alley or street-railroad.
(1) Corner lots shall maintain a triangular area at street intersections, railroad-street
intersections alley-street intersections, and flag lot-street intersections for safety
vision purposes. Two (2) sides of the triangular area shall be exterior property lines,
20 feet in length at street intersections and fifteen (15) feet leg lengths at alley-street
intersections and flag lot-street intersections. When the angle of the portion of the
intersection between streets is less than 30 degrees, the visual distance shall be 20
feet along the property line from the point of intersection. The third side of the
triangle shall be an interior line connecting the two (2) exterior sides. See Figure
5.03(a)
Figure 5.03(a) Figure 5.03(b)
(2) A clear vision area shall contain no plantings, driveways, fences, walls, structures or
temporary or permanent obstruction exceeding 2 ½ feet in height, measured from
the top of the curb or where no curb exists, from the established street center line
grade. Trees exceeding this height may be located in this area, provided all
branches or foliage are removed to a height of eight (8) feet above grade. See
Figure 5.03(b).
SECTION 5.04 RESERVED SECTION
SECTION 5.05 SETBACKS FOR AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS
In a zone where automobile service stations are permitted, freestanding gasoline pumps
and pump stands may occupy a required front yard, provided they are a minimum of fifteen
(15) feet from the property line.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 80
SECTION 5.06 USE OF RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES IN COMMERCIAL ZONE
In commercial zones, pre-existing residential structures may be occupied by nonresidential
uses permitted in the zone provided the structure meets minimum building and safety
standards as outlined in the building code. Site Plan approval subject to Article 6 is
required. If a residential structure is converted to a commercial use, further use of the
structure shall conform to the zone in which the property is located.
SECTION 5.07 FUTURE DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
Buildings must be placed on a site to allow for future street extensions and appropriate
setbacks. When a residential property is larger than twice the minimum lot size and has
potential for division, the applicant must submit a shadow plat showing how that future land
division could take place and site the residence(s) accordingly.
SECTION 5.08 EXCEPTIONS TO LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS
(1) If a lot or the aggregate of contiguous lots held in a single ownership as recorded in
the office of the Lane County Assessor prior to 1989 has an area or dimension which
does not meet the lot size requirements of the zone in which the property is located,
the holdings may be occupied by a use permitted in the zone subject to the other
requirements of the zone. If there is an area deficiency, residential use shall be
limited to a single-family dwelling or to the number of dwelling units consistent with
the lot area per dwelling unit requirement of the zone.
(2) The minimum lot size for flag lots shall be calculated in accordance with Article 6,
Section 6.04 of the Veneta Land Division Ordinance.
SECTION 5.09 EXCEPTIONS TO YARD REQUIREMENTS
The following are authorized exceptions to yard requirements:
(1) In the General Residential (GR) zone, the front yard setback of a building may be
reduced to a minimum of ten (10) feet for any lot that is entirely within the following
geographical area:
(a) West of 3rd Street and
(b) North of Hunter Avenue and
(c) East of 8th Street and
(d) South of Dunham Avenue.
(2) In any residential zone, the minimum front yard set-back for a part of the building
may be modified by not more than five (5) feet, provided the average front yard
depth shall not be less than the standard of the zone. Garage and carport front yard
set-backs shall not be reduced below twenty (20) feet, except when permitted under
Section 5.09(1). Accessory structures not requiring a building permit are not required
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 81
to have back or side yard setbacks provided that stormwater from the roof of the
structure does not flow onto the neighboring property.
(3) In order to permit the eventual widening of streets, every lot abutting a portion of a
street hereinafter named shall have an additional setback over the required yard
dimension specified in the zone so that the minimum distance from the center line of
the street right-of-way to the front setback line shall be listed as below:
Street Name Setback from Center Line of Right-of-Way
Highway 126 50 feet
Territorial Highway 40 feet - West side only
Bolton Hill Road 35 feet
Hunter Road 30 feet
The required front yards specified for each zone shall be in addition to the setbacks
specified above.
SECTION 5.10 EXCEPTIONS TO BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATIONS
Vertical projections, such as chimneys, spires, domes, elevator shaft housings, towers,
aerials, flagpoles and similar objects not used for human occupancy shall not be subject to
the building height limitations of this ordinance.
SECTION 5.11 RESERVED SECTION
SECTION 5.12 LANDSCAPING
All yards, required screening areas, and parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance
with the following requirements:
(1) Provisions for landscaping, screening and maintenance are a continuing obligation
of the property owner and such areas shall be maintained in a clean, weed free
manner.
(2) Site plans indicating landscape improvements shall be included with the plans
submitted to the Building and Planning Official or Planning Commission for
approval. Issuance of a Building permit includes these required improvements
which shall be completed before issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
(3) Minimum Landscaped Area. The minimum percentage of required landscaping is
as follows:
(a) Residential and Residential-Commercial Zones. 20 percent of each lot for
residential developments, 10 percent for commercial or mixed use.
(b) Community Commercial and Broadway Commercial Zones. 10 percent of
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 82
the site.
(c) Highway Commercial Zone. 10 percent of the site.
(d) Industrial Zones (IC,LI, MI). 5 percent of the site.
(e) When the above requirements conflict with landscaping requirements found
elsewhere in this ordinance, the standard which maximizes landscaped area
shall apply.
(4) Minimum number of trees and shrubs acceptable per 1,000 square feet of
landscaped area:
(a) One tree, minimum 2” caliper.
(b) Four 5-gallon shrubs or accent plants.
(5) Minimum percentage Ground Cover. All landscaped area, whether or not required,
that is not planted with trees and shrubs, or covered with non-plant material
(subsections (6)(f) & (g), below), shall have ground cover plants that are sized and
spaced to achieve 75 percent coverage of the area not covered by shrubs and tree
canopy.
(6) Landscape Materials. Permitted landscape materials include trees, shrubs, ground
cover plants, non-plant ground covers, and outdoor hardscape features, as
described below. “Coverage” is based on the projected size of the plants at
maturity, i.e., typically three (3) or more years after planting.
(a) Existing Vegetation. Existing non-invasive vegetation may be used in meeting
landscape requirements.
(b) Plant Selection. A combination of deciduous and evergreen trees, shrubs,
and ground covers shall be used for all planted areas, the selection of which
shall be based on local climate, soil, exposure, water availability, and drainage
conditions. Applicants are encouraged to select native plants which are
drought tolerant to reduce the demand on the City’s water supply.
(c) Plant Establishment. Unless a certified landscape architect specifically
recommends otherwise, all new landscaping shall be irrigated for a minimum
of two (2) years to ensure viability.
(d) Soil amendment. When new vegetation (including sod) is planted, topsoil
shall be added and/or soils amended or aerated as necessary, to allow for
healthy plant growth. Compaction of the planting area shall be minimized
whenever practical and compacted soils shall be amended and/or aerated as
necessary prior to planting.
(e) “Invasive” plants, shall be removed during site development and the planting
of new invasive species is prohibited. Lists of locally invasive species are
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 83
available through the local USDA extension office.
(f) Hardscape features, May cover up to ten percent (10%) of the required
landscape area; except in the Downtown Area where publicly accessible
hardscape features may cover up to eighty percent (80%) of the required
landscape area, subject to approval through Site Plan Review. Swimming
pools, sports courts, and similar active recreation facilities, as well as paving
for parking and access, may not be counted toward fulfilling the landscape
requirement.
(g) Non-plant Ground Covers. Bark dust, chips, aggregate, or other non-plant
ground covers may be used, but shall cover no more than 25 percent of the
area to be landscaped and shall be confined to areas underneath plants.
Non-plant ground covers cannot be a substitute for ground cover plants.
(7) Multi-family sites and parking lots shall be screened from abutting single-family
land uses by a combination of sight-obscuring fences, walls and landscaping
adequate to provide privacy and separation for the abutting land use.
(8) Garbage collection areas, service facilities and air conditioning facilities located
outside the building shall have sight-obscuring screening. Mechanical equipment,
lights, emissions, shipping/receiving areas, and garbage collection areas for
industrial, commercial, and public facility uses shall be located away from
residential areas, schools, and parks.
(9) When a sight-obscuring fence, wall, or hedge is required under the provisions of
this ordinance, it must meet the following provisions:
(a) In order to be “sight-obscuring”, fences and walls must be at least 75 percent
opaque when viewed from any angle at a point 25 feet away from the fence or
wall. Hedges shall be of an evergreen species which will meet and maintain
year-round the same standard within three (3) years of planting. Creative use
of deciduous hedge materials may be proposed to provide screening in
conjunction with wider planting areas. Deciduous hedges may be approved on
a case by case basis as the sole discretion of the Planning Official.
(b) Fences and walls must be maintained in a safe condition and opacity must be
maintained. Wooden materials shall be protected from rot, decay and insect
infestation. Plants forming hedges must be replaced within six (6) months
after dying or becoming diseased to the point that the opacity required is not
met.
(10) When adjacent land uses are of a different type and the proposed use may impact
the adjacent land uses, the Building and Planning Official or Planning Commission
may require sight-obscuring fencing, walls, and/or landscaping. In order to provide
appropriate buffering and screening, the Building and Planning Official or Planning
Commission may increase the required yard dimension.
(11) All stormwater detention facilities shall be landscaped according to City standards.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 84
SECTION 5.13 COMMERCIAL AND MIXED-USE DESIGN STANDARDS
(1) Purpose and Applicability. The following standards are minimum requirements
for new developments that are subject to Site Plan Review or Planned Unit
Development approval in the RC, BC and CC zones. The standards are
intended to protect and enhance the appearance, safety, and economy of Veneta
through appropriate building and site plan regulations. The standards may be
adjusted by the Planning Commission through the Track 2 Site Plan Review
process (see Section 6.05(2)
(2) Standards. This section provides minimum standards for site and building design
in the RC, BC and CC zones. The standards are administered through Site
Plan Review under Article 6. Graphics labeled “RC,”, “BC”, and “CC” respectively,
apply to the RC, BC, and CC zones. The graphics serve as references only; they
are conceptual and are not intended to prescribe a particular architectural style.
Examples of compliant development, and guidelines for adjustments, are
contained in subsection 5.13 (3).
(a) New commercial and mixed use buildings in the BC or RC zone shall have
their primary entrances facing and within twenty (20) feet of a street rightof-
way; except the standard does not apply to: individual residential units in
a mixed-use building; buildings where the primary entrance orients to a
pedestrian plaza between a building entrance and street right-of-way; or
where additional setback is required under other code provisions (e.g., clear
vision areas).
(b) Commercial, mixed-use, and public buildings on corner lots along West
Broadway Avenue shall have their primary entrances oriented to the street
corner; or where corner entrance placement is not practical due to internal
building functions, existing conditions of the site, or other relevant
circumstances unique to the proposed use, the decision making body may
approve an alternative design without requiring approval of a separate
adjustment. In such case, the building corner shall be chamfered or have
other architectural detailing that appropriately emphasizes the corner
location.
(c) Building entrances shall incorporate pedestrian shelters (e.g., recessed
entrance, porch, stoop, eave overhang, or similar feature) that provide
adequate weather protection (e.g., shelter from rain over a portion of the
sidewalk); individual pedestrian shelters shall be at least forty-eight (48)
inches in width and thirty-six (36) inches in depth.
(d) The design of multi-story commercial and mixed-use buildings shall clearly
define the building’s base, middle and top (see figure 5.13(a) below). This
may be accomplished with changes in materials, placement of windows,
porches, canopies, dormers, eaves, bellyband, cornice, parapet or similar
features, with appropriate detailing such as changes in patterns, and/or
textures on exterior elevations. The design of single story buildings need
not separately define the building base and middle but the top of the building
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 85
shall be defined and distinguished from the rest of the building, for example,
with eaves, parapet, cornice, or similar detailing.
Figure 5.13(a)
(e) Designs for buildings longer than fifty (50) feet shall incorporate varying
roof lines, such as gables, sheds or dormers on pitched roofs, and stepped
parapets, cornices or similar features on flat roofs, to break down the
elevation into smaller modules and to reduce the perceived scale of the
building.
(f) Building height shall transition from taller buildings to adjacent shorter
buildings. For buildings sharing a common wall, this standard is met when
the height of the taller building does not exceed the height of the shorter
building by more than ten feet (10 ft) within a horizontal distance of ten
feet (10 ft) from where the two buildings share a common wall. Beyond
the ten-foot area, the taller building may increase in height one foot (1 ft)
for every one foot (1 ft) of additional distance separating the two buildings.
For example, at a distance of twelve feet (12 ft) from the common wall, the
taller building may be twelve feet (12 ft) taller than the abutting building.
(g) Roof-mounted equipment shall be screened so that it is not visible, or is
visually subordinate to the primary roof form, as viewed from adjacent
public ways. Solar panels and mini-wind turbines may project beyond roof
elevations when approved through Site Plan Review. See also, Section 5.10
Exceptions to Building Height Limitations.
(h) Building elevations facing a street, plaza, or similar public or quasi- public
space shall be broken down into smaller planes to promote pedestrian
scale and compatibility with adjacent uses. Building planes shall not exceed
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 86
500 square feet of uninterrupted surface area in the RC, CC, and/or BC
zones. A break in plane is an offset, projection or recess of at least one (1)
foot in depth over a width of at least four (4) feet of horizontal distance. Such
breaks shall occur at least once every 30 lineal feet of a building’s streetfacing
elevation(s). A break may occur in one or more of the following ways,
as appropriate to the overall composition and design of the building: offsets,
projections, overhangs; bays, arcades, alcoves; entries, balconies, porches,
window reveals; dormers, towers, cupolas; pergolas, arbors or similar planter
boxes integrated into a building elevation; belt course, eaves, pillars, posts,
and base materials; or similar features and detailing that contribute to the
building’s overall composition (see figure 5.13(b) below).
Figure 5.13(b)
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 87
(i) All commercial building elevations in the RC, BC, and CC zones facing a
street, plaza, or other public or quasi-public space shall have openings
(transparent windows, doors, balconies, etc.) covering not less than sixty
percent (60%) percent of such elevations. Windows shall be
sized/proportioned, shaped, placed/spaced, and trimmed consistent with
the building’s overall architecture; and meet the intent, which is to provide
visual interest from the outside of a building and natural surveillance from
the inside, at a pedestrian level. Exception: Where a building faces more
than one street, as on a corner, the above standard applies only on the
elevation facing the primary street (i.e., Broadway, Territorial, or an internal
driveway designed to substitute for a street). The standard is reduced by
one-half for an elevation facing a secondary street.
(j) In the RC, BC and CC zones, a weather-protection canopy, awning,
overhang, eave, or similar feature with a depth of not less than four (4) feet
shall extend across at least seventy-five percent (75%) of all building
elevations that are adjacent to a sidewalk, outdoor seating area, walkway,
plaza or similar pedestrian space, as determined by the Building and
Planning Official. The pedestrian shelter must be placed at a height that
achieves the intended purpose of providing weather protection, summer
shade and shelter from the rain (see figure 5.13(c) below).
Figure 5.13(c)
(k) Primary exterior materials shall be consistent with the overall design
composition and intent of a building design. Materials shall consist of durable
wood, composites (e.g., concrete fiber-board or similar materials that has a
wood appearance), brick, split-face or rusticated concrete block (must be
tinted), natural stone, or materials of similar appearance and durability. Vinyl
or metal may be used on the exterior, but may not be used as the
primary cladding material. Where metal is used, it shall be non-reflective
split seam or similar metal. Metal may also be used for exterior detailing (e.g.,
wainscoting, flashing, brackets, etc.) and for renewable energy, energy
efficiency, or water conservation systems (e.g., solar panels and cells, miniwind
turbines, rainwater harvesting, etc.), subject to Site Plan Review.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 88
(l) Where new off-street parking is to be provided in the RC, BC, and CC zones,
it shall not be located between a buildings’ primary entrance and any street,
except as approved through Track 2 Site Plan Review. (see figure 5.13(d)
below).
Figure 5.13(d)
(m) Where alleys exist or can reasonably be extended to serve
development, parking areas shall be accessed from alleys. Where
alley access is not feasible, access may be provided from a private
driveway (see figure 5.13(d) above). Curb openings shall be
minimized by combining and sharing driveways to the greatest extent
practicable. See also, Section 5.24 Access Management.
(n) Drive-Up/Drive-In/Drive-Through Uses and Facilities, where permitted,
shall conform to the provisions of Section 8.20 (16).
(3) Design Guidelines. The following guidelines are to be applied by the Building
and Planning Official in evaluating Site Plan Review applications for
compliance with the design standards in subsection 5.13(2), and by the
Planning Commission in evaluating adjustments (Track 2 Site Plan Review)
for consistency with the intent of this section.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 89
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 90
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 91
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 92
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 93
SECTION 5.14 IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
All applicants for land development shall comply with all public improvement
requirements specified in Article 7 of the Veneta Land Division Ordinance and shall
install improvements in accordance with specifications approved by the City Engineer.
(1) Water and Sewer connections. All developments requiring water within the SFR,
GR, RC, BC, CC, IC, and I zones shall be connected to City water and sanitary
sewers. Developments in the RR zone and HC zone on Highway 126, east
of Territorial Road, shall be required to hook up to city water and sanitary sewer
when available, but connections are not required for development to occur.
(2) Agreement for Improvements.
(a) Before approval of a building permit, the land developer may be required
to install required street, sidewalk, water, sewer, storm sewer, drainage
and other required public facilities (“Improvements”), or execute and
record against the property an agreement between the owner of land and
the City specifying the period of time within which required Improvements and
repairs shall be completed (“Improvement Agreement”). The Improvement
Agreement shall provide that, if Improvements are not installed within the
period specified, the City may complete the work and recover the full cost and
expense, together with court costs and attorneys’ fees necessary to collect
said amounts from the land developer or lien the property in this full amount.
In any event, the land developer shall repair existing streets or other public
utilities damaged in the process of building the development.
(b) In the City’s sole discretion, the City Administrator may substitute an
irrevocable petition to install one or more required Improvements for the
Improvement Agreement referenced in (2)(a) of this Section 5.14 after
determining that immediate Improvement construction is not in the City’s best
interest. Such a determination may, but need not, be based on
circumstances where the proposed development is not adjacent to a paved
street with curbs and gutters. In conjunction with the irrevocable petition, the
developer may be required to deposit with the City a cash payment, surety
bond, or letter of credit in an amount determined by the City Administrator not
exceeding the cost of Improvement construction, as based upon an estimate
approved by the City Engineer (“Deposit”). The irrevocable petition shall
reference the deposit and cover future Improvement installation to the extent
actual installation costs exceed the Deposit amount.
(3) Specifications for Improvements. All improvements shall comply with the Public
Improvement Specifications of Veneta Ordinances in addition to the standard of this
ordinance. If the City does not have adopted standards or specifications, the
developer shall submit proposed improvement standards and specifications to the
City for approval by the City Engineer.
(4) Improvements within a Public Right-of-Way. A construction permit shall be required
for all improvements constructed within a public right-of-way. The City Engineer shall
have the authority to approve, disapprove, or modify construction permits and plans
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 94
in accordance with Veneta Ordinances.
(5) Dedication of Street Right-of-Way. Before approval of a building permit, the City
may require dedication of additional public right-of-way in order to obtain adequate
street widths, in accordance with the Veneta Comprehensive Plan, Land Division
Ordinance and any adopted street plans. Dedication shall be considered whenever
the existing street width adjacent to or within a development is of inadequate width.
(6) Utility and Drainage Easements. Before approval of a building permit, the City may
require that an easement agreement be executed between the city and the property
owner for sewer, water, electric, drainage, storm sewer or other public utility
easements wherever necessary. The easements shall be at least fourteen (14) feet
wide and located adjacent to lot or parcel lines, except for utility pole tieback
easements which may be reduced to six (6) feet in width.
SECTION 5.15 SIGNS
(1) Purpose.
(a) This section of the Veneta Land Development Ordinance will be referred to as
the Veneta Sign Code.
(b) The general purpose of signs is to communicate. The public benefits from
this expression of speech, particularly in identifying businesses. This benefit
supports the Comprehensive Plan Goal of establishing Veneta as a service
and retail center for the Fern Ridge area and an attractive residential
community.
(c) The purpose of this section is to safeguard, preserve, and enhance economic,
recreational, and aesthetic values through regulation of the size, number,
location, illumination, construction and maintenance of signs; and thereby
protect public health, safety and general welfare.
(2) Definitions.
SIGN: Any identification, description, illustration, symbol or device which is placed,
painted, or affixed directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, flag or land visible
from a public right-of-way.
(a) Alteration: Any change excluding content, and including but not limited to the
size, shape, method of illumination, position, location, materials, construction,
or supporting structure of a sign, but excluding content.
(b) Area: The area included within the outer dimensions of a sign. In the case of
a multi-faced sign, the area of each face shall be included in determining sign
area, except double-faced signs placed no more than 24 inches back-to-back.
The area of odd-shaped signs made up of individual letters mounted to the
wall of a building shall be the area enclosed within the outline or perimeter
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 95
around the sign or letters.
(c) Building Sign: A sign attached to, projecting from, erected against or painted
on the building, or on the face of a marquee, awning, canopy or building
fascia or to a wall or fence which is intended to be read from a public right-ofway.
(d) Blade Sign: Blade signs may be hung below roof overhangs, canopies or
awnings over public or private pedestrian ways in accordance with Section
5.15(10)(h). Such signs shall be uniform in size and placement in relationship
to such signs on adjacent buildings, but in no case shall they be larger than
24 inches in height by three feet in length.
(e) Business: A commercial or industrial enterprise
(f) Construction Sign: A temporary, non-illuminated sign placed at a construction
site which identifies the contractor, architect, lending institution and/or
development project. The sign shall be removed once construction is
complete.
(g) Directional Sign: A permanent sign which is designated and erected solely for
the purpose of directing traffic.
(h) Election: The time designated by law for voters to cast ballots for candidates
and measures.
(i) Election Signs: A temporary, non-illuminated sign erected during the period
beginning 90 days before a public election or the time the election is called,
whichever is earlier, to 30 days after the public election. All election signs
must be removed within 30 days following an election. A candidate who
intends to run again in the following election must still comply with this 30-day
requirement. Such a candidate shall not re-erect election signs until either (1)
30 days has elapsed since that candidate's election signs were removed, or
(2) until the filing deadline for the upcoming election, whichever is a shorter
period of time.
(j) Flashing Sign: A sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source, or
which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means of
animation, or an externality mounted intermittent light source.”
(k) Free-Standing Sign: A non-temporary sign erected on a free-standing frame,
mast or pole and not attached to any building. Signs shall comply with the
size and height standards for the sign district in which the sign is located and
with the Uniform Sign Code (USC).
(l) Garage, Yard or Estate Sale Sign: A temporary sign which advertises a
public sale for the purpose of disposing of personal property.
(m) Grand Opening: A 30-day period which encompasses the date a newly
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 96
established business opens to the public.
(n) Human-scale: A scale appropriate, specific, or comprehensible to
pedestrians, especially with reference to architecture or design.
(o) Illegal Sign: A sign which is not authorized by or is erected in violation of the
Veneta Sign Code.
(p) Illuminated Sign: Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, or designs
with the source of illumination being on the surface of the sign or from within
the sign.
(q) Indirectly Lighted Sign: A sign having a source of illumination directed toward
the sign so that a beam of light falls upon the exterior surface of a sign.
(r) Logo: Pictures, figures, symbols, letters, sign copy or similar graphic design
which advertises or identifies a business, building or use.
(s) Monument Sign: A low to the ground, free-standing sign mounted in a frame
that is incorporated into the overall design of the sign. The total square
footage of a monument sign shall include the supporting frame. Signs shall
comply with the size and height standards for the sign district in which the
sign is located and with the Uniform Sign Code (USC).
(t) Murals: Mosaic, wall decoration or painted scene, graphic art technique or
combination or grouping of mosaics, murals, paintings or graphic art
techniques applied, implanted or placed directly onto a wall or fence. With
the exception of the artist's signature, the mural shall contain no printed text
or logo and shall be intended as a decorative or ornamental feature or to
highlight a building's architectural or structural features.
(u) Non-conforming Sign: An existing sign, lawful at the time of enactment of this
ordinance, which does not conform to the requirements of the Veneta Sign
Code.
(v) On-Site Information Sign: A sign used for the purpose of communicating to
persons on the development site. Such a sign may be visible but shall not
convey a message to persons not on the site. A sign which conveys a
message where any portion of the message is easily legible or discernible to a
person of ordinary vision from any location off the site commonly visited by
members of the public shall not qualify as an on-site information sign. On-site
information signs may include but are not limited to menu boards and building
directories.
(w) Portable Sign: A single or double surface painted or poster type sign which is
not permanently attached to a building, structure or the ground which is to be
displayed for more than 30 days per calendar year. It shall be constructed of
weather-resistant paper, cloth, wood, plastic, or metal, or other material with
sufficient structural integrity to withstand wind and moisture, so as to maintain
appearance and service for the term of use. The maximum dimensions for
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 97
sandwich boards, sidewalk signs, and curb signs is 42 inches tall by 30 inches
wide.
(x) Public Sign: Any sign placed by a public officer or employee in the
performance of a public duty, including but not limited to traffic signals and
control signs, warning lights, street identification signs, directional signs,
informational signs or legal notices.
(y) Real Estate Signs: A temporary, non-illuminated sign advertising the
prospective sale, rental or lease of the building(s) or property on which the
sign is located. The sign shall be removed once the property is sold or
leased.
(aa) Sign Band: A small rectangular space recessed into an exterior building wall
that is designed for a building sign which may be engraved into the building
façade or mounted onto the sign band. May have integrated lighting for the
sign so that internal signage illumination is not necessary.
(bb) Sign Cabinet: A frame or external structure of a box-like sign that encloses
the various functional elements of the design, whether electrical or structural
components. Can be free-standing or wall-mounted.
(cc) Sign Copy: Any combination of letters or text which advertise or identify a
business, building or use, including logos.
(dd) Sign Height: The vertical distance from grade to the highest point of a sign or
a sign structure.
(ee) Temporary Sign: A sign which is not permanently affixed to a building,
structure or the ground, including all devices such as banners, pennants,
sandwich boards, sidewalk signs, curb signs and balloons which will be
displayed for 30 days or less per calendar year. The maximum dimensions for
sandwich boards, sidewalk signs, and curb signs is 42 inches tall by 30 inches
wide.
(ff) Unsafe Sign: Any sign or supporting structure which constitutes a hazard to
the public health, safety or welfare by reason of structural design or
construction, inadequate maintenance, lack of repair or dilapidation.
(gg) Vehicle Sign: Any sign permanently or temporarily placed on or attached to a
motor vehicle, where the vehicle is used in the regular course of business for
purposes other than the display of signs.
(hh) Wall Sign: See Building Sign.
(ii) Warning Signs: Signs which warn the public of the existence of danger,
hazardous materials or relating to trespass and containing no advertising
material.
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 98
(jj) Window Sign: Any sign attached to or painted on the inside surface of a
window.
(kk) Roof Sign: A sign affixed to the roof of the building or structure, rising above
the roof level at any point. Signs affixed to the roof edge and hanging below
the roof are not classified as roof signs. False facades and architectural
elements that also serve as signs do not count as roof signs, if the element
would still exist if it were not a sign.
(3) Designated Sign Districts. Four sign districts have been established to ensure that
sign size and location will provide the most visibility for each business while
protecting the aesthetic qualities of surrounding uses. The size, height and distance
allowed between signs vary by district, taking into account traffic speeds and types of
uses in each district. Refer to Table A for Permitted Signs to determine whether or
not a sign is allowed in the following districts and what specific requirements may
apply. In addition to specific requirements for each district, signs must comply with all
other sections of the Veneta Sign Code.
(a) Highway 126 Corridor District: All property zoned Highway Commercial,
Community Commercial, Industrial-Commercial, Light Industrial, Medium
Industrial, Public Facilities and Parks, which abut Highway 126.
(b) Business District(s): All property zoned Highway Commercial, Community
Commercial, Industrial-Commercial, Light Industrial, Medium Industrial, Public
Facilities and Parks which do not abut Highway 126.
(c) Residential District: All property zoned Rural Residential, General Residential
or Single-Family Residential. Also includes residential uses in the
Residential- Commercial zone. The Residential District has two sub-districts:
Single-Family Residential and Multi-Family Residential.
(d) Downtown District: All property zoned Broadway Commercial and
Residential-Commercial, except residential uses.
1. Signs in the Downtown District should be human-scale and directed
primarily at people walking and biking, in addition to people driving.
If property is visible from a state highway, a permit from the Oregon Department of
Transportation (ODOT) may be required in addition to any city permits.
(4) Authorization of Similar Signs. The Building or Planning Official may permit in a
particular sign district a type of sign not specifically listed in the Veneta Sign Code,
provided the sign is of the same general type as the signs permitted there by code.
The decision of the building and planning official may be appealed to the Planning
Commission using procedures specified in Section 2.07 of this ordinance.
(5) Prohibited Signs. Any sign not exempted or allowed pursuant to the Veneta Sign
Code, except by approval of variance, is not permitted. The following signs are
prohibited:
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 99
(a) Signs or devices that move; appear to move; have moving parts or can move
by wind or other means; or display flashing, intermittent, scintillating or varying
degree of intensity lights including LCD and similar screen type displays (flags
and time/temperature signs excepted).
(b) Strings of lights and "neon type" tubing used to outline or border any feature
of the building are not permissible. (Neon tubing is allowed in the actual
composition of a sign.) This type of sign may be allowed by the Building and
Planning Official if the applicant provides substantial proof that the sign will
not provide a distraction to the operator of a motor vehicle.
(c) Strings of pennants, tinsel and lights except for grand openings and holiday
lights (from November 15 to January 15).
(d) Building signs which project more than six (6) inches above the roof of a
building.
(e) Signs that may be confused with public traffic signs or highway identification
signs, or graphically appear similar to these types of signs. This includes, but
is not limited to, signs which use the words "stop, slow, caution, look, danger"
or any other word, phrase, symbol or character that may mislead or confuse
vehicle operators.
(f) Any signs (except blade signs) located on or above public rights-of-way
without written consent of the applicable jurisdiction.
(g) Signs placed on, affixed to, or painted on any motor vehicle, trailer or other
mobile structure which is inoperable or not registered, licensed and insured
for use on public highways.
(h) Unsafe or illegal signs as defined by the Veneta Sign Code.
(i) Internally illuminated signs in the residential district, except address or name
plates.
(j) Signs which exceed this Code's size, distance, or height restrictions, or
conflict with any other provision of the Veneta Sign Code.
(k) Sign cabinets in the Downtown District.
(l) Roof signs.
(6) Temporary Signs. There is no limit to the size or number of temporary signs allowed
on a lot or parcel, except as indicated in Table 5.15 for specific types of temporary
signs (such as election signs, real estate signs and garage sale signs). Unless
otherwise specified, a temporary sign may only be displayed for up to 30 days per
calendar year. Signs that will be displayed for more than 30 days per year are
considered "portable signs" and require a permit (see Table 5.15). Although no
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493 Page| 100
permit is required for a temporary sign, the Building and Planning Official must be
notified of any temporary signs not listed in Table 5.15, for tracking purposes. The
placement of temporary signs must conform to the requirements listed in the Veneta
Sign Code.
(7) Permitted Signs. Table 5.15 below list the types of signs which are allowed within
the designated sign districts. In addition to the conditions listed in these tables, all
signs must comply with all other applicable sections of the Veneta Sign Code.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 110
TABLE 5.15 Permitted Signs
Type of Sign
Highway 126
Corridor District
Business District
Downtown District
Residential District
Single Family
Residential
Multi-Family
residential
Permitted
Requires
Permit
Permitted
Requires
Permit
Permitted
Requires
Permit
Permitted
Requires
Permit
Permitted
Requires
Permit
Free-Standing or
Monument Signs
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
1 per lot or parcel.
Max height: 35 ft.
Max size: 100 sq. ft.
1 per lot or parcel.
Max height: 20 ft.
Max size: 64 sq. ft.
1 per lot or parcel.
No sign cabinets.
Max height: 8 ft.
Max size: 20 sq. ft.
1 per subdivision.
Max height: 20 ft.
Max size: 32 sq. ft.
1 per lot or parcel.
Max height: 20 ft.
Max size: 64 sq. ft.
Building Signs Y Y Y Y Y Y N N/A Y Y
Total area of all
building signs shall
not exceed 6% of
building’s footprint
(sq. ft.)
Total area of all
building signs shall
not exceed 6% of
building’s footprint
(sq. ft.)
Total area of all
building signs shall
not exceed 6% of
building’s footprint
(sq. ft.) No sign
cabinets.
Total area of all
building signs shall
not exceed 6% of
building’s footprint
(sq. ft.)
Portable Signs Y Y Y Y Y Y N N/A Y Y
1 per street frontage.
Max height: 42 inches
Max width: 30 inches
1 per street frontage.
Max height: 42 inches
Max width: 30 inches
1 per street frontage.
Max height: 42 inches
Max width: 30 inches
1 per street frontage.
Max height: 42
inches
Max width: 30 inches
Temporary Signs Y N/A Y N/A Y N/A N N/A Y N/A
Time & size limits
(see definition).
1 sandwich board,
sidewalk sign, or curb
sign per street
frontage.
Time & size limits
(see definition).
1 sandwich board,
sidewalk sign, or curb
sign per street
frontage.
Time & size limits
(see definition).
1 sandwich board,
sidewalk sign, or curb
sign per street
frontage.
Time & size limits
(see definition).
1 sandwich board,
sidewalk sign, or curb
sign per street
frontage.
Flags (no height
or size restrictions
on the National or
State flags)
Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N
Max height: 35 ft.
Max size: 20 sq. ft.
Max height: 35 ft.
Max size: 20 sq. ft.
Max height: 35 ft.
Max size: 20 sq. ft.
Max height: 35 ft.
Max size: 20 sq. ft.
Max height: 35 ft.
Max size: 20 sq. ft.
Election Signs Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N
Time limit (see
definition)
Max size: 32 sq. ft.
Time limit (see
definition)
Max size: 12 sq. ft.
Time limit (see
definition)
Max size: 4 sq. ft.
Time limit (see
definition)
Max size: 4 sq. ft.
Time limit (see
definition)
Max size: 4 sq. ft.
Real Estate or
Construction
Signs
Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N
Time limit (see
definition).
1 per lot. Max size:
36 sq. ft.
Time limit (see
definition).
1 per lot. Max size:
36 sq. ft.
Time limit (see
definition).
1 per lot. Max size:
36 sq. ft.
Time limit (see
definition).
1 per lot. Max size: 4
sq. ft.
Time limit (see
definition).
1 per lot. Max size:
36 sq. ft.
Driveway
Entrance/Exit
Signs
Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N
Max height: 2 ½ ft. Max height: 2 ½ ft. Max height: 2 ½ ft. Max height: 2 ½ ft. Max height: 2 ½ ft.
Address Plates Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N
Max size: 1 sq. ft. Max size: 1 sq. ft. Max size: 1 sq. ft. Max size: 1 sq. ft. Max size: 1 sq. ft.
Directional Signs Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N
Max size: 2 sq. ft. Max size: 2 sq. ft. Max size: 2 sq. ft. Max size: 2 sq. ft. Max size: 2 sq. ft.
Blade Signs Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N
1 per business
entrance.
Max size: 6 sq. ft.
1 per business
entrance.
Max size: 6 sq. ft.
1 per business
entrance. Max
6 sq. ft.
Public Sign Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N
Window Signs Y N Y N Y N N N/A N N/A
Holiday Lights,
Decorations, And
Banners
Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N
On-Site
Information
Signs
Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N
Murals Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N
Garage, Yard, &
Estate Sale Signs
N N/A N N/A N N/A Y N Y N
Warning Signs Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N
Name Plates/Sign
Bands
N N/A N N/A N N/A Y N Y N
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 111
(8) Sign Permits.
(a) A sign permit is required in each of the following instances:
1. Upon the erection of any new sign except signs specifically listed in
Table 5.15 as signs not requiring a permit.
2. To make structural or electrical alteration to an existing sign, including
a change in the size, shape, materials or location.
3. To replace a pre-existing sign.
(b) Information required for a sign permit:
1. A drawing to scale shall be submitted which indicates fully the material,
color, dimensions, size, shape and height above grade. The drawing
shall show the structural elements of the proposed sign and supporting
structure(s) and any other information needed to show that the sign will
not interfere with traffic safety, public health, or general welfare.
a. Building Signs: The diagram shall show where the sign will be
attached to the building, including the distance the sign will
project from the wall to which it is attached and the height
above the finished ground surface over which it is mounted.
b. Free-standing Signs: In addition to the diagram a site plan
shall be submitted which shows the placement of the sign on
the property with relation to property lines, driveways,
sidewalks, parking areas and buildings.
2. The size and types of all other permitted signs located on the
applicant's building or property.
3. For free-standing signs, the applicant shall show the distance,
measured in feet, to free-standing signs on adjacent lots.
(c) In addition to a sign permit, all illuminated signs require a City of Veneta
electrical permit.
(d) A permit shall expire if a sign is not installed, as approved, within 180 days
from the date of approval. Reapplication shall include a new, fully completed
application form and a new application fee.
(9) Permit Fees. Sign permit fees which are due and payable upon receipt of a permit
shall be set by separate resolution adopted by the council.
(10) Placement of Signs. In addition to requirements of the sign district in which a sign is
located, placement of signs must comply with the following:
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 112
(a) No signs in excess of 2½ feet in height shall be placed in the vision clearance
area as described in Section 5.03 or within ten (10) feet of driveways. A
portion of the sign area, excluding the base or supporting structure, may
extend into the vision clearance area or within ten (10) feet of a driveway,
provided it is at least eight (8) feet above grade.
(b) No sign or portion thereof shall be erected within a future street right-of-way
unless and until an agreement is recorded stipulating that when street
improvements are made the sign will be removed or relocated at no expense
to the City.
(c) No sign or portion thereof shall be erected within public utility easements.
(d) No sign or portion thereof shall be placed where it obstructs ingress or egress
through any door, window, fire escape, or like facility required or designated
for safety or emergency use.
(e) No sign shall interfere with on-site traffic, bicycle or pedestrian circulation.
(f) No sign may be placed where it hides from view any official traffic sign or
signal.
(g) No sign or portion thereof shall extend beyond any property line of the
premises on which such sign is located.
(h) No sign projecting from a building may be less than eight (8) feet above the
ground over which it projects and may not interfere with traffic circulation or
public safety.
(11) Calculating Sign and Wall Areas. The total area for building signs shall not exceed
the area permitted in this sign district in which the building is located. The area shall
include all signs attached to, projecting from, erected against or painted on a wall or
portion of a wall, including any fascia, awning, canopy or marquee attached to the
wall, which is visible to the public. If any sign painted on a roof or attached to a
fence is visible and intended to be read from a public right-of-way, the total area of
the roof painting or fence sign shall be included in the total area permitted for
building signs. The total area permitted for building signs may be divided into
multiple signs or used for one single sign and may also be used for portable signs.
(12) Vehicle Signs. The City does not regulate signs placed on, affixed to, or painted on
any operable motor vehicle, trailer or other mobile structure which is registered,
licensed and insured for use on public highways.
(13) Illuminated Signs. Illuminated signs, except those listed in as Prohibited Signs, are
permitted in all sign districts. In addition to the requirements of the sign district in
which the sign is located, illuminated signs must comply with the following:
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 113
(a) No sign may be illuminated or use lighting where such lighting is directed at
any portion of a traveled street or will otherwise cause glare or impair the
vision of the driver of a motor vehicle or otherwise interfere with the operation
thereof.
(b) No sign may be illuminated or use lighting which causes a direct glare on
adjacent properties.
(c) External illumination shall be shielded so that the light source elements are
not directly visible from a residential use which is adjacent to or across a
street from the source of illumination.
(14) Sign Maintenance. Signs and supporting structures shall be maintained to protect
public safety and to prevent deterioration. Sign maintenance includes copy changes,
painting, repainting, cleaning and normal maintenance and repair but does not
include a structural or electrical change.
(15) Unsafe or Illegal Signs. Any sign determined by the Building or Planning Official to
be an unsafe or illegal sign is subject to the following:
(a) If the Building or Planning Official finds that any sign is unsafe or illegal,
enforcement action shall be taken as prescribed in Section 2.10. Failure to
remove or alter said sign as directed shall subject the permittee or property
owner to the penalties prescribed in Section 2.10.
(b) The Building and Planning Official may remove or cause to be removed any
sign which is so unsafe or insecure it constitutes a real and immediate danger
to persons or property.
(c) Any sign removed because it has been determined to be unsafe or illegal
shall not be re-established until a valid permit has been issued.
(16) Non-Conforming Signs.
(a) A non-conforming sign may continue to be used until altered, replaced,
modified or moved at which time the sign shall be brought into conformance
with all provisions of the Veneta Sign Code.
(b) General maintenance, repair and copy changes which do not add to the size
or shape of the sign shall be permitted.
(c) If a non-conforming sign is totally or substantially destroyed, a future sign on
the site shall comply with the provisions of the sign district in which the
property is located.
(17) Variances. A request for a variance must comply with Article 10. Variances will not
be granted where the following sign regulations are involved:
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 114
(a) Prohibited Signs
(b) Abatement of unsafe signs
(c) Construction and Maintenance standards of the Uniform Sign Code
(d) Placement of a sign in the Clear Vision Area
(18) General Exemption. All public signs are exempt from the Veneta Sign Code.
SECTION 5.16 STORMWATER DETENTION AND TREATMENT
As the City of Veneta develops, impervious surfaces create increased amounts of
stormwater runoff, disrupting the natural hydrologic cycle. Without stormwater
management, these conditions decrease groundwater recharge while increasing channel
erosion and the potential for localized flooding. The City continues to use swales and other
more natural methods to control and convey stormwater run-off, incorporating wetlands
and other natural systems into stormwater drainage plans to the greatest extent possible
rather than relying exclusively on pipes. Runoff from urban areas is a major source of
pollution and watershed degradation. The City is currently a Designated Management
Agency (DMA) under the Willamette Basin TMDL and as such, is responsible for reducing
pollutant loads transported to surface waters from runoff. In order to protect and enhance
watershed health and long-term livability, the City requires that development comply with
the following stormwater management criteria.
(1) For all projects that create greater than or equal to 1000 square feet of new
impervious surface, stormwater detention and treatment facilities shall be provided.
Detention and treatment facilities shall be designed and sized according to the City
of Portland Stormwater Management Manual, Revision #4, August 1, 2008 which is
adopted as the City’s Stormwater Management Manual. Where the manual and this
section conflict, this section shall prevail.
(2) The intent of these requirements is as follows:
(a) To maintain runoff peak flows at predevelopment levels
(b) To provide treatment of runoff to limit the transport of pollutants to area
waterways.
(c) To limit accumulation of ponded water by discouraging the use of detention
ponds and other centralized stormwater facilities through the dispersal of
small detention and treatment facilities throughout a development.
Preference shall be given to detention and treatment systems designed to
drain completely within 24 hours to limit standing water.
(d) To encourage the use of vegetated treatment systems over structural
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 115
pollution control devices
(3) Exceptions or alternatives to the requirements and standards of the Stormwater
Management Manual may be allowed by the City Engineer based on specific site
conditions provided that detention and treatment requirements are met in
conformance with the intent as stated above. Applicants are encouraged to use
either the Simplified Approach or Presumptive Approach to size facilities.
(4) The following storm data (Eugene Airport) shall be used in sizing facilities.
SECTION 5.17 RESERVED SECTION
SECTION 5.18 TIME LIMIT EXTENSION REQUEST
The applicant may submit a request in writing for up to a one (1) year extension for a land
use approval. Unless the City Council or the original approval provides otherwise, a
maximum of two (2) extensions may be granted.
1) Requests for extensions shall:
a. Be submitted to the City in writing prior to expiration of the approval, but no earlier
than 90 days prior to the expiration of the approval; and
b. Explain any special or unusual circumstances that warrant an extension.
2) The City may deny a request for an extension if any Lane Use Ordinance requirements
or laws have been adopted since the original approval that would clearly make the
development unlawful to approve as of the date the approval would otherwise expire.
SECTION 5.19 RESERVED SECTION
SECTION 5.20 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
For each new structure or use, each structure or use increased in area and each change in
the use of an existing structure, there shall be provided and maintained off-street parking
areas in conformance with the provisions of this section.
(1) Design and improvement requirements for residential parking for single-family and
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 116
multi-family dwellings.
(a) Except where the City Engineer has approved a porous paving system to
manage storm water runoff and water quality, all parking areas, driveways,
and driveway approaches shall be surfaced with two (2) inches of asphaltic
concrete or six (6) inches Portland Cement concrete over approved base or
other materials approved by the City Engineer. Paved driveways are not
required in situations approved by the Planning Commission or Building and
Planning Official in which the driveway will be used temporarily until further
land divisions or development occur.
(b) Parking spaces along the outer boundaries of a parking area shall be
contained by a curb or bumper so placed to prevent a motor vehicle from
extending over the property line.
(c) Off-street parking areas shall not be located in a required front yard, except
that driveways may be used for off-street parking.
(d) A house with one street frontage and at least one hundred feet of width, or
any house with two local street frontages may be served by a circular drive.
Driveways shall not cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the required front
yard area. Driveways shall not be constructed in required clear vision areas.
All City standards including but not limited to those relating to storage of RVs,
trailers, or inoperable vehicles, shall continue to apply.
(2) Design and improvement requirements for parking lots (not including single-family or
multi-family dwellings).
(a) All required parking lots, driveways, and driveway approaches shall be
surfaced with two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete, six (6) inches Portland
Cement concrete over approved base, or other materials approved by the City
Engineer which are designed to reduce or slow rates of stormwater runoff. All
parking lots shall be graded so as not to drain storm water over the sidewalk
or onto any abutting property.
(b) Service drives and parking spaces on surfaced parking lots shall be clearly
and permanently marked. Parking spaces, except for handicap spaces, shall
have a minimum dimension of eighteen (18)' X nine (9)' exclusive of
maneuvering and access area. The dimension includes the area in front of
the curb stop over which the front of a vehicle would extend. Handicap
spaces shall be provided as required by the Oregon State Structural Specialty
Code.
(c) Parking lots shall be served by a service driveway so that no backing
movements or other maneuvering within a street other than an alley shall be
required. Design for parking arrangements and turning movements shall be
approved by the Building and Planning Official. Two-way driveways shall
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 117
have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet and a maximum width of 30 feet.
One-way driveways shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet and a
maximum width of sixteen (16) feet.
(d) Parking spaces along the outer boundaries of a parking area shall be
contained by a curb or bumper so placed to prevent a motor vehicle from
extending over the property line.
(e) Service driveways to off-street parking lots shall be designed and constructed
to facilitate the flow of traffic, provide maximum safety of traffic access and
egress and maximum safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the site.
The number of service driveways shall be limited to the minimum that will
allow the property to accommodate and service the traffic anticipated.
(f) All off-street parking lots within or abutting residential districts or uses shall be
provided with a sight-obscuring fence, wall or hedge as approved by the
Building and Planning Official to minimize disturbances to adjacent residents.
(g) A grading structure and drainage plan shall be submitted to the City Building
and Planning Official and approved by the City Engineer.
(h) Parking lots shall be provided with landscaping as provided in Section 5.12
and other suitable devices in order to divide the parking lot into sub-units to
provide for pedestrian safety, traffic control and to improve the appearance of
the parking lot. A minimum of one shade tree per sixteen (16) parking spaces
shall be provided in planter islands distributed throughout the lot. A maximum
of twenty (20) spaces shall be allowed between planter islands.
(i) Parking lot lighting must comply with Veneta Municipal Code Chapter 15.15
(3) Location standards for parking lots
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided for development in all zones. Off street
parking areas may be located no farther than 400 feet from the building or
use they are required to serve, with the exception of uses within the
Broadway Commercial (BC) zone which are subject to the requirements
of Section 4.05(11).
(b) Parking lots and loading docks for new public, and semi-public buildings shall
be located to the side or rear of the building, except as approved through
Track 2 Site Plan Review.
(c) Loading docks for new commercial, industrial, public, and semi-public
buildings shall be located to the side or rear of the building.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 118
(4) Required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of operable motor
vehicles for residents, customers, patrons and employees only and shall not be
used for storage of vehicles, materials, or for repair or servicing.
(5) The provision and maintenance of off-street parking spaces are continuing
obligations of the property owner. No building or other permit shall be issued until
plans are presented that show parking space. The subsequent use of property for
which the permit is issued shall be conditional upon the unqualified continuance and
availability of the amount of parking area required by this ordinance.
(6) Should the owner or occupant of a lot or building change the use of the property to
a use which increases the off-street parking requirements, it shall be unlawful and a
violation of this ordinance to begin to maintain such altered use until the required
increase in off-street parking is provided. The Building and Planning Official or
Planning Commission may require a Site Plan Review if the increase in parking
significantly changes on-site circulation, creates additional impervious surface or
requires additional landscaping.
(7) In the event several uses occupy a single structure or parcel of land, the total
requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements of the
several uses computed separately. Where the uses have the ability to share
parking and a shared parking agreement is approved through Site Plan Review, the
total requirements for all uses and locations shall be computed. The decision
making body may reduce the sum requirement based on off-peak parking demands
(shared parking) under subsection 5.20 (3) (a).
(8) A system of joint use driveways, sidewalks, and cross access easements shall be
established for commercial and office properties wherever feasible and shall
incorporate the following:
(a) A design speed of ten (10) mph and a maximum width of twenty (20) feet to
accommodate two-way travel aisles designed to accommodate automobiles,
service vehicles, and loading vehicles.
(b) A unified access and circulation plan for coordinated or shared parking areas.
Pursuant to this section, property owners shall:
1. Record an easement with the deed allowing cross access to and from
other properties served by the joint use driveways, sidewalks, and
cross access or service drive;
2. Record a joint maintenance agreement with the deed defining
maintenance responsibilities of property owners.
(9) A plan, drawn to scale, indicating how the off-street parking requirements are to be
fulfilled, shall accompany a request for a building permit.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 119
(10) The Building and Planning Official or the Planning Commission may approve the
use of on-street parking spaces in lieu of required off-street parking spaces in the
Broadway Commercial, Community Commercial, Residential-Commercial,
Industrial-Commercial and Public Facilities & Park zones.
(11) Space requirements for off-street parking shall be consistent with Table 5.20(a)
below. Fractional space requirements shall be counted as a whole space. When
square feet are specified, the area measured shall be the gross floor area of all
buildings but shall exclude any space within a building used for off-street parking,
loading or service functions not primary to the use. When the requirements are
based on the number of employees, the number counted shall be those working on
the premises during the largest shift at peak season. A reduction in the number of
required spaces not to exceed (fifty) 50% of the required spaces may be permitted
by the Planning Commission. A reduction in excess of 50% may be permitted
through a Track 2 Site Plan Review, pursuant to Article 6, if evidence is provided to
show that a reduced amount of parking is sufficient and will not cause any
detrimental impacts to on-street parking or other parking areas. For example, an
employer working with Lane Transit District to provide bus passes to employees or
who offers van pools or other transportation demand management measures may
need fewer parking spaces for employees.
Table 5.20(a)
Use Categories
Vehicle Parking Requirement
Bicycle Parking
Requirement
Type and % of
Bicycle Parking
Residential
One and two-family
dwellings
Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit. See also
zoning district regulations for ADUs
NA
NA
Multiple-family dwellings,
spaces/units
Studio or 1 bedroom - One (1)
2 bedroom - One and one half (1 1/2)
3 bedroom - Two (2)
1 per unit
100% Long term
Rooming or boarding house
Space equal to 80 percent of the number of
guest accommodations, plus one (1)
additional space for the owner or manager
1 per guest room
100% Long term
Residential facilities
One (1) space per two (2) beds or living
units plus one (1) space for each employee
during peak work shift
1 per ten (10)
employees
100% Long term
Residential Commercial
Hotel/Motel
One (1) space per guest room, plus one (1)
additional space for the owner or manager
1 per ten (10) guest
rooms
100% Long term
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 120
Bed and Breakfast
One (1) space per guest room, plus one (1)
additional space for the owner or manager
1 per ten (10)
employees
100% Long term
Institutional
Welfare or correctional
institution
One (1) space per six (6) beds for patients
or inmates
1 per twenty (20) beds
25% Long term
75% Short term
Convalescent hospital,
nursing home, sanitarium,
rest home, home for the aged,
which do not include
retirement units where care is
not provided
One (1) space per four (4) beds for patients
and residents
1 per ten (10) beds
25% Long term
75% Short term
Hospital
One (1) space per 200 square feet of floor
area
1 per 3,000 square feet
of floor area
25% Long term
75% Short term
Place of Public Assembly
Church
One (1) space per four (4) seats or eight (8)
feet of bench length in the main auditorium
or one (1) space for each 35 square feet of
floor area of main auditorium not
containing fixed seats
1 per 20 fixed seats or
40 feet of bench length
or every 200 square feet
in main auditorium
where no permanent
seats or benches are
maintained
100% Long term
Library, reading room
One (1) space per 400 square feet of floor
area of main auditorium not containing
fixed seats
1 per 500 square feet of
floor area
25% Long term
75% Short term
Day care facility
One (1) space per staff person, based on
the maximum staff at the facility during
peak time
1 per ten (10)
employees
100% Long term
Elementary or junior high
school
One (1)space per classroom, plus one (1)
space per administrative employee or one
(1) space per four (4) seats or eight (8) feet
of bench length in the auditorium or
assembly room, whichever is greater
1 per eight (8) students
25% Long term
75% Short term
High School, college,
commercial school for adults
One (1)space per classroom, plus one (1)
space per administrative employee plus one
(1) space per six (6) seats or eight (8) feet
of bench length in the auditorium or
assembly room, whichever is greater
1 per eight (8) students
25% Long term
75% Short term
Other public assembly
One (1) space per six (6) seats or eight feet
of bench length, or one (1)space for each
35 square feet of floor area for assembly
room not containing fixed seats
1 per 20 fixed seats or
40 feet of bench length
or every 200 square feet
in main auditorium
where no permanent
seats or benches are
maintained
100% Long term
Entertainment/Recreational
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 121
Stadium, arena, theater
One (1) space per four (4) seats or eight (8)
feet of bench length
1 per 20 seats
25% Long term
75% Short term
Bowling alley
Three (3) spaces per alley, plus one (1)
space per two (2) employees
1 per each lane
25% Long term
75% Short term
Dance hall, skating rink
One (1) space per 100 square feet of floor
area, plus one (1) space per two (2)
employees
1 per 400 square feet of
floor area
25% Long term
75% Short term
Athletic/Sports facility
Swimming Pools
One (1) space per 220 square feet of pool
surface area
1 per 500 square feet of
pool surface area
25% Long term
75% Short term
Athletic Field
10 per each field
4 per each field
100% Short term
Tennis, racquetball,
basketball
Two (2) spaces per playing court
1 per playing court
25% Long term
75% Short term
Commercial
Retail or grocery stores
One (1) space per 400 square feet of floor
area designated for retail
1 per 3,000 square feet
of floor area
25% Long term
75% Short term
Service or repair shop, retail
store handling bulky
merchandise such as
automobiles and furniture
One (1) space per 660 square feet of floor
area designated for retail
1 per 5,000 square feet
of floor area
25% Long term
75% Short term
Bank, office (except medical
and dental)
One (1) space per 330 square feet of floor
area
1 per 3,000 square feet
of floor area
25% Long term
75% Short term
Medical and dental clinic
One (1) space per 200 square feet of floor
area
1 per 3,000 square feet
of floor area
25% Long term
75% Short term
Eating or drinking
establishments
One (1) space per 200 square feet of floor
area
1 per 600 square feet of
floor area
25% Long term
75% Short term
Mortuaries
One (1) space per six (6) seats or eight feet
of bench length in chapels
1 per 280 square feet of
auditorium floor area
100% Short term
Industrial
Industrial uses which entail
manufacturing, research,
processing or assembling
One (1) space per 600 square feet of gross
floor area
1 per 5,000 square feet
of floor area
25% Long term
75% Short term
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 122
Industrial uses which are
primarily warehousing and
distribution
One (1) space per 800 square feet of gross
floor area
1 per 5,000 square feet
of floor area
25% Long term
75% Short term
Storage Facilities
One (1) space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area of the office area or three (3)
spaces, whichever is greater
NA
NA
Industrial uses shall provide
space for patron and visitor
use
Minimum of three (3) parking spaces in
addition to the requirements listed.
NA
NA
Other
Transit Transfer Stations
NA 1 per ten (10) parking
spaces or 5 spaces,
whichever is greater
50% Long Term
50% Short Term
Park-and-ride Lots
NA 1 per ten (10) parking
spaces or 5 spaces,
whichever is greater
50% Long Term
50% Short Term
(12) Accessible Parking Spaces. Parking shall be provided for disabled persons, in
accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act. Accessible parking is included in the
minimum number of required parking spaces listed above.
Table 5.20(b) Minimum Accessible Parking Requirements
Total Number of
Parking Spaces
Provided
Total Minimum
Number of
Accessible
Parking Spaces
(60" and 96"
aisles)
Van
Accessible
Parking
Spaces with
min. 96" wide
access aisle
Accessible
Parking
Spaces with
min. 60"wide
access aisle
1 to 25 1 1 0
25 to 50 2 1 1
51 to 75 3 1 2
76 to 100 4 1 3
101 to 150 5 1 4
151 to 200 6 1 5
201 to 300 7 1 6
301 to 400 8 1 7
401 to 500 9 2 7
501 to 1000
2% of total
parking provided
in each lot
1/8 of total
Accessible
Parking
Spaces*
7/8 of total
Accessible
Parking
Spaces**
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 123
1001 and over
20 plus 1 for
each 100 over
1000
1/8 of total
Accessible
Parking
Spaces*
7/8 of total
Accessible
Parking
Spaces**
(13) Unspecified uses. Any use not specifically listed in this section shall have a parking
requirement determined by the Building and Planning Official, based on the parking space
requirements for comparable uses listed in this section. The decision of the Building and
Planning Official may be appealed to the Planning Commission, using procedures as
spelled out in this ordinance.
(14) Off-Street Loading. Except as provided below, under subsection (b), in any zone, every building
or part thereof hereafter erected and having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more,
which is to be occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehousing, goods display, retail sales
or as a hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning establishment or other uses similarly
requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be
provided and maintained at least 1 off-street loading space, plus 1 additional such loading
space for each additional 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(a) Said loading space shall be provided with access, driveways and surfacing in the same
manner as for off street parking, except that each space shall be ten (10) feet wide and
25 feet long, with a height clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet. In the case where
service vehicles of the truck and trailer category are utilized, the Planning Commission
may require additional length for required off-street loading spaces to accommodate up
to a maximum overall length of 50 feet.
(b) Uses located on lots with at least 25 feet of frontage onto Waldo Lane, West Broadway,
or Second Street may utilize those rights-of-way for required loading space(s) if
sufficient right-of-way is available, subject to a Track 2 Site Plan Review. The Planning
Commission may impose conditions of approval on such right-of-way use to mitigate
adverse impacts on traffic circulation, including measures to protect the operational
safety and level of service on adjacent streets, pedestrian safety, and compatibility with
adjacent land uses.
(15) Stacking and Queuing Areas. Apply to all developments that involve queuing of vehicles,
loading and unloading of goods, materials, or people. All queuing areas are required to have
an area for vehicle stacking to prevent or minimize congestion of public streets. Examples of
uses include but are not limited to schools and drive- through services such as banks, car
washes, and coffee stands.
A stacking space shall be a minimum of nine feet (9’) in width and 20’ in length and shall not be
located within or interfere with any other circulation driveway, parking space, fire lane, or
maneuvering area.
In all zoning districts where queuing of vehicles is necessary, vehicle stacking spaces shall
be provided in the manner set forth in the following list of property uses:
Table 5.20 (c) Vehicle Stacking and Queuing Requirements
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 124
Use Category Vehicle Stacking Requirements
Automated Teller Machine (ATM) Three (3) stacking spaces.
Automobile Oil Change and Similar
Establishments
Three (3) stacking spaces per bay.
Car Wash (Full Service) Six (6) stacking spaces per bay.
Car Wash (Self-Service) - Open Bay Two (2) stacking spaces per bay.
Car Wash (Self-Service) - Drying
Areas/Vacuum Islands
Two (2) stacking spaces per drying/vacuum area.
Dry Cleaning, Pharmacy, or Other Retail
Establishment with Drive-thru
Three (3) stacking space for first service window.
Financial Institution Five (5) stacking spaces per window or service lane.
Elementary, Middle, Day Schools and
Similar Child Training and Care
Establishment
One (1) stacking space per 20 students provided on a
through one-way drive.
Coffee Kiosk Three (3) stacking spaces per window or service lane.
Food Service Kiosk
Five (5) stacking spaces for first window or other
stopping point.
General Kiosk (without Food Service)
Two (2) stacking spaces for first window other stopping
point.
Restaurant with Drive-thru
Five (5) stacking spaces for first window other stopping
point.
Other uses not specifically listed above shall furnish stacking and queuing spaces as required
by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall use the above list as a guide for
determining requirements for such uses.
An alternate number of required stacking spaces can be approved by the Planning Commission
through a Track 2 Site Plan Review where the applicant demonstrates that the proposed plan
meets applicable standards of the Land Development Code for pedestrian circulation, safety,
and traffic operations.
(16) Parking of Recreational Vehicles on Private Property
(a) No person shall park or store a recreational vehicle, unless they meet 1-5 below or
subject to approval of a Temporary Use permit for a second dwelling on property
during construction or demolition, Section 7.04(3):
1. The recreational vehicle is maintained in structurally safe condition and not
permitted to become unsafe or objectionable by reason of dilapidation,
obsolescence or abandonment, or by reason of unsatisfactory or inadequate
maintenance; and either
2. The recreational vehicle is located within a garage or carport; or
3. The recreational vehicle is parked or stored on a surface in such a manner
that it does not obstruct the front or side views of the neighbors adjoining on
either side; or
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 125
4. The recreational vehicle is parked or stored in a manufactured dwelling park or
recreational vehicle park.
5. The use of the recreational vehicle has been approved as part of a temporary
use permit.
(b) No person shall use a recreational vehicle for emergency sleeping rooms for any period of
time exceeding seven days, except in a manufactured dwelling park which has been issued
a valid certificate of sanitation under the provisions of ORS Chapter 446.
(c) Citations may be issued to the property owner or the possessor or driver of such vehicle.
(17) Bicycle Parking. Shall apply to all developments that require a Site Plan Review or Site Plan
Amendment for new development, changes of use, and building expansions or remodels.
Bicycle parking spaces are intended to provide a safe, convenient and attractive place for the
circulation and parking of bicycles as well as encouraging the use of alternative modes of
transportation. Long term bicycle parking requirements are intended to accommodate
employees, students, residents, commuters and other persons who expect to leave their bicycles
parked for more than 2 hours. Short term bicycle parking spaces accommodate visitors,
customers, messengers, and other persons expected to depart within two (2) hours.
(a) Bicycle Parking Space Requirements.
1. Multi-Family Residences. Every residential use of four or more multifamily dwelling
units shall provide at least one sheltered long term bicycle parking space for each
unit. A Residential Facility with more than fifteen (15) persons shall provide one
sheltered long term bicycle parking space for every twenty (20) vehicle parking
spaces, or two (2) spaces, whichever is greater. Sheltered Long term bicycle
parking areas may be in a conveniently located garage or storage unit, or under an
eave, independent structure, or similar cover.
2. Non-Residential Parking. Required bicycle parking shall be provided by either
short or long term parking, or both as outlined in Table 5.20(a) above for all
commercial, mixed-use, and industrial zoned parcels. Short or long term parking
requirements are as follows:
a. All required long term bicycle parking spaces shall be provided in a well-lit
location within a convenient distance of a main entrance and shall be
sheltered from weather elements such as rain and wind either within a
building or bicycle locker, or under an eave, overhang, or similar structure.
The minimum required width of long term bicycle parking may be reduced
to 18” to accommodate parking in a more compact area.
b. All required short term bicycle parking shall consist of a securely fixed
structure that supports the bicycle frame in a stable position without
damage to wheels that may be locked to the rack by the bicyclist’s own
locking device. Bicycle parking shall not be farther than the closest
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 126
automobile parking space (except disabled parking).
c. Direct access from the bicycle parking area to the public right- of-way shall
be provided with access ramps when the elevations in access change
(e.g. elevation change between a sidewalk and driveway).
(b) Location & Design. All bike racks shall have the following design features:
1. Rounded or square style hoop racks or similar design as illustrated in figures
5.20(a) and 5.20(b) below.
Figure 5.20(a) Figure 5.20(b)
2. Bicycle racks shall provide each bicycle parking space with at least two points
of contact for a standard bicycle frame.
3. The bike rack shall have rounded surfaces and corners;
4. The bike rack shall be coated in a material that is weather resistant and will not
damage the bicycle’s painted surfaces.
5. Bicycle parking shall be provided at ground level.
6. A bicycle parking space required by this ordinance shall be at least six (6) feet
long, two (2) feet wide, and provide seven (7) feet of overhead clearance.
7. Bicycles may be tipped vertically for storage, but not hung above the ground.
8. Visibility and Security. Bicycle parking for customers and visitors of a use
shall be visible from street sidewalks or building entrances, so that it provides
sufficient security from theft and damage.
9. Lighting. For security, bicycle parking shall be at least as well-lit as vehicle
parking.
10. Hazards. Bicycle parking shall not impede or create a hazard to pedestrians.
Parking areas shall be located so as to not conflict with vision clearance
standards (Section 5.03).
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 127
11. Reserved Areas. Areas set aside for bicycle parking shall be clearly marked
and reserved for bicycle parking only.
12. Options for Storage. Long term bicycle parking requirements for can be met
by providing a bicycle storage room, bicycle lockers, racks, or other secure
storage space inside or outside of the building.
SECTION 5.21 RESERVED SECTION
SECTION 5.22 PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE ACCESS AND CIRCULATION
(1) Internal pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall be provided within new commercial, office, and
multi-family residential developments through the clustering of buildings, construction of hard
surface pedestrian walkways, multi-use paths for shared pedestrian and bicycle travel,
landscaping, or similar techniques.
(2) Pedestrian and bicycle access to transit facilities shall be provided from new commercial,
employment, and multi-family residential developments and new activity centers shall be
provided while existing developments shall provide safe and accessible pedestrian and bicycle
access to transit facilities when a site changes uses or is retrofitted.
(3) Internal pedestrian and bicycle systems shall connect with external existing or planned
systems. Pedestrian access from public sidewalks to the main entrances of public, semi-public,
commercial, and multi-family buildings shall not cross driveways or parking lots.
(4) All streets shall have sidewalks except rural local streets and rural lanes unless there is
compelling evidence that other pedestrian systems meet the needs of pedestrians.
(5) Compliance with the commercial design standards for and mixed-use, residential and
commercial development, respectively, in Chapters 5.13 and 5.29, is required.
(6) Safe, Direct, and Convenient. Walkways/paths within developments shall provide safe,
reasonably direct, and convenient connections between primary building entrances and all
adjacent streets and existing or planned transit stops, based on the following criteria:
(a) Reasonably direct. A route that does not deviate unnecessarily from a straight line or a
route that does not involve a significant amount of out-of-direction travel for likely users.
(b) Safe and convenient. Routes that are reasonably free from hazards and provide a
reasonably direct route of travel between destinations.
(c) "Primary entrance" for commercial, industrial, mixed use, public, and institutional
buildings is the main public entrance to the building. In the case where no public
entrance exists, street connections shall be provided to the main employee entrance.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 128
(d) "Primary entrance" for residential buildings is the front door (i.e., facing the street). For
multi-family buildings in which units do not have their own exterior entrance, the
“primary entrance” may be a lobby, courtyard, or breezeway that serves as a common
entrance for more than one dwelling.
SECTION 5.23 TRANSIT FACILITIES
Table 5.23(a) below shows the transit amenities that may be required. Determination of specific
requirements will be made on a case by case basis for each development by weighing the
following factors in consultation with the Lane Transit District:
• Expected transit ridership generated by development
• Level of existing or planned service adjacent to development
(Planned service is defined as service which will be established within five years after the
completion of the development.)
• Location of existing transit facilities
• Proximity to other transit ridership generators
Table 5.23(a) Transit Facility Requirements
Number of Average Peak
Hour Traffic Trips
Amenities Which May Be Required
Residential
Developments with less than 9
dwelling units per gross acre that
generate 25 to 49 trips
Concrete boarding pad for bus stop, lighting, bench
Developments with 9 or more
dwelling units per gross acre that
generate 25 to 49 trips
Shelter, concrete boarding pad, lighting
Developments that generate 50
to 99 trips
Shelter, concrete boarding pad, lighting
100 - 199 trips Shelter, concrete boarding pad, lighting, bus turnout
200 or more trips
Shelter, concrete boarding pad, lighting, bus turnout, on-site
circulation
Office Developments
50 to 199 trips Shelter, concrete boarding pad, lighting
200 or more trips Shelter, concrete boarding pad, lighting, bus turnout
Retail/Industrial/Institutional/Public
Facilities
100 to 249 trips Shelter, concrete boarding pad, lighting
250 to 499 trips Shelter, concrete boarding pad, lighting, bus turnout
500 or more trips
Transit transfer facility, park-and-ride lot, shelter, concrete
boarding pad, lighting, bus turnout, on-site circulation
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 129
Amenities for phased developments shall be required to be built at the time the development
will generate enough peak hour traffic trips to meet the requirements. Transit easements may be
required for bus stops and shelters.
SECTION 5.24 ACCESS MANAGEMENT
(1) Residential driveways shall be located to optimize intersection operation and where
possible, to access off the street with the lowest functional classification. For example,
if a house is located on the corner of a local street and a minor collector, the driveway shall
access from the local street as long as it can be located a sufficient distance from the
intersection.
(2) Properties that only front on collector or arterial streets are encouraged to share an access
with neighboring properties. The decision making body may require a combined
access for two or more developments, and shared driveways between developments,
including land divisions, where access spacing standards cannot otherwise be met.
(3) Access to state highways is regulated by the Oregon Department of Transportation
(ODOT) as described in the Oregon Highway Plan.
(4) New access points shall meet or exceed the minimum spacing requirements listed in the
adopted Transportation System Plan (TSP). However, where no reasonable
alternatives exist or where strict application of the standards would create a safety hazard,
the City may allow a variance per article 10 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 5.25 DEVELOPMENT ON SLOPES OF OR OVER FIFTEEN PERCENT
In addition to other review processes and standards required in other sections of this
ordinance, the following process and standards shall apply to all land developments and land
divisions on land where the slope meets or exceeds fifteen percent:
(1) A site shall be deemed to meet the 15% slope criteria if the average slope across the site in any
direction meets or exceeds a 15 foot rise in every 100 feet. Isolated areas on the site may exceed
the 15% limit and not require the additional review process itemized below providing the entire
site is below the 15% threshold.
(2) All land developments and land divisions shall be subject to review by the City Building and
Planning Official and the City Engineer. The applicant shall submit a geo-technical report
prepared and stamped by a professional engineer with specialty background in geotechnical
engineering or a professional geologist with specialty certification in engineering geology who
is registered through the State Board of Examiners for Engineering or the State Board of
Geologist Examiners. The report shall contain and analyze on-site and adjacent off-site data on
buildable and non- buildable areas and a statement of the expected impacts resulting from the
proposed development. The required report shall demonstrate that the proposed developments are
within the carrying capacity of the land based on the following on-site and adjacent off-site
features and characteristics of the proposed development:
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 130
(a) Base Geology
(b) Slopes (steepness, orientation and aspect)
(c) Soils
(d) Stream and Drainage Patterns
(e) Housing Density Impact
(3) All proposed developments, except those within the Rural Residential (RR) zone, shall be
served by city water and wastewater service (sanitary sewer).
(4) The requirements of this section shall apply and be considered during any site review process
required by the Land Development or Land Divisions Ordinances. As part of the site review
process, vegetation and animal patterns, including endangered and threatened plant and animal
species known to be in the area, shall be considered.
(5) The minimum lot size is 8,000 square feet. Larger lot sizes may be required to address
technical concerns raised in the geo-technical report.
SECTION 5.26 PARKLAND DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS
(1) INTENT
The availability of parkland and open space is a critical element in maintaining and improving the
quality of life in Veneta. Land that features trees, grass and vegetation provides not only an
aesthetically pleasing landscape but also buffers incompatible uses, and preserves sensitive
environmental features and important resources. Parks and open space, together with support
facilities, also help to meet the active and passive recreational needs of the population of Veneta.
This chapter implements Goals and Policies of Chapter III(H) of the Comprehensive Plan and the
Parks Master Plan by outlining requirements for dedication of parks and open space in the City of
Veneta.
(2) MINIMUM PARKLAND DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS
Parkland Dedication. New residential subdivisions, planned developments (including plans
implementing the Specific Development Plan (SDP) subzone), multi-family or manufactured
home park developments shall be required to provide parkland to serve existing and future
residents of those developments. Multi-family developments which provide some "congregate"
services and/or facilities, such as group transportation, dining halls, emergency monitoring
systems, etc., but which have individual dwelling units rather than sleeping quarters only, are
considered to be multi-family developments for the purpose of parkland dedication. Licensed adult
congregate living facilities, nursing homes, and all other similar facilities which provide their
clients with individual beds and sleeping quarters, but in which all other care and services are
communal and provided by facility employees, are specifically exempt from parkland dedication
requirements.
(a) The required parkland shall be dedicated as a condition of approval for the following:
1. Tentative plat for a subdivision or partition;
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 131
2. Planned developments including those in the Planned Development (PD) and
Specific Development Plan (SDP) subzones. For Specific Development Plans
that have dedicated park space equal to or in excess of that required by this
ordinance, no additional dedication is required at the time of subdivision.
3. Site Plan Review for a multi-family development or manufactured home park;
and
4. Replat or amendment of any site plan for multi-family development or manufactured
home park where dedication has not previously been made or where the density
of the development involved will be increased.
(b) Calculation of Required Dedication. The required parkland acreage to be dedicated is
based on a calculation of the following formula rounded to the nearest 1/100 (0.01) of an
acre:
Required parkland dedication (acres) = (proposed units) x (persons/unit) x 0.0084 (per
person park land dedication factor)
1. Population Formula: The following table shall be used to determine the number
of persons per unit to be used in calculating required parkland dedication:
Type of Unit
Total Persons
Per Unit
Single family residential 3
Standard multi-family unit 2
Manufactured dwelling
park
2
Congregate multi-family
unit
1.5
2. Persons per unit, age distribution, and local conditions change with time. The
specific formula for the dedication of land will, therefore, be subject to periodic
review and amendment.
3. Per Person Parkland Dedication Factor: The total parkland dedication requirement
shall be 0.0084 of an acre per person based on the adopted standard of acres
of land per one thousand of ultimate population according to the Veneta Parks,
Recreation, and Open- Space Master Plan. This standard represents the
citywide land-to- population ratio for city parks, and may be adjusted
periodically through amendments to the Parks Master Plan.
(3) MINIMUM PARK LAND STANDARDS
Land required or proposed for parkland dedication shall be contained within a continuous unit
and must be suitable for active use as a neighborhood or mini-park. Exceptions to any or all of the
following standards may be allowed if the Planning Commission determines that the proposed
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 132
dedication fulfills the purpose of this section. The location of any dedicated parkland shall be
approved by the planning commission.
(a) Homes must front on the parkland as shown in the example below:
(b) The required dedication shall be contained as a contiguous unit and not separated
into pieces or divided by roadways.
(c) The parkland must be able to accommodate play structures, play fields, picnic areas,
or other active park use facilities. The average slope of the active use parkland shall
not exceed 15%.
(d) Wetlands, and lands overlain by the Greenway Open-Space subzone may be included
in dedicated tracts, but do not count towards the total lands required for dedication by
this section.
(e) Any retaining wall constructed at the perimeter of the park adjacent to a public rightof-
way or alley shall not exceed 4 feet in height.
(f) Once dedicated, the City will assume maintenance responsibility for the neighborhood
or mini parkland.
(4) DEDICATION PROCEDURES
Lands required for dedication by this section shall be dedicated at the time of Final Plat.
Dedication of land in conjunction with multi-family development shall be required prior to
issuance of permits and commencement of construction.
(a) Prior to acceptance of required parkland dedications, the applicant/developer shall
complete the following items for all proposed dedication areas:
1. The developer shall clear, fill, and/or grade all land to the satisfaction of the City,
install sidewalks on the park land adjacent to any street, and seed the park land;
and
(b) Additional Requirements
1. In addition to a formal dedication on the plat to be recorded, the sub- divider shall
convey the required lands to the city by general warranty deed. The developer of a
multi-family development or manufactured home park shall deed the lands required
to be dedicated by a general warranty deed. In any of the above situations, the land
so dedicated and deeded shall not be subject to any reservations of record,
PARK
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 133
encumbrances of any kind or easements which, in the opinion of the Planning
Official, will interfere with the use of the land for park, open space or recreational
purposes.
2. The sub-divider or developer shall be required to present to the City a title insurance
policy on the subject property ensuring the marketable state of the title.
3. Where any reservations, encumbrances or easements exist, the City may require
payment in lieu of the dedication of lands unless it chooses to accept the land
subject to encumbrances.
4. Phased Developments. In a phased development, the required park land for
the entire development shall be dedicated prior to approval of the final plat for the
first phase. Improvements to the land as required by Veneta Land Division
Ordinance Article 6 shall be made prior to approval of the final plat for the phase
that includes the park land.
(5) CASH IN LIEU OF DEDICATION
At the city’s discretion only, the city may accept payment of a fee in lieu of land dedication.
The city may require payment in lieu of land when the park land to be dedicated does not meet
the standards stated above, or when a fee is determined to be in the best interest of the City as
determined by the Planning Commission. A payment in lieu of land dedication is separate from
Park Systems Development Charges (SDC), and is eligible for a credit only for that portion
of the SDC attributable to land acquisition. The amount of the fee in lieu of land dedication (in
dollars per acre) shall be set by City Council Resolution, and it shall be based on the average
market value of undeveloped city lots of between 1 and 10 acres in size. The required fee-inlieu-
of shall be calculated by multiplying the acres required for dedication by the dollar/acre
amount set by resolution.
(a) The following factors shall be used in the choice of whether to accept land or cash in lieu:
1. The topography, geology, access, parcel size, and location of land in the
development available for dedication;
2. Potential adverse/beneficial effects on environmentally sensitive areas;
3. Compatibility with the Parks Master Plan, Public Facilities element of the
Comprehensive Plan, and the City of Veneta Capital Improvements Program in
effect at the time of dedication;
4. The City’s current park and open-space needs
5. The feasibility of dedication.
(b) Cash in lieu of parkland dedication shall be paid prior to approval of the final plat unless
the developer provides a binding financial instrument acceptable to the City.
SECTION 5.27 TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS AND MITIGATION
(1) A Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) and review is required when one of the following conditions
exists:
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 134
(a) The development will generate more than 100 vehicle trips during the a.m. or
p.m. peak hour as determined by using the most recent edition of the Institute of
Transportation Engineer’s Trip Generation Manual. In developments involving a land
division, the peak hour trips shall be calculated based on the likely development that will
occur on all lots resulting from the land division.
(b) The proposal is immediately adjacent to an intersection that is functioning at a level of
service below LOS D, the City’s minimum acceptable operating condition during the
weekday peak hour.
(c) The Traffic Impact Analysis is required by the State or County due to increased
traffic on a State or County road within the City’s Urban Growth Boundary.
(d) The proposed use is expected to generate or receive traffic by vehicles exceeding 26,000
pounds gross vehicle weight as part of daily operations. “Daily operations” includes, but
is not limited to, delivery to or from the site of materials or products processed, sold, or
distributed by the business occupying the site. Trips associated with routine services
provided to the site by others, such as mail delivery, garbage pickup, or bus service, are
exempt from this provision.
(e) An access driveway that does not meet minimum intersection sight distance
requirements, or is located where vehicles entering or leaving the property are restricted,
or such vehicles queue or hesitate, creating a safety hazard.
(f) An access driveway that does not meet the access spacing standard of the roadway on
which the driveway is located.
(g) A change in internal traffic patterns that may cause safety problems, such as back-up
onto public streets or traffic conflicts in the approach area.
(2) Review Procedure. Any application for a planned development, subdivision, site plan, or specific
development plan which shows that increased traffic meeting one of the applicability conditions
a) through g) above shall be accompanied by a Traffic Impact Analysis. Traffic Impact Analysis
shall be reviewed by the City Engineer, or a professional engineer chosen by the City, prior to
approval of the site plan review, subdivision, PD, or SDP. This review is part of the “Technical
Review” costs incurred by the developer.
(3) Mitigation Required. Traffic impacts to facilities as identified in the TIA and supported by the City’s
Traffic Engineer shall be mitigated by the developer as part of the improvements for the Site Plan,
Subdivision, Planned Development (PD), or Specific Development Plan (SDP). Mitigation
measures shall be recommended where study intersections fail to meet minimum level of service
standards provided in the Veneta Transportation System Plan. Mitigation measures may be a
condition of approval.
SECTION 5.28 STREET TREES
When street trees are proposed, their selection and installation shall be according to the following
requirements. Planting of street trees shall generally follow construction of curbs and sidewalks,
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 135
however, the City may defer tree planting until final inspection of completed dwellings to avoid damage
to trees during construction.
(1) Species selection. Trees shall be selected from the City’s adopted tree list and shall be appropriate
for the planning location based on the criteria found therein.
(2) Caliper Size. All street trees shall be a minimum of 2 inch caliper at time of planting.
(3) Spacing and Location. Street trees shall be planted within the street right-of-way within existing
and proposed planting strips or in sidewalk tree wells on streets without planting strips, except
when utility easements occupy these areas. Street tree spacing shall be determined by the type
of tree(s) selected and the canopy size at maturity and, at a minimum, the planting area shall
contain 16 square feet, or typically, 4 feet by 4 feet. In general, trees shall be spaced at 30-40
foot intervals, except where planting a tree would conflict with existing trees, retaining walls,
utilities and similar physical barriers. All street trees shall be placed outside utility easements
and clear vision areas.
(4) Growth Characteristics. Trees shall be selected based on climate zone, growth characteristics
and site conditions, including available space, overhead clearance, soil conditions, exposure,
and desired color and appearance. The following should guide tree selection by developers and
approval by the City:
(a) Provide a broad canopy where shade is desired, except where limited by available
space.
(b) Use low-growing trees for spaces under low utility wires.
(c) Select trees which can be “limbed-up” to comply with vision clearance requirements.
(d) Use species with similar growth characteristics on the same block for design continuity.
(e) Use deciduous trees for summer shade and winter sun, unless unsuited to the location
due to soil, wind, sun exposure, annual precipitation, or exhaust.
(5) Replacement. Replacement of street trees shall the responsibility of the developer for a period
of 2 years from the time of planting, and shall be guaranteed through a warranty bond prior to
final plat.
(6) Maintenance. Maintenance of street trees shall be the responsibility of the adjacent property
owner.
(a) Standards. All trees located within the public right-of-way must be pruned to National
Arborist Association Pruning Standards for Shade Trees.
(b) Adjacent Property Owners to Maintain Trees. Every adjacent property owner of any tree
overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city, including trees within the right-ofway,
shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the view of any
street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of thirteen feet, six inches
(l3'6") over the street, and/or eight (8) feet above the sidewalk. Said owners shall
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 136
remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees; or broken or decayed limbs which
constitute a menace to public safety.
(c) Adjacent Property Owners Liable. The owner of property abutting trees on a right-of-way
shall be liable for injury, damage, or loss to persons or property caused by the property
owner's negligent failure to comply with subsection
(b) of this section.
(d) Notification. The City may serve notice on the adjoining property owner to prune,
remove, or otherwise treat any tree on a right-or-way as conditions may require. Any
such notice shall be governed the standards below. Neither the duty of the adjoining
property owner to maintain trees located on a right- of-way, nor the liability for the property
owner's failure to do so, is dependent upon any notice from the city.
1. Notice to Prune or Remove. Should any property owner fail to maintain
adjacent trees as per Section 7 of this ordinance, the City shall order such person
or persons, within ten days of mailing of such notice, to so prune or remove such
trees.
2. Notice Required. The notice required herein shall be served by mailing a copy
of the order to the last known address of the property owner, by certified mail.
3. Failure to Comply. When a person to whom a notice is directed shall fail to comply
within this specified time, it shall be lawful for the city to cause the trees in question
to be pruned and/or removed; and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to
the property owner as provided by law in the case of public nuisance abatements.
(e) Debris Removal. The person working on trees on a street, highway, or public area shall be
required to remove all debris from the right-of-way by sunset of the same day, unless
specifically authorized to do otherwise by the Community Development Director, or
designee. The acceptable standard shall be a broom clean finish or better.
(f) City Tree Maintenance. The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove
trees located within the public right-of-way as may be necessary to preserve or enhance
the symmetry and beauty of such areas. The city may remove, or cause or order to be
removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of
its nature is injurious to sewers, electrical power lines, natural gas lines, water lines, or
other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect, or other pest.
This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property
owners, providing that the selection and location of said tree is in accordance with this
ordinance.
(g) City Held Harmless. The city of Veneta shall not be liable for injury, damage, or loss to
person or property caused in whole or part by the defective or dangerous condition of
any tree located in or upon a right-of-way. The property owner shall defend and hold
harmless the city from all claims for loss and damage arising from the owner's negligent
failure to comply with Section 7 of this ordinance.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 137
SECTION 5.29 RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
(1) Purpose and Applicability. The following standards are minimum requirements for new
residential developments (any zone). The standards apply to single-family dwellings,
manufactured homes on individual lots, duplex dwellings, and multi-family projects, except mixeduse
buildings with dwellings in upper stories are subject to the provisions of Section 5.13. The
standards are intended to protect and enhance the appearance, safety, and livability of Veneta
through appropriate building and site design regulations. The standards may be adjusted by the
Planning Commission through the Track 2 Site Plan Review process (see Section 6.05(2)(b))
(2) Standards. Section 5.29 provides minimum standards for residential development site and
building design in all zones where residential development is permitted. The standards are
administered through building plan review (no land use permit required) where Site Plan Review
is not required and through Site Plan Review (Building and Planning Official, or Planning
Commission for Track 2 reviews) where such review is required in accordance with Article 6. The
following graphics serve as examples of compliant development. The graphics are conceptual
and do not prescribe a particular style.
(3) Building Orientation Standards. The following standards are intended to support residential
development designs where walking and crime prevention is encouraged through natural
surveillance (“eyes-on-the-street”).
(a) Primary building entrances (i.e., dwelling entrance, a lobby entrance, or
breezeway/courtyard entrance serving a cluster of units) shall be oriented to abutting
streets; this provision is met where entrances are visible from the street right-of-way. The
standard does not apply where primary entrances for a multiple-unit building are oriented
to an interior courtyard or common areas, or where buildings abut Highway 126 or a
non-residential zone. See Figure 5.29(a).
(b) Off-street parking, driveways, and other vehicle areas.
1. Parking for multi-family (except duplexes) developments shall not be placed
between buildings and the street(s) to which building entrances are oriented,
except vehicle drop-off and loading areas may be permitted through Site Plan
Review, provided the vehicle circulation area is minimized and the building’s
primary entrance is connected to an improved street sidewalk by a pedestrian
walkway and the driveway/parking area is crossed by a raised concrete
walkway of not less than six (6) feet in width. See Figure 5.29(a).
2. Parking for attached single family dwellings (townhomes) must meet the following
criteria, as generally shown in Figure 5.29(b):
a. Except for allowed front driveway parking for single family and duplex
dwellings, off-street parking areas shall be oriented to alleys, or rear or side
yards, and not front or street-facing yards. Where parking in a front or
street-facing yard is unavoidable, curb openings shall be minimized. This
standard is intended to protect the pedestrian environment and maximize
the potential for on-street parking. It is met when two street-facing garages
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 138
share one driveway access that does not exceed sixteen (16) feet in width
where it opens onto the street; such driveways may be wider (e.g., flare out)
behind the sidewalk, between the sidewalk and garage opening(s). Where
shared driveways are not feasible, the decision making body may require a
landscape strip or island be provided between adjacent driveways to break
up large areas of paving and capture and slow the rate of storm water
runoff; alternatively, the decision making body may approve driveways with
landscape strips between paved treads to capture and slow the rate of
storm water runoff.
b. Primary dwelling entrances shall be connected to adjacent streets by
walkways; walkways serving individual townhome dwellings may be
combined with driveways serving the same dwellings.
c. The maximum number consecutively attached townhome units with garages
facing the same street is four (4) (two driveways). Buildings on corner lots
may contain more than four (4) dwelling units with garages facing streets
provided that not more than four (4) townhome units face the same street.
d. Where a garage opening faces a street it must be setback at least twenty
(20) feet from the street or otherwise oriented away from the street (e.g.,
side-loaded garage entry); where a building is placed less than twenty (20)
feet from the street, the 20-foot garage setback may be accomplished by
recessing the garage behind the front building elevation or turning the garage
so that it is side-loaded. Side loaded garages within 50 feet of the front lot
line shall have a minimum of 24 square feet of window area on the street
facing side. These standards apply to both public street and private street
or shared driveway frontages.
3. Where a lot contains multiple buildings or townhome units and there is insufficient
street frontage to which all entrances can be oriented, primary building entrances
may be oriented to common green, open space, plaza, or interior courtyard that
is connected to the street sidewalk by a five (5) foot minimum width walkway.
See Figures 5.29(a) and (c).
Figure 5.29(a) – Building Orientation Example
Acceptable
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 139
Figure 5.29(b) – Townhome Building Orientation
Not Acceptable
(4) Building Design. The following standards are intended to promote neighborhood
livability and compatibility between new and existing developments through
architectural detailing, pedestrian-scale design, and street visibility.
(a) Building Length. The continuous horizontal distance, as measured from end- wall
to end-wall, of individual buildings shall not exceed 120 feet.
(b) Articulation. All primary buildings shall incorporate architectural elements that
break up large expanses of uninterrupted building surfaces or blank walls.
This standard is met by providing at least two (2) or more of the following
elements on all building elevations, and on each building, as generally
shown in Figure 5.29(d), and subject to the following criteria:
Figure 5.29(c) – Building Orientation Options
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 140
1. Recess (e.g., entrance, porch, balcony or similar feature) with a
minimum depth of 6 feet.
2. Extension (e.g., living area, porch, patio, entrance, overhang, or
similar feature) that projects a minimum of 2 feet from the building plane
and runs horizontally for a minimum length of 4 feet.
3. Offsets or breaks in roof elevation: (gable, dormer, secondary roof,
covered entrance, or similar feature) 2 feet or greater elevation
change.
Figure 5.29(d) – Building Length and Articulation (Multi-family Housing Example)
(c) Eyes on the Street. All dwellings (including duplexes) shall provide entrances facing a
street or an approved flag lot drive. Multi-family buildings and attached single-family units
shall also provide windows, porches, entrances and/or balconies covering minimum of
forty (40) percent of the front (i.e., street-facing) elevation, including elevations facing a
flag lot drive, and covering a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the side and rear building
elevations. “Percent of elevation” is measured as a percentage of surface area
containing the above features. The standard applies to each full and partial building
story.
(d) Detailed Design. All dwellings shall provide the following detailing on all street-facing
elevations (i.e., where the axis of the structure oriented within 45 degrees from street lot
line). This standard is met by using at least six (6) of the architectural features in items
“a” through “n,” below, consistent with the overall composition and design integrity of
building. The applicant may select the elements, except that the decision making body
may specify elements or detailing when a project is subject to a Track 2 Site Plan Review,
Planned Unit Development review, or Conditional Use Permit review; in such cases, the
decision making body may require specific design elements or changes, consistent with
the purposes of Section 5.29. See Figure 5.29(e).
1. Dormers (actual living space and not an applied element)
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 141
2. Gables (actual living space and not an applied element)
3. Recessed entries (recess by 4 feet or more)
4. Covered porch entries or portico (covered to at least a 4 feet depth)
5. Cupolas or towers
6. Pillars or posts (not less than 4”x4” post)
7. Eaves (minimum 6-inch projection)
8. Off-sets in building face or roof (minimum 16 inches)
9. Window trim (minimum 3 inches wide)
10. Bay window(s)
11. Balcony(ies)
12. Change in siding materials / decorative patterns: shingles, lap, tongue- in-groove, Vgroove,
paneling, board and batten, log construction, stone, brick, or split-face
concrete block. Where different types of material are used (e.g., wood and
stone), heavier materials shall be used on the base of the building
13. Decorative cornice, parapet, or pediment (e.g., for flat roofs)
14. An alternative feature providing visual contrast and aesthetic interest, similar to
options 1-14, as approved through Track 2 Site Plan Review.
Figure 5.29(e) – Examples of Architectural Elements (illustrative only)
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 142
(5) Multifamily Housing – Open Space. Multi-family (except duplexes) housing
developments shall provide open space to serve the active and passive recreational
needs of occupants, to reduce crowding of occupants, to reduce the apparent scale
and density of development and to provide visual relief in higher density projects.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 143
The standards may be adjusted by the Planning Commission through a public
hearing (Track 2 Site Plan Review) where innovative techniques such as rooftop
gardens, historic preservation, natural features protection, or other low-impact or
green building practices are used to meet the above intent. Figure 5.29(f) provides a
conceptual illustration of the following standards.
(a) Common open space. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the site area shall
be designated and permanently reserved as common open space, in
accordance with all of the following criteria:
1. The site area is defined as the lot or parcel on which the development
to be located, after subtracting any required dedication of street rightof-
way and other land for public purposes (e.g., public park or school
grounds, etc.);
2. One or more of the following shall be provided in meeting the
common open space requirement: outdoor recreation area for all
residents of the development, including play fields, outdoor
playgrounds, outdoor sports courts, swim pools, walking fitness
courses, pedestrian amenities, or similar open space amenities, or
protection of sensitive lands (e.g., trees, wetlands, riparian areas
preserved).
3. Historic buildings or landmarks that are open to the public may count
toward meeting the open space requirements when approved by the
Planning Commission;
4. Where common open space is designated for active recreational use
(e.g., playfields, sports courts, etc.) it must be suitable for the
intended use in terms of slope, accessibility, area, and dimensions;
5. Designated open space areas shall have a minimum width that is not
less than twenty (20) feet and a minimum length that is not less than
twenty (20) feet;
6. Where a public space with pedestrian amenities is provided between
primary building entrance(s) and adjoining street(s) (e.g., plaza,
extended sidewalk area with seating, or similar area), the requirement
to provide common open space as described above may be reduced
proportionately but in total shall not be less than five percent (5%) of
the site;
7. The Building and Planning Official or Planning Commission waive the
common open space requirement for a multiple family project of not
more than twenty (20) dwelling units that is located within 1,200 feet
(measured walking distance) of a public park, where there is a direct,
accessible (i.e., Americans With Disabilities Act-compliant), lighted
pedestrian walkway or multi-use pathway connecting the site to the
park. If the park is not developed, or only partially developed, the
multiple family housing developer may improve parkland in an amount
comparable to the common open space area that is waived or
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 144
reduced (i.e., the area that would otherwise be required of the
development) in meeting this provision.
(b) Private open space. Private open space shall be provided for housing units
based on all of the following criteria:
1. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all ground-floor housing units
shall have private patios or decks containing at least forty-eight (48)
square feet of usable surface. Ground-floor housing means the
housing unit entrance (front or rear) is within five (5) feet of the
finished ground elevation (i.e., after grading and landscaping);
2. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all upper-floor housing units shall
have private patios or decks containing at least forty-eight (48) square
feet of usable surface. Upper-floor housing means housing units that
are more than five (5) feet above the finished grade.
3. Where it is not practical to provide private open space as provided in
subsections (1) and (2), above, due to the existence of natural
features or other physical site constraints, the private open space
standard may be adjusted through Track 2 Site Plan Review, provided
the development shall contain additional common open space to
offset the reduction in private open space. At least forty-eight (48)
square feet of additional common open space shall be provided for
each housing unit lacking private open space. Open space required
to offset the reduction of private open spaces shall not be counted
towards the park dedication requirements in Section 5.26.
Figure 5.29(f) – Examples of Multiple Family Open Space
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 145
SECTION 5.30 BACKYARD CHICKENS
(1) The keeping of chickens on lots less than one (1) acre in size within the Single
Family Residential, General Residential, and Residential – Commercial Zoning
Districts is subject to all of the following conditions:
(a) No person shall keep chickens until a backyard chicken permit application
has been approved by City Building and Planning Official. See Section
5.30(5) below.
(b) One (1) chicken is allowed for each one thousand five hundred (1,500)
square feet of lot area, up to a maximum of ten (10) chickens.
(c) No chickens are allowed on properties occupied by multi-family housing,
including duplexes.
(d) Roosters are not allowed.
(2) Chickens kept under this section shall be secured at all times:
(a) During non-daylight hours, chickens must be confined within a secure
chicken coop sufficient to protect chickens from predators;
(b) During daylight hours, chickens shall be confined within a chicken coop or
run meeting the requirements of Subsection 5.30(3), below, or within a
securely fenced backyard.
(3) Chicken coops and runs:
(a) Shall be built in compliance with all applicable building and zoning codes;
(b) Shall not be located in a required front yard;
(c) Shall be set back at least 20 feet from dwellings on abutting property;
(d) Shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from abutting property;
(e) Shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height;
(f) Square footage combined shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in
area, or ten (10) square feet per animal, whichever is greater.
(4) To protect public health, the areas in which chickens are kept must be maintained in
compliance with the following requirements:
(a) All animal or poultry food shall be stored in metal or other rodent proof
receptacles;
(b) Chicken manure must be collected, stored, composted and/or removed from
the property on a regular basis so as not to create a public health hazard or
nuisance. All manure not used for composting or fertilizing shall be removed
from the property;
(c) Noise resulting from the keeping or maintaining of chickens must not exceed
the limitations set forth in Veneta Municipal Code, Chapter 9.20.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 146
(5) Backyard Chicken Permit.
(a) An application for a permit to keep chickens is required in the following
instances:
1. To keep chickens on a lot less than one acre in size, in the Single
Family Residential, General Residential, and Residential–
Commercial Zoning Districts.
(b) Information required for a permit to keep chickens shall include the following
information:
1. The name and mailing address of the person to whom the permit will
be issued;
2. The physical address where the chickens will be kept, if different from
above;
3. A sketch plan and affidavit that the chicken facility will meet the
standards in this section.
4. When the applicant is not the owner of the property where chickens
will be located, the applicant will obtain signed consent from the
property owner for the keeping of chickens on the property.
(c) A permit fee may be established by Council resolution and, if so established,
shall accompany a permit application.
(d) The granting of a permit under this chapter shall be treated as an
Administrative decision, and shall be administered by the Building and
Planning Official. Applications will be processed in the following manner:
1. The application will be reviewed for completeness and will not be
acted upon until all required information is received.
2. Within 10 days the application will be reviewed and a decision
rendered.
3. Written notice of the decision will be mailed to the applicant.
4. A decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission. The appeal
must be filed within 5 days of date of notice and be accompanied by a
fee to be established by Council resolution.
(e) A backyard chicken permit will be revoked in the event the permit holder
violates any provision of this Section or condition imposed within a permit
issued.
(6) Purpose and Applicability. The following standards are minimum requirements for
new residential developments (any zone). The standards apply to single-family
dwellings, manufactured homes on individual lots, duplex dwellings, and multi-family
projects, except mixed-use buildings with dwellings in upper stories are subject to
the provisions of Section 5.13. The standards are intended to protect and enhance
the appearance, safety, and livability of Veneta through appropriate building and site
design regulations. The standards may be adjusted by the Planning Commission
through the Track 2 Site Plan Review process (see Section 6.05(2)(b))
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 147
(7) Standards. Section 5.29 provides minimum standards for residential development
site and building design in all zones where residential development is permitted.
The standards are administered through building plan review (no land use permit
required) where Site Plan Review is not required and through Site Plan Review
(Building and Planning Official, or Planning Commission for Track 2 reviews) where
such review is required in accordance with Article 6. The following graphics serve as
examples of compliant development. The graphics are conceptual and do not
prescribe a particular style.
(8) Building Orientation Standards. The following standards are intended to support
residential development designs where walking and crime prevention is encouraged
through natural surveillance (“eyes-on-the-street”).
(a) Primary building entrances (i.e., dwelling entrance, a lobby entrance, or
breezeway/courtyard entrance serving a cluster of units) shall be oriented to
abutting streets; this provision is met where entrances are visible from the
street right-of-way. The standard does not apply where primary entrances for
a multiple-unit building are oriented to an interior courtyard or common
areas, or where buildings abut Highway 126 or a non-residential zone. See
Figure 5.29(a).
(b) Off-street parking, driveways, and other vehicle areas.
1. Parking for multi-family (except duplexes) developments shall not be
placed between buildings and the street(s) to which building
entrances are oriented, except vehicle drop-off and loading areas
may be permitted through Site Plan Review, provided the vehicle
circulation area is minimized and the building’s primary entrance
is connected to an improved street sidewalk by a pedestrian
walkway and the driveway/parking area is crossed by a raised
concrete walkway of not less than six (6) feet in width. See Figure
5.29(a).
2. Parking for attached single family dwellings (townhomes) must meet
the following criteria, as generally shown in Figure 5.29(b):
a. Except for allowed front driveway parking for single family,
duplex dwellings, off-street parking areas shall be oriented to
alleys, or rear or side yards, and not front or street-facing
yards. Where parking in a front or street-facing yard is
unavoidable, curb openings shall be minimized. This standard
is intended to protect the pedestrian environment and
maximize the potential for on-street parking. It is met when two
street-facing garages share one driveway access that does not
exceed sixteen (16) feet in width where it opens onto the
street; such driveways may be wider (e.g., flare out) behind the
sidewalk, between the sidewalk and garage opening(s). Where
shared driveways are not feasible, the decision making body
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 148
may require a landscape strip or island be provided between
adjacent driveways to break up large areas of paving and
capture and slow the rate of storm water runoff; alternatively,
the decision making body may approve driveways with
landscape strips between paved treads to capture and slow
the rate of storm water runoff.
b. Primary dwelling entrances shall be connected to adjacent
streets by walkways; walkways serving individual townhome
dwellings may be combined with driveways serving the same
dwellings.
c. The maximum number consecutively attached townhome units
with garages facing the same street is four (4) (two driveways).
Buildings on corner lots may contain more than four (4)
dwelling units with garages facing streets provided that not
more than four (4) townhome units face the same street.
d. Where a garage opening faces a street it must be setback at
least twenty (20) feet from the street or otherwise oriented
away from the street (e.g., side-loaded garage entry); where a
building is placed less than twenty (20) feet from the street, the
20-foot garage setback may be accomplished by recessing the
garage behind the front building elevation or turning the garage
so that it is side-loaded. Side loaded garages within 50 feet of
the front lot line shall have a minimum of 24 square feet of
window area on the street facing side. These standards apply
to both public street and private street or shared driveway
frontages.
3. Where a lot contains multiple buildings or townhome units and there
is insufficient street frontage to which all entrances can be oriented,
primary building entrances may be oriented to common green, open
space, plaza, or interior courtyard that is connected to the street
sidewalk by a five (5) foot minimum width walkway. See Figures
5.29(a) and (c).
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 149
Figure 5.29(a) – Building Orientation Example
Acceptable
Figure 5.29(b) – Townhome Building Orientation
Not Acceptable
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 150
(9) Building Design. The following standards are intended to promote neighborhood
livability and compatibility between new and existing developments through
architectural detailing, pedestrian-scale design, and street visibility.
(a) Building Length. The continuous horizontal distance, as measured from endwall
to end-wall, of individual buildings shall not exceed 120 feet.
(b) Articulation. All primary buildings shall incorporate architectural elements
that break up large expanses of uninterrupted building surfaces or blank
walls. This standard is met by providing at least two (2) or more of the
following elements on all building elevations, and on each building, as
generally shown in Figure 5.29(d), and subject to the following criteria:
1. Recess (e.g., entrance, porch, balcony or similar feature) with a
minimum depth of 6 feet.
2. Extension (e.g., living area, porch, patio, entrance, overhang, or
similar feature) that projects a minimum of 2 feet from the building
plane and runs horizontally for a minimum length of 4 feet.
3. Offsets or breaks in roof elevation: (gable, dormer, secondary roof,
covered entrance, or similar feature) 2 feet or greater elevation
change.
Figure 5.29(c) – Building Orientation Options
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 151
Figure 5.29(d) – Building Length and Articulation (Multi-family Housing Example)
(c) Eyes on the Street. All dwellings (including duplexes) shall provide
entrances facing a street or an approved flag lot drive. Multi-family buildings
and attached single-family units shall also provide windows, porches,
entrances and/or balconies covering minimum of forty (40) percent of the
front (i.e., street-facing) elevation, including elevations facing a flag lot drive,
and covering a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the side and rear building
elevations. “Percent of elevation” is measured as a percentage of surface
area containing the above features. The standard applies to each full and
partial building story.
(d) Detailed Design. All dwellings shall provide the following detailing on all
street-facing elevations (i.e., where the axis of the structure oriented within
45 degrees from street lot line). This standard is met by using at least six (6)
of the architectural features in items “a” through “n,” below, consistent with
the overall composition and design integrity of building. The applicant may
select the elements, except that the decision making body may specify
elements or detailing when a project is subject to a Track 2 Site Plan Review,
Planned Unit Development review, or Conditional Use Permit review; in such
cases, the decision making body may require specific design elements or
changes, consistent with the purposes of Section 5.29. See Figure 5.29(e).
1. Dormers (actual living space and not an applied element)
2. Gables (actual living space and not an applied element)
3. Recessed entries (recess by 4 feet or more)
4. Covered porch entries or portico (covered to at least a 4 feet depth)
5. Cupolas or towers
6. Pillars or posts (not less than 4”x4” post)
7. Eaves (minimum 6-inch projection)
8. Off-sets in building face or roof (minimum 16 inches)
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 152
9. Window trim (minimum 3 inches wide)
10. Bay window(s)
11. Balcony(ies)
12. Change in siding materials / decorative patterns: shingles, lap, tonguein-
groove, V-groove, paneling, board and batten, log construction,
stone, brick, or split-face concrete block. Where different types of
material are used (e.g., wood and stone), heavier materials shall be
used on the base of the building
13. Decorative cornice, parapet, or pediment (e.g., for flat roofs)
14. An alternative feature providing visual contrast and aesthetic interest,
similar to options 1-14, as approved through Track 2 Site Plan Review.
Figure 5.29(e) – Examples of Architectural Elements (illustrative only)
(10) Multifamily Housing – Open Space. Multi-family (except duplexes) housing
developments shall provide open space to serve the active and passive recreational
needs of occupants, to reduce crowding of occupants, to reduce the apparent scale
and density of development and to provide visual relief in higher density projects.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 153
The standards may be adjusted by the Planning Commission through a public
hearing (Track 2 Site Plan Review) where innovative techniques such as rooftop
gardens, historic preservation, natural features protection, or other low-impact or
green building practices are used to meet the above intent. Figure 5.29(f) provides a
conceptual illustration of the following standards.
(a) Common open space. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the site area shall
be designated and permanently reserved as common open space, in
accordance with all of the following criteria:
1. The site area is defined as the lot or parcel on which the development
to be located, after subtracting any required dedication of street rightof-
way and other land for public purposes (e.g., public park or school
grounds, etc.);
2. One or more of the following shall be provided in meeting the
common open space requirement: outdoor recreation area for all
residents of the development, including play fields, outdoor
playgrounds, outdoor sports courts, swim pools, walking fitness
courses, pedestrian amenities, or similar open space amenities, or
protection of sensitive lands (e.g., trees, wetlands, riparian areas
preserved).
3. Historic buildings or landmarks that are open to the public may count
toward meeting the open space requirements when approved by the
Planning Commission;
4. Where common open space is designated for active recreational use
(e.g., playfields, sports courts, etc.) it must be suitable for the
intended use in terms of slope, accessibility, area, and dimensions;
5. Designated open space areas shall have a minimum width that is not
less than twenty (20) feet and a minimum length that is not less than
twenty (20) feet;
6. Where a public space with pedestrian amenities is provided between
primary building entrance(s) and adjoining street(s) (e.g., plaza,
extended sidewalk area with seating, or similar area), the requirement
to provide common open space as described above may be reduced
proportionately but in total shall not be less than five percent (5%) of
the site;
7. The Building and Planning Official or Planning Commission waive the
common open space requirement for a multiple family project of not
more than twenty (20) dwelling units that is located within 1,200 feet
(measured walking distance) of a public park, where there is a direct,
accessible (i.e., Americans With Disabilities Act-compliant), lighted
pedestrian walkway or multi-use pathway connecting the site to the
park. If the park is not developed, or only partially developed, the
multiple family housing developer may improve parkland in an amount
comparable to the common open space area that is waived or
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 154
reduced (i.e., the area that would otherwise be required of the
development) in meeting this provision.
(b) Private open space. Private open space shall be provided for housing units
based on all of the following criteria:
1. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all ground-floor housing units
shall have private patios or decks containing at least forty-eight (48)
square feet of usable surface. Ground-floor housing means the
housing unit entrance (front or rear) is within five (5) feet of the
finished ground elevation (i.e., after grading and landscaping);
2. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all upper-floor housing units shall
have private patios or decks containing at least forty-eight (48) square
feet of usable surface. Upper-floor housing means housing units that
are more than five (5) feet above the finished grade.
3. Where it is not practical to provide private open space as provided in
subsections (1) and (2), above, due to the existence of natural
features or other physical site constraints, the private open space
standard may be adjusted through Track 2 Site Plan Review, provided
the development shall contain additional common open space to
offset the reduction in private open space. At least forty-eight (48)
square feet of additional common open space shall be provided for
each housing unit lacking private open space. Open space required
to offset the reduction of private open spaces shall not be counted
towards the park dedication requirements in Section 5.26.
Figure 5.29(f) – Examples of Multiple Family Open Space
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 155
SECTION 5.31 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT STANDARDS
(1) Purpose: Accessory Dwelling Unit standards are intended to encourage a variety
of housing options, maintain consistency with the purpose of the residential zones,
and address compatibility between accessory dwellings and single family dwellings
on abutting lots:
(a) Accessory dwellings shall not exceed 600 square feet of floor area, or 50%
of the primary unit, whichever is smaller.
(b) One Unit. A maximum of one accessory dwelling unit is allowed per one legal
single-family dwelling.
(c) Accessory dwellings shall comply with Yard and Lot Coverage standards of
the applicable zoning district.
(d) The building height of any detached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed
the height of the primary dwelling, except if interior to an existing detached
garage.
(e) Screening. Accessory Dwelling Units shall be screened with sight obscuring
landscaping, fence or wall, where an ADU borders an existing single family
detached residential dwelling on an abutting lot. Fences and walls must be
at least 75 percent opaque when viewed from any angle at a point 25 feet
away from the fence or wall. Hedges shall be of an evergreen species which
will meet and maintain year-round the same standard within three (3) years
of planting.
(f) A minimum of two parking spaces total must be provided for the primary
dwelling and accessory dwelling.
(2) Accessory Dwelling Unit Permit.
(a) A permit application to construct an Accessory Dwelling Unit is required.
(b) A permit application shall include the following information:
1. The name and mailing address of the person to whom the permit will be
issued;
2. The physical address where the ADU will be constructed, if different from
above;
3. A plan drawn to scale which indicate clearly and with full dimensions
addressing standards in this section.
4. When the applicant is not the owner of the property where the ADU will
be located, the applicant will obtain signed consent from the property
owner.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 156
(c) The granting of a permit under this chapter shall be treated as an
Administrative Decision, and shall be administered by the Building and
Planning Official.
(d) A permit fee may be established by Council resolution and, if so established,
shall accompany a permit application.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 157
ARTICLE 6 - SITE PLAN REVIEW
SECTION 6.01 SITE PLAN REVIEW PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the site plan review procedures is to correlate the general
ordinance requirements with the specific site conditions and proposed uses and
changes of use through a comprehensive review process to assure that
developments are in conformance with the applicable land use regulations of the
Land Development Ordinance.
(2) Applicability. Site Plan Review is required for all new construction or expansion of
existing uses or structures exceeding 10% or 1,000 square feet, whichever is
greater, of the original structure(s) on the site. Site Plan Review is not required for
detached single-family dwellings on individual lots. Site Plan Review may be
required where site or development characteristics, as determined by the Building
and Planning Official, warrant a site plan review, including but are not limited to:
(a) Site is traversed by a natural drainageway or has demonstrated drainage
limitations as shown on the utility plans required in Section 6.03(1)(b)(4) of
this ordinance. Demonstrated drainage limitations are site or development
conditions that prevent the unrestricted flow from areas draining through the
site or that do not allow the extension of the system to serve such area as
per the City’s Drainage Master Plan, or that prevent stormwater from being
directed to storm sewers or to natural drainageways in accordance with the
Land Division and Land Development Ordinances.
(b) Site includes or is adjacent to Open Space and/or Greenway Areas
designated on the Veneta Zoning Map as a Greenway subzone.
(c) Site is located in a Flood Hazard subzone.
(d) Site includes significant wetland resources, or is located within 50 feet of a
wetland resource identified as locally significant in the Veneta Local
Wetlands Inventory.
(e) Site has slopes of (15) fifteen percent (or greater) (see Section 5.25 of this
Ordinance).
(f) Site is an undersized lot.
(g) Expansion of parking lots, relocation of parking spaces on a site, or other
changes which affect circulation, landscaping or drainage.
The Building and Planning Official or Planning Commission may waive any
component of the Site Plan Review for a development if it finds the required
information does not apply to the development, the information is already
available to the City or the change of use does not increase traffic volume,
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 158
water or sewer use or drainage.
SECTION 6.02 FILING COPIES OF SITE PLAN
(1) Applications for site plan review or amendment shall include:
(a) Fifteen (15) copies of the site plan, narrative, improvement plans and
other supplementary data for review and action.
(b) A reproducible 11" x 17" black and white copy of the proposed site plan
map.
(c) Electronic copies of all materials including maps in PDF format.
(d) All maps shall be 18” x 24” folded to 8 ½ x 11 in size as shown in Figure
6.02(a). The Building and Planning Official may allow submittal of 11x17
maps when the larger format is not necessary for clarity.
SECTION 6.03 REQUIRED INFORMATION ON SITE PLAN
An application for a Site Plan Review, Site Plan Review with adjustments (Track 2), or
Amendment, as applicable, shall include the following information based on the size, scale
and complexity of the development. The Building and Planning Official, at his or her
discretion, may waive certain application submittal items where such items are not relevant
to the review or the information is already available.
(1) Site Plan. All maps must be drawn to scale and indicate clearly and with full
dimensions, the following information:
(a) Vicinity Map. A scaled vicinity map clearly showing the relationship of the
proposed site to surrounding developments, tax lots, streets, storm
Figure 6.02(a) – Folding Requirements
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 159
drainage(s), sewer, water and other required public facilities.
(b) Development Plans. A development plan shall include the following items in
accordance with Article 5:
1. Building and Land Use Plans.
a. Location of all proposed buildings and existing buildings which
will remain on the site.
b. Floor elevations.
c. Preliminary architectural plans showing one or all of the
following for new buildings and major remodels in conformance
with Section 5.13 or 5.29 of this ordinance:
i. Building elevations with building height and widths
dimensioned, and materials labeled;
ii. Building materials, colors and type; a materials sample
board may be required;
iii. The name of the architect or designer.
d. Existing land uses adjacent to the property.
e. The phases, if any, of development construction. Such phases
shall be clearly marked on the plan.
2. Parking and Traffic Flow Plans.
a. Location, arrangement, number and dimensions of automobile
garages and parking spaces, width of aisles, bays and angle of
parking.
b. Location, arrangement and dimensions of truck loading and
unloading spaces, if any.
c. Location of bikeways, pedestrian walkways, malls and trails.
d. Traffic flow pattern showing the circulation of vehicles within
and adjacent to the site, including fire equipment access and
turnarounds.
e. Stacking and queuing areas that involve queuing of vehicles,
loading and unloading of goods, materials, or people shall
provide an area for vehicle stacking in accordance with Section
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 160
5.20 (15) of this ordinance.
f. Location of all existing and proposed streets, public ways,
railroad and utility rights-of-way within and immediately
adjacent to the development.
g. A Traffic Impact Analysis if required under Section 5.27 of this
ordinance.
3. Landscaping and Site Improvements.
a. Location and type of all landscaping proposed for the
development, including irrigation systems in conformance with
Section 5.12 of this ordinance.
b. Location, height and materials of all walls, fences and screen
plantings. Elevation drawings of typical walls and fences shall
be included.
c. Location, size, height and means of illumination of all proposed
signs and lighting.
d. Open space to be maintained and controlled by the owners of
the property but not included in the development.
e. Areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public parks,
playgrounds, school sites, public buildings and others to be
reserved or dedicated to the public.
4. Utility Plans.
a. Existing and proposed contour map of the site.
b. Location, flow elevations and capacities of all existing and
proposed storm drainage facilities designed and constructed in
accordance with Section 5.16 of this ordinance
c. Location of all existing and proposed water mains.
d. Location, flow elevations and certified capacities of all existing
and proposed sewer lines.
e. Location of all other underground facilities, including phone,
electricity, and cable television.
5. Emissions or Potential Hazards.
Specifications of the extent of emissions and potential hazard or
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 161
nuisance characteristics caused by the proposed use including
approvals of all regulatory agencies having jurisdiction.
The applicant shall accurately specify the extent of emissions and
nuisance characteristics relative to the proposed use including, but
not limited to surface or groundwater pollution, noise, vibration,
smoke, odor, fumes, dust, heat, glare or electromagnetic interference.
Misrepresentations or omissions of required data shall be grounds for
termination of a Certificate of Occupancy.
All uses shall meet all applicable standards and regulations of the
Oregon State Board of Health, the Oregon Department of
Environmental Quality and any other public agency having
appropriate regulatory jurisdiction. Prior to construction, evidence
shall be submitted to the City indicating that the proposed activity has
been approved by all appropriate regulatory agencies.
Any such other data as may be necessary to permit the Planning
Commission to make the required findings.
6. Tree Removal Plans.
If development of the proposed plan will require removal of trees as
defined by Veneta Municipal Code 8.10, detailed tree removal plans
are required. Plans shall be in conformance with VMC 8.10.
(2) Additional Information. Prior to the end of the completeness review period, the
Building and Planning Official may require an applicant to submit studies, reports or
exhibits prepared by qualified professionals to show compliance with applicable
criteria addressing specific site features or impacts including but not limited to:
(a) Stormwater
(b) Steep Slopes
(c) Wetlands
(d) Flood Plains
(3) Deed Restrictions and easements. The applicant shall submit copies of all existing
and proposed restrictions or covenants and any proposed easements.
(4) Building Orientation and Design. All new or remodeled commercial, mixed-use or
residential buildings that require a site plan review or site plan amendment shall
comply with the commercial or residential design standards in Article 5 of this
ordinance.
(5) Program Elements.
(a) Narrative statement documenting how each required criteria in the land
development ordinance have been met, including those criteria that are
required in accordance with Section 6.03(1) above.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 162
(b) A completed environmental assessment may be required by the Planning
Commission or Building and Planning Official if it finds that a potential hazard,
nuisance or emissions exists, existed or will be created by the development
and has not been adequately addressed in the development plans and
program.
(c) A timetable indicating when utility and drainage facilities intended to serve the
development are to be installed. If the development is to be constructed in
stages, the timetable shall reflect this.
(d) If the site plan calls for tree removal which would require a tree removal permit
pursuant to Veneta Municipal Code Chapter 8.10.030, a tree removal permit,
together with the required filing fee, must be submitted.
SECTION 6.04 IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
This section promotes upgrades to features of nonconforming development that affect a
site's appearance and functionality. Nonconforming developments may continue unless
specifically limited by Section 6.04(1) below or by other provisions in this ordinance.
(1) Development that does not comply with the following standards must be brought
into compliance with current standards to an extent commensurate with the
proposed changes.
(a) Landscaped setbacks for surface parking and exterior development areas;
(b) Interior parking lot landscaping;
(c) Landscaping in existing building setbacks;
(d) Minimum landscaped area (where land is not used for structures, parking, or
exterior improvements);
(e) Screening;
(f) Paving of surface parking and exterior storage and display areas;
(g) Commercial and residential design standards; and
(h) Installation of public facilities.
SECTION 6.05 APPROVAL CRITERIA
(1) After an examination of the site and prior to approval of plans, the Planning
Commission or Building and Planning Official must make the following findings:
(a) That all provisions of city ordinances are complied with.
(b) That traffic congestion is avoided; pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular safety are
protected; and future street right-of-way is protected.
(c) That proposed signs or lighting will not, by size, location or color, interfere with
traffic or limit visibility.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 163
(d) That adequate water, sewer, and other required facilities, for the proposed
use are available.
(e) That drainageways are protected, existing drainage patterns are maintained
and drainage facilities are provided in accordance with Section 5.16 of this
ordinance.
(f) That the extent of emissions and potential nuisance characteristics are
reasonably compatible with the land use district, adjacent land uses and the
standards of all applicable regulatory agencies having jurisdiction.
(g) Where the applicant has requested an adjustment to Site Plan Review criteria
(Track 2 Site Plan Review) pursuant to the Veneta Land Development
Ordinance, the applicant shall identify all applicable criteria in this ordinance
and specifically address each adjustment.
(2) Alternatives to the Commercial and Mixed Use Design Standards of Section 5.13, or
Residential Design Standards of Section 5.29 or Off Street Parking Location
Standards Section 5.20(3)(c) may be granted by the Planning Commission following
a public hearing where the Commission finds that the alternative design:
(a) Meets the purpose and intent of the applicable design standard being
adjusted
(b) Conforms with the design guidelines provided in Section 5.13 or 5.29 as
applicable
(c) Promotes pedestrian safety, convenience and comfort
(d) Contains architectural features substituting for code required features which
are consistent with the overall design intent and composition of the building.
(e) Maintains or enhances compatibility between new development and existing
uses, including aesthetics and privacy for residential uses.
SECTION 6.06 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVING SITE PLANS
(1) Prior to taking action on a site plan the City must provide notice of limited land use
action in compliance with Section 2.13. Track 2 Site Plan Reviews shall be noticed in
compliance with Section 2.11, Notice of Public Hearing.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 164
(2) The Planning Commission may approve, disapprove or approve with conditions new
site plans and major site plan amendments. Minor site plan amendments may be
approved by the Building and Planning Official. Approval of any Site Plan will be
subject to compliance with the standards set forth in this ordinance and standards as
established elsewhere by City ordinance or resolution.
(3) Where the applicant has requested an adjustment to the Residential or
Commercial/Mixed Use Design Standards through the Track 2 process, the Planning
Commission shall be the decision making body and the application shall be reviewed
in a public hearing (“Track 2” Site Plan Review).
(4) The Planning Commission may call for a public hearing to receive testimony if it
determines that the proposed development may produce adverse impacts on
surrounding properties, the neighborhood or the City.
(5) As a result of an approved site plan, a final map shall be prepared and filed with the
Building and Planning Official, including all required modifications and conditions.
Once approved, the site plan submitted shall become the official plan. The applicant
may be required to sign and record a Development Agreement in a form approved by
the City Attorney against the property to assure compliance with ongoing conditions
of approval. Building permits shall be issued only for plans which substantially
conform to the official plan and all construction shall substantially conform to the
official plan or a Certificate of Occupancy may be withheld until compliance.
SECTION 6.07 AMENDMENTS
Amendments are only permitted for developments for which the City has record of an
approved Site Plan. A change to an existing development for which a previous site plan
has never been approved requires a full site plan review
If the proposed use is more intensive than the existing use, additional Systems
Development Charges shall be assessed at the time a building permit is issued.
Major amendments to an approved site plan shall follow the same procedure as for an
approval of a site plan review. A new application and filing fee is required and the proposal
must be approved by the Planning Commission. Major site plan amendments involve a
change that does not meet the criteria listed under minor site plan amendments. Minor site
plan amendments that may be approved as an Administrative Decision by the Building and
Planning Official are those that meet the following criteria:
(1) The site plan amendment does not involve any interpretation of submission
requirements or required findings that would set a precedent for other site plans or
site plan amendments.
(2) The site plan amendment will not change the impacts (such as traffic generation,
emissions or drainage) on surrounding properties.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 165
(3) The site plan amendment fully complies with City ordinances and does not require a
variance.
(4) There are no unusual circumstances relative to the site plan amendment.
(5) There are no questions of adequacy of services raised by The Public Works
Superintendent, City Engineer, or any affected public or private agency.
A minor amendment requires Planning Commission approval if it involves commercial or
industrial development adjacent to Hwy 126 and involves a change in use that is more
intensive than the current or previous use as determined by the Building and Planning
Official.
A new application, including a narrative statement and filing fee is required. The Planning
Commission shall be advised of all administrative approvals of site plan amendments at
the following regular Planning Commission meeting. Appeals of an administrative decision
will go before the Planning Commission.
SECTION 6.08 COMPLIANCE WITH SITE PLAN REVIEW
All development must substantially comply with the approved site plan. Minor shifts in
location of buildings, parking lots, or landscaping are allowed by the Building and Planning
Official as long as the site plan continues to comply with city requirements. Continual
compliance with the approved site plan and any conditions of approval is required. Any
departure from the approved site plan or conditions of approval constitutes a violation of
this Ordinance and may be grounds for revocation of the site plan permit.
SECTION 6.09 TIME LIMIT ON AN APPROVED SITE PLAN
Site plan or site plan amendments approvals shall be effective three (3) years from the
date of final decision, unless a building permit has been issued and substantial
construction pursuant thereto has taken place. Within one (1) year from the final decision,
a final map shall be prepared and filed with the Building and Planning Official, including all
required modifications and conditions. Approved site plans or site plan amendments that
do not have a final map submitted within one (1) year shall be void.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 166
ARTICLE 7 - TEMPORARY USE PERMIT REGULATIONS
SECTION 7.01 PURPOSE OF TEMPORARY USE PERMIT
To allow the establishment of specified uses on a short-term basis in certain, specified land
use zoning districts. No temporary use permit can be granted which would have the effect
of permanently rezoning or granting privilege not shared by other property in the same
zone.
SECTION 7.02 APPLICATION
All temporary uses must comply with the provisions of this ordinance. Only temporary uses
lasting more than two (2) days in a calendar year require a temporary use permit.
Applications for the temporary use permit shall be filed with the Building and Planning
Official and shall include:
(1) Form prescribed by the City and signed by the property owner.
(2) A statement explaining the request.
(3) Site plan showing location of any proposed structures, activity areas, and parking
with respect to property lines and existing buildings, parking areas, and landscaping.
(4) Drawings or photos showing proposed structures.
(5) Any other information needed to describe the proposed use in sufficient detail for the
Building and Planning Official to determine how the proposed use meets the
approval criteria.
SECTION 7.03 APPROVAL CRITERIA
A temporary use may be granted only if:
(1) The temporary use is not inconsistent with the purpose of the zoning district in which
it is placed.
(2) The temporary use will not have a significant adverse impact on the surrounding
uses.
(3) The temporary use shall comply with the applicable criteria listed in Section 7.04.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 167
SECTION 7.04 ALLOWABLE TEMPORARY USES
(1) Temporary displays, sales, and events. Temporary displays, sales and events may
be permitted in all industrial, commercial and public facilities and parks zones. They
are also allowed in the rural residential zone for horticultural-related activities. All
activities must meet the following criteria:
(a) The temporary activity is located on the same lot for no more than forty-five
(45) cumulative days in any calendar year.
(b) The proposed temporary activity does not result in vehicular traffic congestion
and adequate pedestrian and bicycle access is provided.
(c) Adequate parking facilities are available. The temporary activity does not
eliminate parking spaces required by Section 5.20 of this ordinance.
(d) The temporary activity does not encroach on the required setbacks of the lot.
(e) Annual events require a renewal permit each year.
(2) Temporary mobile vending. Temporary mobile vending units may be permitted in all
commercial and industrial zones and the permit shall be renewed on an annual
basis. Mobile Vending Units must meet the following criteria:
(a) The temporary Mobile Vending Unit is located on the same lot for no more
than one (1) year.
(b) Standards for Mobile Vending Unit. The following standards apply to each
mobile vending unit on the site.
1. Attachments. Attachments to the mobile vending unit, such as awnings
or canopies, are permitted only if they are supported entirely by the unit
and do not touch the ground. Neither the mobile vending unit nor any
item relating to the mobile vending unit shall lean against or hang from
any structure or utility pole.
2. Accessory Storage. Items relating to the Mobile Vending Unit shall be
stored in, on, or under the Mobile Vending Unit.
3. Skirting. The use shall provide screening for all conduit, tanks and
storage areas from all public areas and streets by temporary
landscaping and/or skirting.
4. Drive-Thru service. A Mobile Vending Unit may not include drive-thru
service.
5. The applicant has written permission from the property owner to utilize
the subject property for the proposal.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 168
6. Off-street parking that is required of an existing/permanent land use, in
order to meet minimum parking requirements, shall not be utilized by
customers or employees of the temporary use.
7. The use, including all items associated with the operation, shall not
obstruct pedestrian pathways, driveways or drive aisles of any off-street
parking area and shall not be located in any sight distance triangle as
defined in Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493, Section 5.03
or so as to create a traffic or safety hazard.
8. The Mobile Vending Unit may not be a permanent structure and must
remain capable of being moved, with wheels attached.
9. Suitable receptacles for disposal of trash must be provided and
maintained by the vendor, in order to accommodate all trash generated
by the temporary use. The permittee shall be responsible for disposal of
accumulated trash and for clean-up of trash generated by the
temporary use on and before the close of each business day.
10. Signs. Signs are restricted to sandwich board signs only, with a
maximum dimension of 42 inches tall by 30 inches wide. Each mobile
vending unit is permitted to display one (1) portable sign (as defined in
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493, Section 5.15(2)(w)) with
sign permit approval.
11. The use must not connect to City water or sewer and must identify the
method of grey water disposal.
12. Food vendors shall comply with all state and county health regulations
and shall furnish written evidence of compliance at the time of
application for a temporary mobile vending unit permit.
13. Prior to the issuance of any permit or a business registration, the Fire
Marshal shall inspect and approve any mobile vendor to determine
compliance with all applicable Fire Code.
14. The Mobile Vending Unit is prohibited from operating in the City rightof-
way.
15. Merchandise display areas outside the Mobile Vending Unit are
prohibited.
16. A permit fee may be established by Council resolution and, if so
established, shall accompany a permit application.
(c) Mobile Vending Site Standards. The following standards apply to a Mobile
Vending Site.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 169
1. Signs. Signs are restricted to sandwich board signs only, with a
maximum dimension of 42 inches tall by 30 inches wide. Each mobile
vending unit is permitted to display one (1) portable sign (as defined in
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493, Section 5.15(2)(w)) with
sign permit approval. More than one (1) portable sign per lot is
permitted for mobile vending sites.
2. Minimum Setbacks and Separation Distance. All mobile vending units
on the site shall be located a minimum of:
a. Ten (10) feet from any structure or other mobile vending unit.
b. Five (5) feet from any front lot line, except when adjoining lot is in
common ownership; and
c. Five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line, except if such lot line
abuts a residential zoning district, the minimum setback shall be
twenty (20) feet.
3. Driveway Access. No new or modified driveway access is permitted.
4. Setback from Vehicular and Pedestrian Use Areas. Windows and doors
used for service to customers shall be located a minimum of ten (10)
feet from loading areas, driveways, on-site circulation drives, and
parking lot aisles, and a minimum of five (5) feet from bicycle parking
spaces and walkways.
5. Obstruction of Vehicular and Pedestrian Use Areas and Landscape
Areas. No mobile vending unit or associated element, such as
aboveground power cords, seating areas, trash receptacles, signs, and
customer queuing areas, shall occupy bicycle parking spaces, loading
areas or walkways. Mobile vending units shall not occupy landscaping
areas approved as a part of a prior approval or other land use
application. However, occupying existing on-site vehicular parking
spaces is permitted, provided that such spaces are not simultaneously
used for parking or required to meet minimum parking requirements on
the site.
6. Sight Distance. The mobile vending site shall comply with the clear
vision area standards of Section 5.03.
7. Lighting. Pedestrian scale lighting (maximum 12-16 feet in height) is
required at dusk.
8. Utilities. The applicant is responsible for coordination with the
applicable electrical provider.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 170
9. Sanitation Facilities. Sanitation facilities shall be provided when
required by the Oregon Health Authority and Lane County Public Health
Department.
10. Sewage Disposal. Subsurface sewage disposal is prohibited.
(d) Exemptions. Mobile Vending Units that are operated as part of an approved
Farmer’s Market or other city event are exempt from the requirements of this
Section 7.04(2).”
(3) Second Dwelling on Property During Construction or Demolition of Dwelling
A manufactured home or RV may be used temporarily during construction of a
permanent residence. Or, a building permit may be issued for a new residence
while an existing home remains occupied to allow for the residents to remain on
their lot until the new dwelling is ready to occupy. The temporary use, including
demolition of building, shall be limited to a maximum of one year (including the 60
day time limit on a temporary certificate of occupancy) unless an extension is
approved by the Building and Planning Official. The following standards must be
met for either of these temporary uses:
(a) The applicant shall provide evidence of an approved water supply and sewage
disposal system.
(b) The certificate of occupancy for the new residence shall not be issued until the
original dwelling has been demolished and the site cleaned up, or until the
manufactured home being used temporarily is removed from the site. The time
limit for a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be 60 days.
(c) If a manufactured home is to be used as a temporary residence, a building
permit for the siting and anchoring of the manufactured home shall be
submitted and approved by the building inspector prior to occupancy. Upon
expiration of the temporary use, the manufactured home shall not be converted
to an accessory use.
(d) RV use shall be limited to not more than 90 days.
(4) Outdoor Storage (not involving sales). Temporary outdoor storage not exceeding
180 days may be permitted in all industrial and commercial zones. All outdoor
storage areas must meet the following criteria:
(a) The storage does not encroach on the required setbacks of the lot.
(b) Adequate parking facilities are available. The temporary outdoor storage does
not eliminate parking spaces required by Section 5.20 of this ordinance.
(c) The materials being stored will not cause any contamination of stormwater
runoff.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 171
(d) The materials being stored shall be screened from view with sight-obscuring
fence or landscaping in compliance with Section 5.12 (9) of the Veneta Land
Development Ordinance.
(e) The materials do not create an attractive nuisance as defined in the Veneta
Municipal Code.
(f) After one (1) year, the temporary use permit period expires. The use shall then
either be converted to a permanent use through Conditional Use Permit review
in compliance with the standards of Article 8, or be discontinued.
(5) Standards for a manufactured dwelling as a temporary office in the
commercial or industrial zone during construction of a permanent structure.
(a) Approval by the Planning Commission shall be subject to a finding that such a
use will be reasonably compatible with and have minimal impact on abutting
property and surrounding neighborhoods.
(b) Within six (6) months from the date the approval is granted, an application for a
building permit for a permanent structure or modification of an existing structure
on the premises must be filed. Failure to submit the application within the
specified time will terminate the approval.
(c) The temporary permit shall be for a period not to exceed eighteen (18) months.
(d) All owners of the lot agree in writing to remove the manufactured dwelling from
the lot not later than eighteen (18) months from the date on which the building
permit is issued or not later than two (2) months following the completion of the
office, whichever shall occur first.
(e) All owners of the lot agree in writing to remove all evidence that the
manufactured dwelling has been on the lot within 30 days after the removal of
the manufactured dwelling and that the manufactured dwelling shall not be
converted to an accessory building.
(f) Any electric, water and sewer connections which are necessary must be made
according to City specification.
(g) A building permit for the siting and anchoring of the manufactured dwelling shall
be submitted and approved by the building inspector prior to occupancy.
SECTION 7.05 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVING TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
(1) Prior to taking action on a temporary use permit, the City must provide notice of a
Limited Land Use Decision, except for Mobile Vending Units which will be
processed as follows:
(a) A mobile Vending Unit will be processed administratively.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 172
(b) A mobile Vending Site will be processed administratively with public notice
provided in accordance with Section 2.13 – Limited Land Use Actions.
(2) The building and Planning Official may approve, disapprove, or conditionally
approve the Temporary Use Permit. If the application is for a highly visible location
or potentially controversial use, the Building and Planning Official may forward the
application to the Planning Commission for decision. Approval of the Temporary
Use Permit will be subject to compliance with the standards as set forth in this
ordinance and standards established elsewhere by City ordinance or resolution.
(3) The Building and Planning Official or the Planning Commission may attach
appropriate and reasonable conditions to the permit that are necessary to secure
the public health, safety, and welfare and to maintain compliance with city codes
and ordinances. Such clear and objective standards may include but are not limited
to:
(a) Setback requirements
(b) Screening
(c) Control of points of ingress and egress
(d) Special provisions for signs
(e) Landscaping and maintenance of landscaping
(f) Maintenance of grounds
(g) Control of noise, vibration, and odors
(h) Limitation of hours for certain activities
(i) Limitation of duration of temporary use
(j) Once approved, the site plan for the temporary use as modified with
conditions shall become the official plan.
(k) If written Notice of Appeal is not filed within fifteen (15) days of the date the
Final Order is signed and mailed, the decision becomes final.
(l) Compliance with conditions imposed in the temporary use permit and
adherence to the approved plans is required. The Building and Planning
Official may revoke the temporary use permit with any departure from the
approved plans or conditions or approval.
(m) All temporary uses involving a business must comply with Veneta Municipal
Code Chapter 5.05, Business Registration.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 173
SECTION 7.06 PROCEDURE FOR RENEWING TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
(1) Temporary Use Permit shall be subject to review and approval by the Building and
Planning Official on an annual basis.
(2) Public Notice requirements may be waived for renewal of Temporary Use Permits at
the discretion of the Building and Planning Official provided that:
(a) No formal complaints have been filed regarding the temporary use.
(b) There have been no changes made to the site plan or activities from the time of
initial approval as verified by the Building and Planning Official.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 174
ARTICLE 8 - CONDITIONAL USES
SECTION 8.01 PURPOSE OF CONDITIONAL USE PROCEDURE
A conditional use is a use, which, due to the nature of potential impacts on surrounding
land uses and public facilities, requires a case-by-case review and analysis. It is the intent
of this article to provide standards and procedures so that uses which are classified as
conditional may be permitted, enlarged or altered if the site is appropriate and if
conditions of approval intended to protect the best interests of the property, the
neighborhood and the City can be met.
SECTION 8.02 AUTHORIZATION TO GRANT OR DENY A CONDITIONAL USE
PERMIT
Conditional uses listed in this ordinance may be permitted, altered or enlarged upon
authorization of the Planning Commission in accordance with the standards and
procedures set forth in this article and may be subject to Site Plan Review. Relaxation of
any of these standards requires a variance in accordance with Article 10.
(1) In taking action on a conditional use permit application, the Planning Commission
may either approve or deny the application.
(2) If an application is denied, the action must be based on reasons related to
noncompliance with the Comprehensive Plan, incompatibility of the proposed use
within the zone or to adjacent land uses, or inappropriate site location or failure to
meet all applicable standards listed in Sections 8.10 and 8.20 for the proposed use.
(3) In approving a conditional use permit application, the Planning Commission shall
impose any conditions which are necessary to insure compliance with the standards
of the Veneta Land Development Ordinance or other appropriate State, County and
City standards, rules, regulations and laws and standards established by any other
City resolution.
(4) In the case of a use existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance and
classified in this ordinance as a conditional use, a change in use or in lot area or an
alteration or enlargement of a structure shall conform to the requirements for
conditional use.
(5) The Planning Commission may require that the applicant for a conditional use
furnish the City with a performance bond or similar contractual arrangement of up to
the value of the cost of the improvements to be guaranteed by such bond, in order
to assure that the conditional use is completed according to the plans as approved
by the Planning Commission.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 175
(6) The Planning Commission may require that an applicant for a conditional use enter
into a contractual agreement with the City to assure that the applicant will provide
his or her share of the development costs for streets; curbs; gutters; sidewalks and
water, sewer and drainage facilities to City standards.
(7) The applicant shall sign and record a Development Agreement in a form approved
by the City Attorney against the property to assure that all conditions of approval are
met by the applicant and future property owners.
SECTION 8.03 TAKING ACTION ON A CONDITIONAL USE APPLICATION
The procedure for taking action on an application for a conditional use shall be as follows:
(1) A property owner may initiate a request for a conditional use by filing an application,
a narrative statement explaining how the proposed use complies with the
Comprehensive Plan and the standards of this ordinance, plans, and other
supplementary data with the Building and Planning Official, using forms prescribed
pursuant to Section 2.06. A filing fee in accordance with the provisions of Section
2.08 shall accompany an application for a conditional use and shall be submitted at
least 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing.
(2) Lane County shall be notified of any conditional use permits that will have a
potential impact or effect on lands, services or facilities outside the city limits.
(3) Before the Planning Commission may act on a conditional use application, it shall
hold a public hearing thereon in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.11.
(4) Within seven (7) days after a decision has been rendered with reference to a
conditional use application, the Building and Planning Official shall provide the
applicant with written notice of the decision of the Planning Commission.
SECTION 8.04 BUILDING PERMITS FOR AN APPROVED CONDITIONAL USE
Building permits for all or any portion of a conditional use shall be issued only on the basis
of the plan for the conditional use as approved by the Planning Commission. Any
proposed change in the approved plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission as a
new application for a conditional use. Building permits involving an approved conditional
use shall not be issued until the appeal period as specified under Section 2.07 has passed.
SECTION 8.05 TIME LIMIT ON AN APPROVED CONDITIONAL USE APPLICATION
Conditional Use permit approvals shall be effective three (3) years from the date of final
decision, unless a building permit has been issued, substantial construction pursuant
thereto has taken place or the authorized use has commenced. Within one (1) year from
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 176
the final decision, a final map shall be prepared and filed with the Building and Planning
Official, including all required modifications and conditions. Approved conditional use
permits that do not have a final map submitted within one (1) year shall be void.
SECTION 8.06 TERMINATION OF A CONDITIONAL USE
A conditional use may be revoked or modified by the Planning Commission, after public
hearing, on any one or more of the following grounds:
(1) Approval of the conditional use was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation.
(2) The use for which approval was granted has ceased to exist.
(3) The use does not meet the conditions specifically established for it at the time of the
approval of the application.
(4) The use is in violation of any provision of this ordinance or of any other applicable
statute, ordinance or regulation.
SECTION 8.07 LIMITATION
No request for a conditional use shall be considered by the Planning Commission within
the one year period immediately following a denial of such request, except the Planning
Commission may consent to a new hearing, if, in the opinion of the Planning Commission,
new evidence or a change of circumstances warrants it.
SECTION 8.08 TRANSFERRING A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
A Conditional Use Permit may not be transferred from one parcel to another parcel.
A Conditional Use Permit may be transferred from one owner to a new owner for the same
parcel and the same use when the new owner submits an affidavit to the City of Veneta
certifying that the new owner understands the conditions of the Conditional Use Permit and
that the continued use shall comply wholly with the conditions stated in the permit as well
as all applicable laws, rules and regulations.
SECTION 8.09 RESERVED SECTION
SECTION 8.10 GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPROVAL
A conditional use may be granted only if:
(1) The proposed use is consistent with the Veneta Comprehensive Plan.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 177
(2) The proposed use is consistent with the purpose of the zoning district.
(3) The potential negative impacts of the proposed use on adjacent properties and on
the public will be mitigated through the application of existing requirements and
conditions of approval.
(4) All required public facilities have adequate capacity to serve the proposal. Systems
Development Charges will be assessed at the time a building permit is issued.
Additional SDC’s will be assessed for changes in use that are more intense than a
pre-existing use.
(5) The site size, dimensions, location, topography, and access are adequate
considering such items as the bulk, coverage or density of the proposed
development; the generation of traffic; environmental quality impacts; and health,
safety or general welfare concerns.
SECTION 8.11 SPECIAL STANDARDS GOVERNING CONDITIONAL USES
Certain conditional uses shall meet the following standards:
(1) Requirements for front, back or side yards for conditional uses may be increased by
one (1) foot for each foot by which the building height exceeds that specified for the
district.
(2) Standards for public structures or uses of land for public utility facilities such as
electric substation or transformer, public or community sewage disposal plant or
pumping station, municipal well or water storage, radio or television tower or
transmitter, telephone exchange, shop and storage yard or similar governmental or
utility structure or use of land;
(a) Public utility facilities and storage areas shall be screened and provided with
landscaping.
(b) The minimum lot size requirement may be waived on finding that the waiver
will not result in noise or other detrimental effect to adjacent or nearby
property.
(3) Standards for a manufactured dwelling park. A manufactured dwelling park may be
permitted as a conditional use subject to site plan approval. In addition, a
manufactured dwelling park must meet current state requirements and the following
minimum standards:
(a) Screening shall be provided on each side of a manufactured dwelling park
which is adjacent to a property line or an alley. The screening shall consist
of a continuous fence or wall, supplemented with landscape planting,
evergreen hedge or combination thereof so as to effectively screen the
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 178
manufactured dwelling park from view. All screening shall be maintained in
good condition.
(b) The applicant must provide sufficient information to show that the proposed
manufactured dwelling park shall not have an adverse impact upon the
over-all future program for the development and improvement of the City as
related to but not limited to the following areas of public service.
1. Domestic water supply.
2. Sewage disposal system.
3. Adequacy of drainage facilities.
4. Traffic problems and proposed streets in the Veneta Transportation
System Plan
5. Fire protection and police protection.
6. Preservation of property values of surrounding areas.
(4) Caretaker or watch person dwelling on the premises of a non-residential use.
.
(a) Only one (1) dwelling may be situated upon a particular piece of property
unless approved by the Planning Commission.
(b) The dwelling shall be separated by at least ten (10) feet from all other
buildings on the property.
(c) Setbacks of the dwelling from all property lines shall be the same as for the
zone in which the dwelling is located or ten (10) feet whichever is greater.
(d) If the home is a manufactured dwelling, it shall be constructed to the State of
Oregon Manufactured Dwelling Standards enacted on June 15, 1976 or any
subsequent amendments thereto and have the Oregon Insignia of
Compliance. It shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width and 40 feet in
length. It shall be provided with a kitchen having a sink with hot and cold
running water and at least one bathroom equipped with a water closet,
lavatory and bathtub and/or shower. A building permit must be submitted
and approved by the building inspector to ensure that the manufactured
dwelling has been properly placed on and securely anchored to state
approved foundation and stabilizing devices.
(e) All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to a public water supply system and
to a public sewerage disposal system and be equipped with running water.
All water and sewer lines connecting the dwelling with public water and
sewer lines shall comply with the standards of the City.
(f) If a manufactured dwelling is used, the wheels and tongue or hitch shall be
removed within 60 days unless a temporary use permit provides for an
extended date.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 179
(g) Unless placed upon a continuous permanent foundation, the manufactured
dwelling shall be completely enclosed with a continuous concrete wall or
skirting which shall consist of non-decaying, non-corroding material
extending to the ground or to an impervious surface.
(h) Skirting and foundation enclosing walls shall have provisions for ventilation
and access to the space under the units as follows:
1. The walls or skirting shall have a net ventilation area of not less than
1-1/2 square feet for each 25 linear feet of exterior wall.
2. Openings shall be arranged to provide cross ventilation on opposing
sides and shall be protected with corrosion-resistant wire mesh.
3. All foundation areas shall be provided with a 16x24 inch access way
and shall be secured against entry.
(i) No additional or accessory buildings shall be permitted in conjunction with a
dwelling except as follows:
1. One carport or garage not to exceed 500 square feet in area.
2. One covered or uncovered patio not to exceed 300 square feet in
area.
3. One storage building not to exceed 100 square feet in area and which
shall be attached to and made a part of a carport or garage and which
shall be included as a part of the maximum area provided for the
carport or garage.
(j) A caretaker residence may be accessory to an existing commercial or
industrial use that is in need of protection. The duration of the conditional
use may be for the life of the commercial or industrial use and temporary
vacancy periods for up to two (2) years. If at the end of the conditional use,
the manufactured dwelling is removed from its permanent foundation, the
owner of the property shall sign and record a development agreement
approved by the City Attorney to remove the foundation and all additions to
the manufactured dwelling and permanently disconnect and secure all
utilities. The development agreement authorizes the City to perform the
work and place a lien against the property for the cost within 30 days from
the date on which the manufactured dwelling is moved from its foundation.
This condition shall not apply in the event that another approved
manufactured dwelling is placed within 30 days of the original unit's
removal.
(k) Two (2) off-street parking spaces for the dwelling shall be provided.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 180
(5) Accessory dwelling to relieve a temporary medical hardship. A manufactured
dwelling used as an accessory dwelling to a permanent residence for a designated
member of the immediate family may be granted by the Planning Commission when
a medical hardship exists in the family.
(a) The minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet.
(b) The medical hardship is verified by a licensed physician.
(c) There is insufficient space in the permanent residence to accommodate the
additional family member(s).
(d) The family lacks the resources for alternative off-site care.
(e) The temporary use shall be limited to a maximum of one year unless resubmitted
for an extension and approved by the Planning Commission.
(f) The manufactured dwelling shall be provided with an approved water supply
and sewage disposal system.
(g) A building permit for the siting and anchoring of the manufactured dwelling
shall be submitted and approved by the building inspector prior to
occupancy. The building permit must be accompanied by a plot plan
showing that the temporary home complies with the minimum required yard
setbacks for the zone in which it is located.
(h) The manufactured dwelling and all accessory elements shall be removed
within 60 days of vacation by the family member(s) and may not be
converted to an accessory use.
(6) Standards for neighborhood commercial.
(a) Permitted Uses. Uses shall be limited to small-scale establishments that
serve the neighborhood or the community that do not exceed 2,000 square
feet of floor area and are located at the intersection of a designated arterial
and/or collector street. Allowable uses include those allowed in the
Community and Broadway Commercial Zoning Districts.
(b) Outdoor Activities Prohibited. All business operations except off-street
parking and temporary activities associated with an established business
shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
(c) Automobile-Oriented Uses Prohibited. Prohibited automobile-oriented uses
include:
1. Businesses that repair, sell, rent, store, or service automobiles, trucks,
motorcycles, buses, recreational vehicles, boats, construction
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 181
equipment, and similar vehicles and equipment.
2. Drive-up, drive-in, and drive-through facilities.
(d) Maximum Size. The maximum commercial floor area shall not exceed 2,000
square feet per neighborhood commercial site. There may be up to four
neighborhood commercial sites at one intersection (one on each corner).
(e) Minimum Yard Requirements.
1. Front yards abutting residential zone shall be twenty (20) feet.
2. Back and side yards abutting residential zone shall be ten (10) feet.
3. Yards shall be landscaped as provided in Section 5.120.
4. See Section 5.090 for additional setbacks on designated streets.
(f) Maximum Building Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet.
(g) Building Orientation. All new or remodeled commercial buildings shall have
their main entrance facing the street, pursuant to Section 5.13. Off-street
parking shall be located behind or to the side of the primary building entrance
and shall be screened from abutting residential lots, as generally shown in
Figure 8.20(6).
Figure 8.20(a) – Neighborhood Commercial Building Orientation
(h) Pedestrian Access. A sidewalk shall provide safe, convenient pedestrian
access from the street to the building entrance. If the sidewalk crosses the
driveway, it shall be raised or marked in a manner that calls attention to the
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 182
sidewalk.
(i) Signs. One sign for each facing street per business or use conducted within
the building, not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. Signs attached
flat against the building shall not project more than twelve (12) inches from
the wall nor project above the roof or parapet wall. Freestanding signs shall
be located on the property and shall not project beyond the property line.
(j) Additional Standards. The Planning Commission may limit the type, extent,
and hours of operation of a proposed use and may require additional
standards to protect adjacent property owners based upon evidence
submitted at the public hearing.
(7) Commercial Dog Kennels.
(a) Minimum size of lots upon which commercial dog kennels are located is one
acre.
(b) Commercial dog kennels shall be located behind the residence if one exists,
not less than 100 feet from any residence, nor closer than twenty (20) feet to
any property lines.
(c) Dogs shall be properly caged or housed and proper sanitation shall be
maintained at all times. All food shall be stored in metal or other rodentproof
receptacles.
(d) When a property with a commercial dog kennel is rezoned to a zoning district
that does not allow commercial dog kennels, the commercial kennel use on
that property shall be completely discontinued within a period of six (6)
months from the date of reclassification.
(e) Kennels must be operated in accordance with Veneta Municipal Code
Regulations.
(8) Accessory Structures Larger than 2,500 Square Feet in SFR, GR, RC, and RR
Zone.
(a) Shall require a building permit.
(b) Shall not interfere with preservation of significant natural resources.
(c) Shall be located so that grading and filling are kept to a minimum and natural
feature such as drainage swales, rock outcroppings, and slopes are retained.
(d) Shall minimize detrimental impacts on neighboring properties (such as
obstruction of views, limiting solar access, and intrusion on privacy).
Planning Commission may impose conditions such as maximum height of
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 183
structure, minimum setbacks, and required buffering in order to limit
detrimental impacts.
(9) Commercial animal husbandry.
(a) The farm or parcel shall be located in the Rural Residential zone and shall
have a minimum area of five (5) acres, with the exception of goat or cattle
dairies which require a minimum area of twenty (20) acres.
(b) The keeping of no more than five (5) swine over the age of three (3) months.
(c) No killing or dressing of fowl or animals for public use.
(d) Animal runs, kennels, or farm buildings for housing livestock or animals,
chicken or other fowl pens and colonies of bees shall be located on the rear
half of the property, not less than 100 feet from any residence, nor closer
than twenty (20) feet to the interior property line of an abutting property.
(e) Animals, chickens and/or other fowl shall be properly caged or housed, and
proper sanitation shall be maintained at all times. All animal or poultry food
shall be stored in metal or other rodent proof receptacles.
(f) When an RR zone is reclassified to another zone, all those land uses
granted under item (b) above shall be completely discontinued within a
period of six (6) months from the date of reclassification.
(10) Day care facilities.
(a) At least 75 square feet of outdoor play and socializing area per child or adult
shall be provided, but in no case shall the total area be less than 500 square
feet.
(b) If planned for children, the outdoor plan shall be adequately fenced in order
to provide for their safety.
(c) If the day care facility is not a residential use as provided in ORS 657A.440,
the day care facility shall not be located in a single-family residence.
(d) The facility shall be readily accessible for fire and other emergency vehicles.
(e) The facility shall meet all applicable state licensing requirements. Proof that
these requirements are met shall be provided.
(f) Adequate space must be provided on-site to allow for drop-off of the children
or adults, preferably a circular drive. L-shaped drives and alley drop-offs
may also be approved.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 184
(g) Parking areas and ingress-egress points are designed so as to facilitate
traffic, bicycle, and pedestrian safety; to avoid congestion; and to minimize
curb cuts on arterial and collector streets.
(11) Standards for multi-family in Single-Family Residential Zone. The Planning
Commission may allow more than one dwelling on a legal lot if the proposed use
meets the following standards.
(a) Minimum legal lot size is 18,000 square feet.
(b) Existing lot is incapable of division to City standards.
(c) Shall minimize detrimental impacts on neighboring properties, such as
obstruction of views, limiting solar access, and intrusion on privacy. Planning
Commission may impose conditions such as maximum height of structure,
minimum setbacks, and required buffering in order to limit detrimental
impacts.
(12) Standards for commercial and industrial uses with open display or storage outside
the building. These standards also apply to open display or storage outside
exceeding 180 days, material recycling operations and outdoor sales of commercial
merchandise. Open display or storage may be allowed by the Planning
Commission if it meets the following standards:
(a) Storage areas shall be located behind buildings to minimize the visibility of
approved storage.
(b) Except for the sales of commercial merchandise, any outdoor storage shall
be surrounded by a sight-obscuring fence, wall, or landscaping.
(c) Display of commercial merchandise must not encroach on any required
yards, parking spaces or vehicular circulation areas. Additional setbacks
may be required by the Planning Commission.
(13) Standards for high impact transportation and recreation facilities such as sports
complexes, stadiums, equestrian arenas, golf courses, swimming pools, heli-ports,
heli-stops, and bus or train terminals.
(a) Major noise generators shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from residential
property lines and shall be screened by a noise attenuating barrier.
(b) Transportation facilities must be consistent with or incorporated into the
Transportation System Plan (TSP).
(c) Major public recreation facilities must be consistent with or incorporated into
the Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Plan.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 185
(d) . A Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) and parking study may be required by the
Planning Official or the City Engineer in accordance with Section 5.27 of
the Veneta Land Development Ordinance. The development project must
include mitigation for any decrease in level of service or operational safety
of the transportation system.
(14) Standards for an RV park. The Planning Commission may allow parks for recreation
vehicles if the following standards are met:
(a) The park shall consist of a minimum of one acre.
(b) There shall be a minimum of a twenty (20) foot landscaped buffer on all
sides.
(c) The public transportation system must be able to support large trucks and
trailers.
(15) Standards for outdoor commercial amusement and recreation establishments.
(a) These uses may not abut any residential uses or districts.
(b) Screening and setbacks in addition to those normally associated with the
district must be increased to minimize the auditory and visual impacts of the
proposed establishment on adjacent uses.
(16) Standards for drive-thru eating and drinking establishments, banks, and similar
drive-thru establishments. Drive-thru includes “drive-up”, “drive-in”, and “drivethrough”
facilities. These are permitted only when they conform to the following
standards which are intended to calm traffic and protect pedestrian safety:
(a) The drive-thru portion is accessory to the primary commercial “walk-in” use.
(b) The drive-thru window or kiosk, as applicable, is located at least twenty (20)
feet from any front or street property line. The setback area shall be
landscaped as required under Section 5.12. Walk-up only teller machines
and kiosks may be oriented to a street sidewalk or walkway.
(c) The drive-thru facility is not oriented to a street corner.
(d) No more than one drive-thru facility shall be permitted on one block, or for a
distance of 400 linear feet along the same street frontage, whichever is less.
(e) All vehicle queuing areas shall be designed so that vehicles do not obstruct a
driveway, fire access lane, walkway, or public right-of-way.
(f) Comply with access management provisions under Section 5.24, and other
applicable requirements of Articles 5, 6, and 8.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 186
(g) Adjustments to the standards in a-f may be approved by the Planning
Commission through a Track 2 Site Plan Review where the commission finds
that potential adverse impacts on traffic circulation, pedestrian safety, and
aesthetics are mitigated by alternative design features that are equal or
superior to those that are required by the base code.
(17) Standards for automobile service and repair stations, truck stops, car and truck
washes, and heavy equipment/truck rentals, sales and repair. Automobile service
stations, including maintenance and repair; truck fuel sales, servicing stations, and
overnight trucking facilities; car or truck washes; and heavy equipment and truck
rental sales/ and repair may be allowed by the Planning Commission if the following
standards are met:
(a) All activities associated with automotive, truck and heavy equipment repair
and service, with the exception of maintenance activities such as pumping
gas or changing tires, shall take place within a building constructed to ensure
that noise or odor do not disturb the normal operation or tranquility of
neighboring uses.
(b) Storage of vehicles to be repaired shall be screened by a sight-obscuring
fence, wall, or hedge.
(c) There shall be a minimum of a five foot front yard setback that is landscaped.
(d) There shall be a physical barrier between the driving surfaces and
pedestrian areas.
(e) All areas of the site where vehicles or equipment will be stored, repaired, or
displayed must be paved.
(f) The areas around fuel pumps and over underground storage tanks must be
paved with concrete.
(g) Public restroom facilities must be available within the building.
(h) All stormwater runoff must be pretreated with pollution control devices before
entering into the public stormwater system.
(18) Stables. Interim uses of stables are allowed provided:
(a) Buildings used for the overnight accommodation of animals, and structures
that enclose animals outside of the buildings, shall be constructed to ensure
that noise or odor do not disturb the normal operation or tranquility of
neighboring land uses.
(b) The dust and other side effects of the use do not interfere with the successful
operations of adjacent land uses.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 187
(c) Bulk storage or sales of fertilizer, feed, or plant materials is prohibited.
(19) Standards for development in the GW subzone. The development must comply with
all standards listed below. If the proposed development cannot comply with all the
standards, the Planning Commission must determine what balance is needed
between the public benefits provided by standards (a) through (e) and the private
benefits provided by standards (f) and (g).
(a) Fish and wildlife habitats and wildlife movement corridors will be protected.
(b) Scenic qualities and viewpoints will be preserved.
(c) Natural drainageways are protected and the stormwater plans comply with an
approved stormwater drainage management plan. Erosion will be prevented
or controlled.
(d) Significant trees and other site vegetation will be preserved.
(e) Stream corridors and wetland will be protected and provided with buffers.
(f) The practical needs of construction activity are provided for in terms of
ingress and egress.
(g) Exceptional and undue hardship upon property owner or developer is
avoided. For purposes of this subsection, hardship means the subject
property will have no economically viable use without the Conditional Use
Permit. The hardship must arise from conditions inherent in the land which
distinguish it from other land in the neighborhood.
(20) Standards for residential facilities
(a) Parking shall be in accordance with Sections 5.20 and 5.21. Bicycle parking
may be reduced to provide for only employee bicycle parking where it is
demonstrated that residents’ disabilities preclude bicycle transportation.
(b) Landscaping shall be in accordance with multi-family developments as
outlined in Section 5.12 and.
(c) Where such facilities have more than fifteen (15) residents, density shall not
exceed 30 beds per acre and the facility must be served by City water and
sewer.
(21) Standards for rebuilding or continuation of a non-conforming use that is totally or
substantially destroyed. Rebuilding of a non-conforming structure shall meet the
following minimum standards:
(a) The building may be placed on the original foundation.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 188
(b) If a new foundation or location is proposed, the building shall meet the
setback requirements for the zone.
(c) The use of the building shall not be more intensive than the original nonconforming
use.
(d) The building shall meet all current building and fire codes.
(e) No additional dwelling units may be added.
(22) Bed and breakfast inns. Bed and breakfast inns are subject to the following
standards:
(a) Accessory Use. The use must be accessory to a household already
occupying the structure as a residence.
(b) Maximum Size. A maximum of four (4) bedrooms for guests, and a maximum
of eight (8) guests are permitted per night. No separate structures are
permitted, except for residential accessory structure.
(c) Length of Stay. Maximum length of stay is 28 days per guest; anything
longer is classified as a boarding house or residential facility.
(d) Employees. Up to two (2) non-resident employees. There is no limit on
residential employees.
(e) Food Service. May be provided only to overnight guests of the business.
(f) Owner-Occupied. Shall be owner-occupied.
(g) Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with Section 5.15 of the Veneta Land
Development Ordinance.
(h) Business Registration. The owner must maintain a current City of Veneta
business registration.
(i) Monitoring. All Bed and Breakfast Inns shall register with the City of Veneta
for any applicable Transient Room Tax and maintain a guest logbook. It
must include the names and home addresses of guests, guests’ license plate
numbers if traveling by car, dates of stays and the room number of each
guest. The log must be available for inspection by City staff upon request.
SECTION 8.12 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL
The Planning Commission may impose conditions that are found necessary to ensure that
the use is compatible with other uses in the vicinity, and that the negative impact of the
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 189
proposed use on the surrounding uses and public facilities is minimized. These conditions
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Limiting the hours, days, place and/or manner of operation;
(2) Requiring site or architectural design features which minimize environmental impacts
such as noise, vibration, exhaust/emissions, light, glare, erosion, odor and/or dust;
(3) Designing the project to compliment the visual context. Utilizing techniques such as
architectural design, site design, use of native landscaping, and choice of colors and
building materials in such manner that facilities are screened from off-site observers
and blend with the natural visual character of the area;
(4) Requiring larger setback areas, lot area, and/or lot depth or width;
(5) Limiting the building height, size or lot coverage and/or location on the site;
(6) Requiring landscaping, screening, drainage, water quality facilities, and/or
improvement of parking and loading areas;
(7) Designating the size, number, location and/or design of vehicle access points or
parking areas;
(8) Requiring street right-of-way to be dedicated and street(s), sidewalks, curbs, planting
strips, pathways, or trails to be improved;
(9) Limiting the number, size, location, height and/or lighting of signs;
(10) Limiting or setting standards for the location, design, and/or intensity of outdoor
lighting;
(11) Requiring berms, screening or landscaping and the establishment of standards for
their installation and maintenance;
(12) Requiring and designating the size, height, location, and/or materials for fences;
(13) Requiring the protection and preservation of existing trees, soils, vegetation,
watercourses, habitat areas, drainage areas, historic resources, and cultural
resources;
(14) Protecting public safety, especially from vandalism and trespass;
(15) Timing construction to minimize disturbances;
(16) Limiting land disturbance and grading
(17) Minimizing impervious surfaces;
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 190
(18) Designating special areas of concern such as the GW subzone, wetlands, or other
significant features on final development plans; and
(19) Marking with fencing or other methods special areas of concern such as the GW
subzone, wetlands, or other significant features on the site prior to commencement
of excavation, grading, or construction.
(20) Mitigation measures for impacts to the transportation system as documented in a
Traffic Impact Analysis. These measures may be off-site and may include multimodal
transportation improvements which would help protect the function and
operation of the planned transportation system, provided that the measures are
proportionate to the impact of the proposed development.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 191
ARTICLE 9 - NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION 9.01 INTENT
It is the intent of the nonconforming uses sections of this ordinance to permit pre-existing
uses and structures which do not conform to the use or standards of this ordinance to
continue under conditions specified herein. However, alteration or expansion of these
nonconforming uses and structures, thereby creating potentially adverse effects in the
immediate neighborhood or in the City as a whole, are subject to Sections 9.01 to 9.08 of
this ordinance.
SECTION 9.02 CONTINUATION OF A NONCONFORMING USE
(1) Subject to the provisions of Sections 9.01 to 9.08, a nonconforming use of a
structure or a nonconforming use, may be continued and maintained, but shall not
be altered or extended except as provided herein.
(2) The extension of a nonconforming use which was approved prior to passage of this
ordinance is not an extension of a nonconforming use.
(3) Except as stated in Section 9.04(1), in any industrial or commercial zone, a
pre-existing dwelling may be altered or extended, provided that such alteration or
extension shall not exceed the yard, lot coverage and building height requirements
of the GR zone.
SECTION 9.03 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE
A structure conforming as to use but nonconforming as to height, setback, lot coverage or
similar dimensional standard, may be altered or extended if the alteration or extension
does not cause the structure to otherwise deviate from the standards of this ordinance.
SECTION 9.04 DISCONTINUANCE OF A NONCONFORMING USE
(1) If a nonconforming use involving a structure is discontinued from active use for a
period of one (1) year, further use of the property shall be for a conforming use.
(2) If a nonconforming use not involving a structure is discontinued from active use for a
period of six (6) months, further use of the property shall be for a conforming use.
SECTION 9.05 CHANGE OF A NONCONFORMING USE
If a nonconforming use is changed, it shall be changed to a use conforming to the
regulations of the zone in which it is located.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 192
SECTION 9.06 DESTRUCTION OF A NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE
If a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use is totally or
substantially destroyed, a future structure or use on the site shall be replaced within 6 (six)
months, in accordance with the provisions of the zone in which the property is located or
the property owner may apply for a conditional use permit to continue with the existing use
or to replace the structure in its present location. This provision does not apply to voluntary
destruction. If the nonconforming structure is voluntarily destroyed, then future use shall
be in accordance with the provisions of the zone in which the property is located.
SECTION 9.07 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE
Any building housing a nonconforming use may be maintained or restored to conform with
the standards of the building code, including repair or replacement of fixtures, wiring or
plumbing, provided the building is not increased in cubic content or floor area.
SECTION 9.08 COMPLETION OF STRUCTURE
Nothing contained in this ordinance shall require any change in the plans, construction,
alteration or designated use of a structure for which a building permit has been lawfully
issued and construction has commenced prior to adoption of this ordinance, provided the
structure, if nonconforming or intended for a nonconforming use, is completed and in use
within one (1) year from the time the permit is issued
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 193
ARTICLE 10 – VARIANCES
SECTION 10.01 PURPOSE
Because of the impossibility of foreseeing and providing for all circumstances and
conditions which may affect individual properties or uses, the variance provision is created,
thus making it possible to adjust the provisions of this ordinance to special and unusual
cases without defeating the general purposes and intent of the ordinance.
SECTION 10.02 AUTHORIZATION TO GRANT OR DENY VARIANCES
The Planning Commission may authorize variances from the requirements of this
ordinance where it can be shown that, owing to special and unusual circumstances related
to a specific property or use, strict application of the ordinance would cause an undue or
unnecessary hardship. No variance shall be created to allow the use of property for a
purpose not authorized within the zone in which the proposed use would be located. In
granting a variance, the Planning Commission may attach conditions which it finds
necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or vicinity and otherwise
achieve the purposes of this ordinance.
SECTION 10.03 CIRCUMSTANCES FOR GRANTING A VARIANCE
A variance may be granted only in the event that all of the following circumstances exist:
(1) Special or unusual circumstances or conditions apply to the property or use which do
not apply generally to other properties or uses in the same zone or vicinity.
(2) The granting of the variance shall not constitute a grant of special privilege not
enjoyed by owners of other similarly zoned properties.
(3) The granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public health,
safety, and welfare or materially injurious to other property in the same zone or
vicinity in which the property is located.
(4) The granting of the variance is in accordance with the purposes and objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan, an adopted Specific Development Plan, and or other related
Veneta Ordinances and will not otherwise conflict with the objectives of any City
ordinance, plan, or policy.
(5) The unusual circumstance or condition described in Subsection (1) of this Section
shall not be self-created, arise from a previous Code violation, or rely on loss of profit
or financial need.
(6) The Variance requested is the minimum necessary to alleviate the unusual condition.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 194
SECTION 10.04 PROCEDURE FOR TAKING ACTION ON A VARIANCE
APPLICATION
The procedure for taking action on an application for a variance shall be as follows:
(1) A property owner may initiate a request for a variance by filing an application with
the Building and Planning Official, using forms prescribed pursuant to Section 2.06.
A filing fee in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.08 shall accompany an
application for a variance. The applicant shall submit evidence that the
circumstance for granting a variance as outlined in Section 10.03 applies to the
variance request.
(2) Before the Planning Commission may act on a variance application, a public hearing
shall be held thereon in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.11.
(3) The Planning Commission may prescribe the terms and conditions upon which a
variance may be granted and set a time limit for the duration of such variance and
may require guarantees in such form as deemed proper under the circumstances to
ensure that the purpose for which said variance is granted will be fulfilled and that
the conditions of the variance will be met.
(4) Within seven (7) days after a decision has been rendered with reference to a
variance application, the Building and Planning Official shall provide the applicant
with written notice of the decision.
SECTION 10.05 BUILDING PERMITS FOR AN APPROVED VARIANCE
Building permits for all or any portion of an application involving an approved variance shall
be issued only on the basis of the plan for the variance as approved by the Building and
Planning Official. Any proposed change in the approved plan shall be submitted to the
Building and Planning Official as a new application for a variance. Building permits
involving an approved variance shall not be issued until the appeal period as specified
under Section 2.07 has passed.
SECTION 10.06 TIME LIMIT OF AN APPROVED VARIANCE APPLICATION
Variance approvals shall be effective three (3) years from the date of final decision, unless
a building permit has been issued and substantial construction pursuant thereto has taken
place. Within one (1) year from the final decision, a final map shall be prepared and filed
with the Building and Planning Official, including all required modifications and conditions.
Approved variances that do not have a final map submitted within one (1) year shall be
void.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 195
SECTION 10.07 TERMINATION OF A VARIANCE
A variance may be revoked or modified by the Planning Commission, after public hearing,
on any one or more of the following grounds:
(1) Approval of the variance was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation.
(2) The use for which approval was granted has ceased to exist.
(3) The variance is in violation of any other applicable statute, ordinance or regulation.
A variance may be revoked by the Planning Commission without public hearing when the
use does not meet the conditions specifically established for it at the time of approval of the
application.
SECTION 10.08 LIMITATION
No request for a variance shall be considered within the one year period immediately
following a denial of such request, except the Planning Commission may consent to a new
hearing if, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, new evidence or a change of
circumstances warrants it.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 196
ARTICLE 11 - AMENDMENTS
SECTION 11.01 AUTHORIZATION TO INITIATE AMENDMENTS
An amendment to the text of this ordinance may be initiated by the City Council, the City
Planning Commission or by application of a property owner or city resident. An
amendment to the zoning map may be initiated by the City Council, the City Planning
Commission or by application of a property owner. The request by an application for an
amendment shall be accomplished by filing an application with the Building and Planning
Official using forms prescribed pursuant to Section 2.06. A filing fee in accordance with the
provisions of Section 2.08 and a narrative statement explaining the reasons for the
amendment shall accompany an application by a property owner.
SECTION 11.02 PUBLIC HEARINGS ON AMENDMENTS
All requests for amendment to the text or zoning map of this ordinance shall comply with
the following public hearing procedures:
(1) Notice of public hearing shall be as specified in Section 2.11.
(2) The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed
amendment at its earliest practicable meeting after it is proposed. Lane County shall
be notified about proposed amendments and large area rezoning proposals before
the date of the hearing.
(3) The Planning Commission shall, within 40 days after the initial hearing date,
recommend to the City Council approval, disapproval or modification of the proposed
amendment.
(4) After receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council
shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment in conformity with the notice
provisions of Section 2.11.
(5) All public hearings shall be in accordance with procedures for the conduct of
hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council.
(6) Within seven (7) days after a decision has been rendered with reference to an
amendment, the Building and Planning Official shall provide the applicant with
written notice of the decision. This procedure shall apply to recommendations made
by the Planning Commission and to final action made by the City Council.
SECTION 11.03 RECORD OF AMENDMENTS
The City Recorder shall maintain records of amendments to the text and zoning map of this
ordinance.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 197
SECTION 11.04 LIMITATIONS
No application of a property owner for an amendment to the text of this ordinance or to the
zoning map shall be considered by the Planning Commission within the (1) one year period
immediately following a previous denial of such request, except the Planning Commission
may permit a new application if, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, new evidence
or a change of circumstances warrants it.
SECTION 11.05 CRITERIA FOR AMENDMENTS
The proposed amendment is consistent with the City of Veneta’s planned transportation
system as described within the Transportation System Plan.
SECTION 11.06 TRANSPORTATION PLANNING RULE COMPLIANCE
The proposal shall demonstrate it is consistent with the adopted transportation system
plan and the planned function, capacity, and performance standards of the impacted
facility or facilities. Proposals shall be reviewed to determine whether they significantly
affect a transportation facility pursuant to Oregon Administrative Rule (OAR) 660-012-
0060 (Transportation Planning Rule - TPR). Where it is found that a proposed amendment
would have a significant effect on a transportation facility in consultation with the
applicable roadway authority, the City shall work with the roadway authority and applicant
to modify the request or mitigate the impacts in accordance with the TPR and applicable
law.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 198
ARTICLE 12 - HOME OCCUPATIONS
SECTION 12.01 PURPOSE OF HOME OCCUPATION PERMITS
To allow for home occupations that are compatible with the neighborhood in which they are
located. Home occupation permits are designed for those who are engaged in small
commercial ventures which could not necessarily be sustained if it were necessary to lease
commercial quarters and which, by the nature of the venture, are appropriate in scale and
impact to be operated within a residence. Some home occupations are permitted by right
and only require a business license. Other home occupations which may have some
impact on the neighborhood require a conditional use permit in addition to the business
license.
SECTION 12.02 STANDARDS FOR ALL HOME OCCUPATIONS
(1) The home occupation shall be secondary to the use of the dwelling as a residence.
(2) There shall be no external structural alterations or construction that causes the
premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of colors, materials,
construction, lighting, or design.
(3) No storage or display of goods shall be visible from the public street.
(4) Mechanical equipment, except that which is compatible with residential purposes,
shall be prohibited.
(5) The use or storage of heavy equipment or heavy vehicles shall not be permitted.
Heavy equipment and heavy vehicles shall include, but not be limited to the use of:
semi-trucks, trucks and tractors, back hoes, bob cats, refrigerator trucks, livestock
trucks, commercial buses, farm tractors, garbage trucks and log trucks.
(6) No home occupation shall cause an increase in the use of water or sewer, so that
the combined total use for dwelling and home occupation purposes exceeds the
average water use for one ERU (equivalent residential unit) or (9,142
gallons/month). Additional SDC’s may be assessed for home kitchens or other uses
requiring more water and sewer use than one ERU.
SECTION 12.03 MINOR HOME OCCUPATIONS
Home occupations in compliance with the standards for all home occupations and the
standards listed below are permitted as accessory uses. No special land use permit shall
be required to establish and maintain such uses. An annual business registration is
required as well as a signed agreement acknowledging compliance with the relevant home
occupations standards.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 199
(1) All aspects of the home occupation, including storage of materials and equipment,
shall be contained and conducted within a completely enclosed, lawfully-built
structure and be conducted in such a manner as not to give an outward appearance
of a business.
(2) The home occupation shall use no more than 25 percent of the floor area used for
human occupancy, or no more than 500 square feet in an accessory structure or
attached garage.
(3) On-site storage of hazardous materials (including toxic, explosive, noxious,
combustible, or flammable) is prohibited.
(4) The use shall involve no more than an average of five customers/clients per week.
(5) No one from outside the resident household shall work at the home occupation site.
The home occupation site shall not be used as a gathering or meeting place for
people employed by or associated with the home occupation. A “home occupation
site” means the property on which the home occupation is conducted.
(6) There shall be no more than an average of one commercial delivery or pickup per
week to or from the home occupation site.
(7) No additional on-site parking will be needed. Residential off-street parking
requirements as specified in 417 5.20(11) still apply.
(8) No written complaints have been received regarding the home occupation. If a
written complaint is submitted to city staff, the city shall not renew the business
license until the Planning Commission has approved the home occupation as a
conditional use.
SECTION 12.04 MAJOR HOME OCCUPATIONS
Home occupations which do not comply with the standards set forth for Minor Home
Occupations but do comply with the standards below may be permitted subject to Planning
Commission approval of a conditional use permit. A property owner may initiate a request
for a conditional use permit by filing an application, plans, and supplementary data with the
City, using forms prescribed pursuant to Section 2.06. A filing fee in accordance with the
provisions of Section 2.08 shall accompany the application for a conditional use permit.
The Planning Commission will take action on the conditional use application after holding a
public hearing in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.11. If approved, the resident
may then apply for an annual business license.
(1) All outdoor storage of materials or equipment is not visible from any public right-ofway
or adjacent property. The Planning Commission may require additional
plantings or screening. The only external evidence of an occupation shall be one
name plate as allowed by the Veneta Sign Code.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 200
(2) The home occupation shall use no more than 25 percent of the floor area used for
human occupancy and or no more than 1000 square feet in an accessory structure.
(3) Only hazardous materials (including toxic, explosive, noxious, combustible, or
flammable) normally incidental to residential use are allowed.
(4) Other than the household members residing within the dwelling, there shall be no
more than two (2) people engaged in on-site aspects of the home occupation. The
Planning Commission may further restrict the number of people involved in the
business and set hours of allowable operation.
(5) There shall be a maximum of three vehicle deliveries to or from the home
occupation site each week. Deliveries shall not be made by trucks with six (6)
wheels or more. Deliveries shall not restrict traffic circulation. The Planning
Commission may further restrict the number and times of the allowed deliveries.
(6) There shall be a maximum of two (2) business-related vehicles parked on-site or on
the street at any one time.
(7) There shall be no more than an average of ten (10) customers/client per day. The
Planning Commission may restrict the number and times of the allowed visits to
prevent inconvenience to nearby residents based on timing of visits, available
parking, and types of vehicles used. Any additional parking created for the purpose
of the home occupation shall be screened from view by any adjacent residences or
public streets.
SECTION 12.05 PROHIBITED HOME OCCUPATION USES
(1) Any activities which are detrimental to the residential use of nearby dwellings, such
as radio or TV interference, noise, dust, glare, vibration, smoke, or odor beyond
allowable levels as determined by local, state or federal standards, or that can be
detected beyond the property line. Activities which involve hazardous materials are
also prohibited. Such prohibited uses include:
(a) Ambulance service;
(b) Animal hospital, veterinary services, kennels or animal boarding;
(c) Auto or other vehicle repair, including but not limited to painting, tune-ups,
alignments, body-fender work, detailing, and upholstering;
(d) Repair, reconditioning or storage of motorized vehicles, boats, recreational
vehicles, airplanes or large equipment on-site;
(e) Restaurant;
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 201
(f) Medical and dental offices;
(g) Mortician, hearse services;
(h) Tow truck services;
(i) Gun dealerships involving any storage of guns.
(2) Any activity involving on-site retail sales except the sale of items that are incidental
to the permitted home occupation. For example, the sale of lesson books or sheet
music from music teachers, art or craft supplies from arts or crafts instructors,
computer software from computer consultants, and similar incidental items for sale
by home businesses are allowed subject to relevant requirements for minor or major
home occupations.
SECTION 12.06 TERMINATION OF HOME OCCUPATION
The Building and Planning Official or his/her designee may visit and inspect the site of
home occupations to insure compliance with all applicable regulations, during normal
business hours, and with reasonable notice.
(1) A home occupation which has been approved by staff may be revoked by staff if the
home occupation is found to be in violation of the provisions of this ordinance.
Enforcement procedures and penalties shall comply with Section 2.10. The
revocation decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission.
(2) A home occupation which has been approved as a conditional use by the Planning
Commission may be revoked by the Planning Commission if the home occupation is
found to be in violation of this ordinance or the conditions under which the permit
was approved. Enforcement procedures and penalties shall comply with Section
2.10. The revocation decision may be appealed to the City Council.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 202
ARTICLE 13 - DEFINITIONS
SECTION 13.01 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
The following rules of construction shall apply unless inconsistent with the plain meaning of the
context of this ordinance:
TENSE Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
NUMBER Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the
plural include the singular.
SHALL AND MAY The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
GENDER The masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
HEADINGS If there is any conflict or inconsistence between the headings of an
article, section or paragraph of this ordinance and the context thereof, the
said heading shall not be deemed to affect the scope, meaning or intent of
such context.
SECTION 13.02 DEFINITIONS
As used in the ordinance the following words and phrases shall mean:
Definitions
ABUT
Contiguous to or immediately join. For example, two (2) lots with a common
property line are considered to be abutting.
ACCESS
The way or means by which pedestrians and vehicles enter and leave
property.
ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES OR
ACCESSORY USE
A structure or use incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the main use of
property and located on the same lot as the main use. Accessory structures
are not permitted on vacant parcels of land. Accessory structures (including
those originally designed for human habitation such as mobile homes) shall
not be used for human habitation.
ALLEY
A street that is more than ten (10) feet and less than sixteen (16) feet in width
which affords primarily a secondary means of access to property.
ALTER
Any change, addition or modification in construction or occupancy.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 203
APPLICANT
The person making application to the City for any action as the owner or
representative of the owner of the property that is subject of the action. The
applicant shall provide proof of permission for the requested action from all
owners or other persons having an interest in the property subject to the
action.
BARN A farm building for housing livestock or animals
BASEMENT
A story partly or wholly underground. A basement shall be counted as a story
for purposes of height measurement where more than one-half of its height is
above the average level of the adjoining ground.
BLOCK
An area bounded on 4 sides by streets not including cul-de sacs. In residential
zones, block lengths do not exceed 600 feet and block perimeters do not
exceed 1800 feet except where topography, natural features, or existing
development creates conditions requiring longer blocks.
BUILDING
Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or
occupancy.
BUILDING HEIGHT
The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a
flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the
highest gable of a pitch or hip roof. The average maximum vertical height
of a building or structure measured at a minimum of three points from
finished grade along each building elevation. Architectural elements that
do not add floor area to a building or structure, such as chimneys, vents,
antennae and towers are not considered part of the height of a building or
structure.
BUILDING
INSPECTOR
The Division Director of the Lane County Department of Environmental
Management, Construction Permits Division, his authorized representative or
any other authorized building inspector appointed by the Veneta City Council.
BUILDING LINE
A line on a plat or map indicating the limit beyond which buildings or
structures may not be erected. Buildings shall not overhang over an
easement or dedicated right-of-way.
BUILDING &
PLANNING
OFFICIAL
An employee of the City appointed by the City Council with duties and
authority as designated by the Council, including the duties and authority as
designated by the Council, including the enforcement of the provisions
CHICKEN RUN
An enclosed area in which chickens are allowed to walk and run about and
that is attached to a chicken coop
CITY
The City of Veneta, Oregon.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 204
CITY COUNCIL
The Council of the City of Veneta, Oregon, which is the governing body of
said City.
DENSITY, NET
The number of dwelling units per acre of land in planned or actual use --
excluding from the acreage dedicated streets, sidewalks, other public rightsof-
way, parks, and non-residential uses allowed in residential areas.
DESIGNATED
ARTERIALS AND
COLLECTORS
Streets identified in the Veneta Comprehensive Plan Functional Class map as
Principal or Minor Arterials or Major or Minor Collectors.
DEVELOPMENT
A building or mining operation, making a material change in the use or
appearance of a structure or land, dividing land into two or more parcels,
including partitions and subdivisions as provided in ORS 92.010 to 92.285,
and creating or terminating a right of access.
DRIVEWAY
An area on private property where automobiles and other vehicles are
operated or allowed to stand.
DRIVEWAY
APPROACH
An area within the Right-of-Way, between the roadway of a public street and
private property line, intended to provide access for vehicles from the roadway
to a definite area of the private property, such as a driveway or parking area
intended and used for the ingress and egress of vehicles. The component
parts of the driveway approach are termed the apron, the end slopes or curb
return, and the sidewalk section.
DWELLING UNIT,
ACCESSORY
Accessory Dwelling Unit means an interior, attached or detached residential
structure that is used in connection with or that is accessory to a single family
dwelling.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY
Attached housing where each dwelling unit is not located on a separate lot.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 205
DWELLING,
SINGLE FAMILY
A single-family dwelling is a building (detached or attached)
used exclusively as a unit and built to the specifications of the State Building
Code (CABO) as adopted by the City of Veneta or a manufactured home as
defined within the statutes of the State of Oregon, on a permanent foundation.
(1) Shall meet current energy standards as adopted by the State of
Oregon.
(2) Shall be occupied only for residential purposes.
(3) Shall conform to all residential use development standards for onefamily
dwellings.
(4) Shall be constructed or installed in accordance with the State Building
Code (CABO), as adopted by the City or as defined within the statutes
of the State of Oregon.
(5) Foundations:
(a) Stick-built homes shall have foundation systems in accordance with
the State Building Code (CABO);
(b) Manufactured dwellings shall be placed on an excavated and
back-filled foundation, enclosed at the perimeter with no more than
sixteen (16) inches of the enclosing material exposed above grade.
Where the building site has a sloped grade, no more than sixteen (16)
inches of the enclosing material shall be exposed on the uphill side of
the home. If the manufactured home is placed on a basement, the
sixteen (16) inch limitation will not apply.
(6) Shall have a minimum width of eighteen (18) feet as measured by the
narrowest elevation.
(7) Shall have an exterior finish and roof materials commonly found on
residential structures in the area and City of Veneta.
(8) Shall have a roof with eaves and gable overhangs of not less than six
(6) inches measured from the vertical side of the structure and shall
include gutters.
(9) Shall have an enclosed garage or carport whichever is commonly found
in the surrounding area and its exterior covering and roof materials
shall be the same as the main structure. The maximum size of the
garage shall be three stalls, with a maximum floor area of 900 square
feet. Garage may be attached to house or detached.
(10) Shall have electrical meter base attached either to the garage or
dwelling unit.
(11) Shall have a roof with a nominal pitch of 3 feet in height for each twelve
(12) feet in width.
DWELLING,
SINGLE-FAMILY
ATTACHED
Common-wall dwellings (townhomes and rowhouses) where each dwelling
unit occupies a separate lot
(1) Shall be occupied only for residential purposes
(2) Shall have an enclosed garage or carport, whichever is commonly
found in the surrounding area and its exterior covering and roof
materials shall be the same as the main structure.
DWELLING, SINGLEFAMILY
DETACHED
A housing unit that is free standing and separate from other housing units.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 206
DWELLING UNIT
A single unit providing complete independent living facilities, designed for
occupancy by one (1) family and including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
FACILITIES
For the purposes of this Code, facilities are water, sewer, stormwater,
telephone, cable, natural gas, electric, telecommunication facilities and
broadband fiber conduit
FAMILY
An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, legal
adoption or legal guardianship living together in one dwelling unit using one
kitchen and providing meals or lodging to not more than two (2) additional
persons excluding servants; or a group of not more than five (5) unrelated
persons living together in one dwelling unit using one kitchen.
FENCE, SIGHT
OBSCURING
A continuous fence, wall, evergreen planting or combination thereof,
constructed and/or planted so as to provide a specified percentage of viewobscuring
screens.
FINAL ACTION,
FINAL DECISION,
OR FINAL
APPROVAL, (DATE
OF)
Means any legislative, administrative, or quasi-judicial action that
establishes the final determination of the City on any land use action by
reducing said decision in writing.
FLOOR AREA
The area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building or
portion thereof, exclusive of vent shafts and courts. The floor area of a
building or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls,
shall be the usable area under the vertical projection of the roof or floor
above.
GRADE (GROUND)
LEVEL
The average elevation of the finished ground level at the exterior of all
walls of a building, except that if a wall is parallel to and within five (5) feet
of a sidewalk, the sidewalk elevation nearest the wall shall constitute
ground level.
HARDSCAPE
Permanent improvements to a site other than a building, including but not
limited to, plazas, concrete planters, decks, sitting areas and other similar
architectural features that include small unit pavers or concrete.
HIGH IMPACT
RECREATION
FACILITIES
Facilities which have the potential for creating significant impacts through
traffic generation, noise, dust, chemical use, lighting, or other nuisance
characteristics. High impact recreation facilities include, but are not limited
to, sport complexes, stadiums, equestrian arenas, golf course and driving
ranges, and swimming pools.
HOME
OCCUPATION
A lawful business carried on by a resident of a dwelling where the business
is secondary to the residential use of the property. See Veneta Municipal
Code 5.05 for definitions and licensing requirements for businesses.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 207
HORTICULTURE
The cultivation of crops, orchards, or gardens. Domestic horticulture
involves plants grown for the people living on the property. Commercial
horticulture involves plants that will be sold; either on-site or delivered to a
buyer off-site. Farm stands and u-pick sales are temporary uses that may
require a permit.
JUNKYARD
Any property used by a business that deals in buying, selling, trading, and
storing, old motor vehicles, old motor vehicle parts, abandoned autos, or
machinery or parts thereof, or appliances or parts thereof.
KENNELS
Any lot or premises on which three (3) or more adult dogs are kept,
whether by owners of the dogs or by persons providing facilities and care,
whether or not for compensation. An adult dog is one that has reached the
age of six (6) months.
LEGAL LOT
A lot or parcel created pursuant to ORS 92.010 to 92.190, a unit of land
created in compliance with all applicable city land division regulations, or a
unit of land created by deed or land sales contract, if there were no applicable
planning, zoning or subdivision or partition ordinance or regulations in effect at
the time of the deed or land sales contract.
LIMITED LAND USE
DECISION
Means a final decision or determination made by the City of Veneta
pertaining to a site within an urban growth boundary that concerns:
(A) The approval or denial of a tentative subdivision or partition plan, as
described in ORS 92.040;
(B) The approval or denial of an application based on discretionary
standards designed to regulate the physical characteristics of a use
permitted outright, including but not limited to site review and design
review.
A Limited Land Use Decision does not mean a final decision made by the
City of Veneta pertaining to a site within an urban growth boundary that
concerns approval or denial of a final subdivision or partition plat or that
determines whether a final subdivision or partition plat substantially
conforms to the tentative subdivision or partition plan.
LOADING SPACE
An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building for the
temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials and which abuts upon a street, alley or other
appropriate means of access
LOT
A single unit of land that is created by a subdivision of land
LOT AREA
The total land area, commonly measured in square feet, within the
boundaries of a legal lot, exclusive of any street or alley rights-of-way.
LOT, CORNER
A lot at least two adjacent sides of which abut streets other than alleys,
provided the angle of intersection of the adjacent streets does not exceed
135 degrees.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 208
LOT, THROUGH
A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets other
than alleys.
LINE, PROPERTY
The division line between two units of land
LOT LINE, FRONT
The lot line separating the lot from a street other than an alley and, in the
case of a corner lot, the shortest lot line along a street other than an alley.
For flag lots, the lot line abutting the pole portion of the lot. See also
YARD, Front
LOT LINE, REAR
The lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE
Any lot line not a front or rear lot line. See also YARD, Side
LOT, FLAG
A lot or parcel that has the bulk of its area set back some distance from a
road or street and that is connected to the road or street via a thin strip of
land (i.e., the flagpole).
LOT WIDTH
The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, ordinarily measured parall
to the front lot line. For irregular shaped lot, lot width shall be determined by
measuring the maximum diameter of a circle that fits entirely within the
property lines as shown below:
MANUFACTURED
DWELLING
Residential trailers constructed before January 1, 1962; mobile homes
constructed between January 1, 1962 and June 15, 1976, which met
Oregon construction standards then in effect; and manufactured homes
constructed to federal standards. (Refer to definition of “dwelling, singlefamily”
for siting and construction requirements.)
MANUFACTURED
DWELLING PARK
Any place where two (2) or more manufactured dwellings are parked within
500 feet of one another on a lot, tract, or parcel of land under the same
ownership, the primary purpose of which is to rent space or keep space for
rent to any person for a charge or fee paid or to be paid for the rental or
use of facilities or to offer space free in connection with securing the trade
or patronage of such person. A manufactured dwelling park has the same
definition as a mobile home park. Manufactured dwelling parks within
Veneta are required to register as a business each year.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 209
MAP
A final diagram, drawing or other writing concerning a partition.
MEDICAL
MARIJUANA
FACILITY
A facility registered with the Oregon Health Authority under ORS
475.314 and OAR 333-008-1050 to:
i. Accept the transfer of usable marijuana and immature marijuana
plants from a registry identification cardholder, the designated
primary caregiver of a registry identification cardholder, or a person
responsible for a marijuana grow site to the medical marijuana
facility; or
ii. Transfer usable marijuana and immature marijuana plants to a
registry identification cardholder or the designated primary
caregiver of a registry identification cardholder.
MOBILE
VENDING UNIT
Any vehicle that is self-propelled, or can be pulled or pushed down a
sidewalk, street, highway or waterway intended for retail, food, or drink
sales.
MOBILE
VENDING SITE
One (1) site with multiple (three or more) mobile vendors.
NONCONFORMING
STRUCTURE, LOT
OR USE
A lawful existing structure, lot or use at the time this ordinance or any
amendment thereto becomes effective which does not conform to the
dimensional or similar standards of the zone in which it is located.
OPEN SPACE
Land area to be used for scenic or open recreational purposes within the
development. Open space does not include street right-of-way, driveways,
parking areas, required setbacks or public service easements unless these
areas have some special recreational design or purpose.
OWNER
An individual, association, partnership, or corporation having legal or equitable
title to land, other than legal title held for purpose of security only.
PARCEL
A unit of land that is created by a partitioning of land.
PARKING SPACE
An off-street enclosed or unenclosed surfaced area with minimum dimensions
of eighteen (18) feet by nine (9) feet, exclusive of maneuvering and access
area, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one automobile and
connected with a street by a surfaced driveway which affords ingress and
egress for automobiles.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 210
PARTITION
Either an act of partitioning land or an area or tract of land partitioned as
defined in this section.
PARTITION LAND
To divide an area or tract of land into two or three parcels within a calendar
year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of
land under single ownership at the beginning of such year. "Partition land"
does not include divisions of land resulting from lien foreclosures; divisions of
land resulting from the creation of cemetery lots; and divisions of land made
pursuant to a court order, including but not limited to court orders in
proceedings involving testate or intestate succession; and "partition land"
does not include any adjustment of a lot line by the relocation of a common
boundary where an additional parcel is not created and where the existing
parcel reduced in size by the adjustment is not reduced below the minimum lot
standards of the zoning ordinance.
PERSON
A natural person, firm, partnership, association, social or fraternal
organization, corporation, trust, estate, receiver, syndicate, branch of
government, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
PLANNING
COMMISSION
The Planning Commission of the City of Veneta, Oregon.
PROFESSIONAL
OFFICE
An office occupied by doctors, dentists, accountants, attorneys, optometrists,
architects, professional engineers or surveyors or persons engaged in similar
occupations.
PROPERTY LINE
ADJUSTMENT
PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT: The Property line adjustment is a
relocation or elimination of all or a portion of the common property line
between abutting properties that does not create an additional lot or parcel.
An adjusted property line shall be surveyed and monumented in accordance
with ORS 92.065(3); a survey, complying with ORS 209.250, shall be filed with
the county surveyor; and the property line adjustment shall be recorded with
the Lane County Department of Deeds and Records
PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC
BUILDINGS
OR USES
A building or use owned or operated by a religious, charitable or other
non-profit organization; a public utility or any social agency such as a
church, school, auditorium, meeting hall, hospital, club, nursing or care
home, stadium, library, art gallery, museum, fire station, utility substation,
cemetery, park, playground, sports field, bicycle or pedestrian way or
community center.
QUASI-JUDICIAL
Refers to an action or decision that requires substantial discretion or
judgment in applying the standards or criteria of this Code. Quasi-judicial
land use decisions involve a public hearing.
RECREATIONAL
VEHICLE
A vacation trailer or other unit, with or without motive power, which is
designed for human occupancy and to be used temporarily for recreational
or emergency purposes. It shall also include a camper placed on a pickup
truck.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 211
REDUCTION
A lessening in value, quantity, size, or the like.
REMODEL
The addition to, removal of or from, or physical modification or repair of an
exterior part or portion of a building.
REPLAT
The act of plating the lots, parcels and easements in a recorded subdivision or
partition plat to achieve a re-configuration of the existing subdivision or
partition plat or to increase or decrease the number of lots in the subdivision.
RESIDENTIAL
FACILITY
Residential Facility with six (6) or more persons as defined by ORS
197.660.
RESIDENTIAL HOME
A residential treatment or training or adult foster home that provides
residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training or a
combination thereof as defined by ORS 197.660 for five or fewer
individuals who need not be related. Staff persons required to meet
licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of facility
residents, and need not be related to each other or to any resident of the
residential home.
RIGHT-OF-WAY
The right of passage or of way, which is a servitude imposed by law or
convention, and by virtue of which one has the right to pass over or through
the property of another as is set forth by its terms.
SERVICE STATION,
AUTOMOBILE
A place or station designed and used primarily for the supplying of motor
fuel, oil, lubrication and accessories to motor vehicles but excluding major
repair and overhauling.
SHADOW PLAT
A future subdivision or partition concept plan approved by the city in
conjunction with a request for interim development (often a single-family
residence or partition). The shadow plat is not binding on either the
property owner of the city; that is, the property owner would have to apply
for tentative plat approval for future development proposals. Shadow plats
are designed to ensure that an urban level of development will be possible
when urban services become available.
SIGN
Any medium including its structure and component parts, which is used or
intended to be used to attract attention to the subject matter for advertising
purposes.
SIGHT OBSCURING
To impede the visibility of an area by more than 75 percent through the use
of fences, vegetation or other means.
SITE
Site means a property (or group of adjacent parcels or lots under the
same ownership) that is subject to a permit application under this
code.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 212
A public or private way that is created to provide ingress or egress for
persons to one or more lots, parcels, areas or tracts of land and including
the term, "road," "highway," "lane," "avenue," "alley" or similar
designations.
(a) Alley A narrow street through a block primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on another
street.
(b) Arterial (Principal) Roadways in urbanized areas which serve the major
centers of activity, the highest traffic volume corridors, the longest trip
desires, and a high proportion of the total urban area travel (even though it
may only constitute a relatively small percentage of the total roadway
network).
• Provides significant intra-area travel
• Because of the nature of the travel served by the major arterial system,
almost all are fully and partially controlled access facilities.
• For major arterials, service to abutting land is subordinate to travel service
to major traffic movements.
STREET
(c) Arterial (Minor) Interconnects with and augments the principal arterial
system.
• Accommodates trips of moderate length at a somewhat lower level of
travel mobility than major arterials.
• Distributes travel to geographic areas smaller than the higher system
does and offers lower traffic mobility.
• May carry local bus routes and provide intracommunity continuity. Ideally,
does not penetrate identifiable neighborhoods.
(d) Collector provides both land access service and traffic circulation within
residential neighborhoods and commercial and industrial areas.
• Differs from Arterial system in that facilities on the collector system may
penetrate residential neighborhoods, distributing trips from the arterials
through the area to their ultimate destination.
• Conversely, they collect traffic from the local streets in neighborhoods and
channel it into the arterial system.
(e) Cul-de-Sac (dead end Street) A local street, usually only a few hundred
feet in length and closed at one end, designed to serve the interior of a
subdivision or large tract of land.
(f) Half Street A portion of the width of a street, usually along the edge of a
subdivision, where the remaining portion of the street could be provided in
another subdivision.
(g) Limited Access Street A minor street parallel and adjacent to a major
arterial street providing access to abutting properties, but protected from
through traffic.
(h) Local Street Streets that serve primarily to provide direct access to
abutting land and access to the higher order systems. It offers the lowest
level of mobility and usually contains no bus routes.
Land Development Ordinance 493 Page | 213
STRUCTURAL
ALTERATION
Any change to the supporting members of a structure including
foundations, bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, girders or
structural change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE USE
That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind or any
piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in
some definite manner. The purpose for which land or a structure is
designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied and maintained.
SUBDIVISION
Either an act of subdividing land or an area or tract of land subdivided as
defined in this section.
SUBDIVIDE LAND
To divide land to create four or more lots within a calendar year.
TENTATIVE PLAN
A tentative plan is the plan of a subdivision or partition submitted to the City
for approval under the provision of ORS 92 and Article 3 and Article 5 of
the Land Division Ordinance.
VETERINARY
HOSPITAL
A building, together with animal runs, in which veterinary services, clipping,
bathing, boarding and other services are rendered to dogs, cats and other
small animals and domestic pets.
WETLAND
Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted to
life in saturated soil conditions.
YARD, BACK
A yard adjacent to a property line. See also LOT LINE, REAR
YARD, FRONT
A yard adjacent to a street and to the front entrance of a building. See also
LOT LINE, FRONT.
YARD, SIDE
A yard adjacent to a property line. For a corner lot, the Side Yard (located
at the side of a residence or structure) can also be adjacent to a street.
See also LOT LINE, SIDE.

VENETA LAND DIVISION
ORDINANCE No. 494
Amended:
May 22, 2019 by Ordinance No.549
June 23, 2016 by Ordinance No. 528
April 13, 2015 by Ordinance No. 519
March 25, 2013 by Ordinance No. 508
Adopted: January 25, 2010

CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 - INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS.............................................................................. 5
SECTION 1.01 TITLE .............................................................................................................. 5
SECTION 1.02 PURPOSE ....................................................................................................... 5
SECTION 1.03 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS ........................................................................... 5
SECTION 1.04 VALIDITY ........................................................................................................ 5
SECTION 1.05 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS ............................................. 5
SECTION 1.06 DEVELOPMENT ON SLOPES OF OR OVER FIFTEEN PERCENT ............. 6
ARTICLE 2 - APPLICATION AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES ................................................... 8
SECTION 2.01 LETTER OF INTENT ...................................................................................... 8
SECTION 2.02 LAND DIVISION CONFERENCE ................................................................... 8
SECTION 2.03 SUBMISSION PROCEDURE ......................................................................... 8
SECTION 2.04 APPLICATION FEES ...................................................................................... 9
SECTION 2.05 VARIANCE PETITION .................................................................................... 9
SECTION 2.06 NOTICE OF LIMITED LAND USE ACTIONS ............................................... 10
SECTION 2.07 WETLAND DEVELOPMENT ........................................................................ 11
ARTICLE 3 - PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS & REPLATS ................................................. 11
SECTION 3.01 PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS .......... 11
SECTION 3.02 PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT REVIEW CRITERIA ............................... 12
SECTION 3.03 PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT RECORDING REQUIREMENTS ........... 12
ARTICLE 4 - SUBDIVISIONS ...................................................................................................... 14
SECTION 4.01 TENTATIVE PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS .................................. 14
SECTION 4.02 TENTATIVE PLAN REVIEW AND ACTION PROCEDURES ....................... 18
SECTION 4.03 CATEGORIES FOR REVIEW OF TENTATIVE PLAN APPLICATIONS ...... 19
SECTION 4.04 AMENDMENTS ............................................................................................. 20
SECTION 4.05 FINAL PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS ............................................ 21
SECTION 4.06 REVIEW AND ACTION PROCEDURES ...................................................... 25
SECTION 4.07 FILING & RECORDING OF PLAT ................................................................ 25
SECTION 5.01 TENTATIVE PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS .................................. 27
SECTION 5.02 EXPEDITED LAND DIVISIONS .................................................................... 31
SECTION 5.03 TENTATIVE PLAN REVIEW AND ACTION PROCEDURES ....................... 31
SECTION 5.04 CATEGORIES FOR REVIEW OF TENTATIVE PLAN APPLICATIONS ..... 32
SECTION 5.05 AMENDMENTS ............................................................................................. 33
SECTION 5.06 FINAL PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS ............................................ 34
SECTION 5.07 REVIEW AND ACTION PROCEDURES ...................................................... 37
SECTION 5.08 FILING & RECORDING OF PLAT ................................................................ 37
ARTICLE 6 - DESIGN STANDARDS ........................................................................................... 39
SECTION 6.01 PRINCIPLES OF ACCEPTABILITY .............................................................. 39
SECTION 6.02 STREET DESIGN STANDARDS .................................................................. 39
SECTION 6.03 BLOCKS ........................................................................................................ 43
SECTION 6.04 BUILDING SITES .......................................................................................... 43
SECTION 6.05 GRADING OF BUILDING SITES .................................................................. 46
SECTION 6.06 BUILDING LINES .......................................................................................... 46
SECTION 6.07 LARGE BUILDING SITES ............................................................................. 47
SECTION 6.08 LAND FOR PUBLIC PURPOSES. ................................................................ 47
ARTICLE 7 - IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS ....................................................................... 49
SECTION 7.01 IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES ................................................................. 49
SECTION 7.02 SPECIFICATIONS FOR IMPROVEMENTS ................................................. 49
SECTION 7.03 IMPROVEMENTS IN SUBDIVISIONS .......................................................... 49
SECTION 7.04 IMPROVEMENTS IN PARTITIONS .............................................................. 51
SECTION 7.05 AGREEMENT FOR IMPROVEMENTS ........................................................ 51
SECTION 7.06 BOND ............................................................................................................ 52
SECTION 7.07 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FINANCING OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS ...... 52
ARTICLE 8 - GENERAL PROVISIONS ....................................................................................... 54
SECTION 8.01 INTERPRETATION....................................................................................... 54
SECTION 8.02 SEVERABILITY ............................................................................................. 54
SECTION 8.03 ENFORCEMENT AND APPEAL PROVISIONS ........................................... 54
SECTION 8.04 PENALTIES .................................................................................................. 55
SECTION 8.05 AMENDMENTS ............................................................................................. 55
SECTION 8.06 DEFINITIONS ............................................................................................... 56
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page | 5
ARTICLE 1 - INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
SECTION 1.01 TITLE
This ordinance shall be known as the "Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494."
SECTION 1.02 PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish standards and procedures for the division of land within the jurisdiction of the City of Veneta. These regulations are necessary in order to provide uniform procedures and standards for the division of land; to provide for the proper width and arrangement of streets; to coordinate proposed development with any overall plan; to provide for utilities and other public facilities; to avoid undue congestion of population; to assure adequate sanitation and water supply; to provide for the protection, conservation, and proper use of land; and in general to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
SECTION 1.03 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS
Subdivision plats and partition maps shall be approved in accordance with these regulations. A person desiring to subdivide land, desiring to partition land or desiring to sell any portion not the whole of a parcel of land within the City shall submit tentative plans and final documents for approval as provided in this ordinance and the State law.
SECTION 1.04 VALIDITY
The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
SECTION 1.05 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS
In addition to the regulations contained herein, all land divisions within the City shall comply with the following regulations:
(1) Chapter 92 of the Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS 92).
(2) The Comprehensive Plan adopted by the City Council, as permitted by Oregon law.
(3) Official Maps or Development Plans as adopted by the City Council.
(4) Land Development Ordinance as adopted by the City Council.
(5) Recording requirements of Lane County.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page | 6
(6) Veneta Municipal Code
(7) All other applicable regulations provided by law including but not limited to the Uniform Building Code (UBC) and Oregon Fire Code (OFC). Legal nonconforming uses and structures notwithstanding, the City may refuse to accept any application, or later may reject and deny any application submitted under this ordinance involving property where a violation of local, state, or federal law exists until the violation is remedied to the satisfaction of the agencies or jurisdiction(s) involved, or will be so remedied as part of the application approval.
SECTION 1.06 DEVELOPMENT ON SLOPES OF OR OVER FIFTEEN PERCENT
In addition to other review processes and standards required in other sections of this ordinance, the following process and standards shall apply to all land developments and land divisions on land where the slope meets or exceeds fifteen percent:
(1) A site shall be deemed to meet the 15% slope criteria if the average slope across the site in any direction meets or exceeds a 15 foot rise in every 100 feet. Isolated areas on the site may exceed the 15% limit and not require the additional review process itemized below providing the entire site is below the 15% threshold.
(2) All land developments and land divisions shall be subject to review by the City Building and Planning Official and the City Engineer. The applicant shall submit a geo-technical report prepared and stamped by a professional engineer with specialty background in geotechnical engineering or a professional geologist with specialty certification in engineering geology who is registered through the State Board of Examiners for Engineering or the State Board of Geologist Examiners. The report shall contain and analyze on-site and adjacent off-site data on buildable and non-buildable areas and a statement of the expected impacts resulting from the proposed development. The required report shall demonstrate that the proposed developments are within the carrying capacity of the land based on the following on-site and adjacent off-site features and characteristics of the proposed development:
(a) Base Geology
(b) Slopes (steepness, orientation and aspect)
(c) Soils
(d) Stream and Drainage Patterns
(e) Housing Density Impact
(3) All proposed developments, except those within the Rural Residential (RR) zone, shall be served by city water and wastewater service (sanitary sewer).
(4) The requirements of this section shall apply and be considered during any site review process required by the Land Development or Land Divisions Ordinances. As part of the site review process, vegetation and animal patterns, including
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page | 7
endangered and threatened plant and animal species known to be in the area, shall be considered.
(5) The minimum lot size is 8,000 square feet. Larger lot sizes may be required to address problems called out in the geo-technical report.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page | 8
ARTICLE 2 - APPLICATION AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES
SECTION 2.01 LETTER OF INTENT
Prior to submission of an application and a tentative plan for a subdivision or partition, a land divider or his agent shall submit a letter and a sketch drawing for the layout of property to be divided to the Building and Planning Official for preliminary review.
SECTION 2.02 LAND DIVISION CONFERENCE
Within 14 days after receipt of the letter of intent and preliminary review, the Building and Planning Official may either recommend filing of an application and tentative plan for review and action or may notify the applicant that a pre-development land division conference with the land divider and representatives of the City and other affected public and private agencies is required to clarify the conditions and requirements necessary in the preparation of the application and tentative plan. If the Building and Planning Official determines that a conference is necessary, or the applicant requests a conference, the applicant shall pay a pre-development conference fee established by City resolution. The land divider may request additional meetings with affected agencies either jointly or individually as may be necessary to clarify policies which may affect the proposed land division.
SECTION 2.03 SUBMISSION PROCEDURE
Following preliminary review and the pre-development land division conference, where applicable, the land divider shall prepare an application and a tentative plan with other supplementary data required to indicate the general program and objectives of the proposed land division. The form of application shall be as prescribed by the City and shall be submitted to the Building and Planning Official who shall coordinate the process of review and action. The submission and informational requirements and review procedures shall be as specified for each land division classification contained in this ordinance.
Applications that are accompanied by the required application fee will be reviewed and, within 30 days of its receipt, the applicant will be notified as to the completeness. If the City determines that the application is complete, the City will process the application in accordance with the review procedures for the type of application that has been submitted. If the City determines that the application is incomplete, the City shall advise the applicant in writing of the necessary missing information. Within 180 days after initial application submittal, the applicant shall submit to the City a written statement indicating either an intent to submit the missing information or a refusal to submit the missing information. The City shall begin review of the application when deemed completed for purposes of ORS 227.178 upon receipt of:
(a) All of the missing information;
(b) Some of the missing information and written notice from the applicant that no other information will be provided; or
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page | 9
(c) Written notice from applicant that none of the missing information will be provided.
On the 181st day after the first being submitted, the application is void if the applicant has been notified of the missing information as required above and has not submitted:
(a) All of the missing information;
(b) Some of the missing information and written notice that no other information will be provided; or
(c) Written notice that none of the missing information will be provided.
SECTION 2.04 APPLICATION FEES
Application fees and deposits established by resolution of the City Council shall be paid to the City at the time of submitting the application and shall be in addition to other fees established by state or county regulations.
SECTION 2.05 VARIANCE PETITION
(1) Variances authorized. Variances and conditional variances to the requirements of this ordinance may be authorized by the Planning Commission.
(2) Application. Petition for a variance shall be made on a form prescribed by the City and shall be submitted to the Building and Planning Official. The variance petition shall cite the ordinance provisions from which a variance is requested and shall state fully the basis and facts relied upon and other data pertinent to the requested variance. Each ordinance provision for which a variance is requested shall be deemed a separate application and shall require a separate petition and filing fee.
(3) Review and Action Procedure.
(a) The Building and Planning Official shall review the variance petition with all affected public and private agencies and submit a findings report to the Planning Commission.
(b) The Planning Commission shall consider the variance petition. Refer to the Notice of Public Hearing in Article 2 of the Land Development Ordinance for notification requirements. A variance or conditional variance may be granted provided all the following circumstances exist:
1. Special or unusual circumstances or conditions apply to the property that do not apply generally to other properties in the same zone or vicinity.
2. The granting of the variance shall not constitute a grant of special privilege not enjoyed by owners of other similarly zoned properties.
3. The granting of a variance will not be materially detrimental to the
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page | 10
public health, safety, and welfare or materially injurious to other property in the same zone or vicinity in which the property is located.
4. The granting of the variance is in accordance with the purposes and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan, an adopted Specific Development Plan and or other related Veneta ordinances and will not otherwise conflict with the objectives of any City ordinance, plan, or policy.
5. The unusual circumstance or condition described in Subsection (1) of Land Division Ordinance Section 2.05(3)(b) shall not be self-created, arise from a previous Code violation, or rely on loss of profit or financial need.
6. The Variance requested is the minimum necessary to alleviate the unusual condition.
(c) The Planning Commission may approve, conditionally approve or deny all or any part of a variance petition. A written record of the findings and action of the Planning Commission shall be attached and noted on two copies of the tentative plan as part of the conditions for approval of the proposed land division.
(d) Authorization of a variance shall be void one (1) year after the date of approval of the variance application or such lesser time as the authorization may specify, unless a tentative plan has been approved within one (1) year from the date of the approval of the variance.
SECTION 2.06 NOTICE OF LIMITED LAND USE ACTIONS
Tentative subdivision applications and tentative partition applications are limited land use decisions. Limited land use decisions do not require public hearings. Effective June 16, 2005, final plat approvals and property line adjustments are not limited land use decisions and do not require notice (HB 2356).
Limited land use decisions are subject to the following requirements:
(1) The City shall follow the applicable procedures contained within the Land Development Ordinance, Land Division Ordinance, Transportation System Plan, Veneta Municipal Code and other applicable legal requirements.
(2) Written notice shall be posted at City Hall and mailed to the property owner, applicant and all owners of property within 300 feet of the entire contiguous site for which the application is made. Notice shall also be provided to any neighborhood or community organization recognized by the City and whose boundaries include the site, and to any public notice subscribers. Notice shall also be posted on the property for which the limited land use decision has been requested. Notice shall be provided to public agencies providing transportation facilities and services, including
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page | 11
ODOT and Lane Transit, regarding proposals that are adjacent to or will have an impact on transportation facilities or services.
(3) Failure of a person to receive the notice prescribed in this section shall not impair the validity of the decision.
(4) The public notice shall provide a 14 day period for submission of written comments prior to the decision. The notice shall explain the nature of the application and the proposed use or uses which would be authorized; list the applicable criteria from the ordinances that apply to the application; cite the street address or some other easily understood geographical reference to the subject property; state the place, date and time that comments are due; include the name and telephone number of the City representative to contact for additional information; state that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence relied upon by the applicant and applicable criteria are available for inspection at no cost and will be provided at reasonable cost. The notice shall state that issues which may provide the basis for an appeal to the Council shall be raised in writing prior to the expiration of the comment period and issues shall be raised with sufficient specificity to enable the decision maker to respond to the issue.
(5) The City shall provide notice of the decision to the applicant and any person who submits comments within the fourteen (14) day period provided. The notice of the decision must include an explanation of appeal rights and briefly summarize the local decision making process for the decision being made.
SECTION 2.07 WETLAND DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE 3 - PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS & REPLATS
SECTION 3.01 PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
A complete application includes a completed application form signed by all the property owners involved in the proposed adjustment, one (1) 18 X 24 and (1) one 11 X 17 reproducible copy of a map showing the details below.
(1) The scale, north arrow, and date of the map.
(2) The assessors tax map and lot numbers identifying each property involved in the adjustment.
(3) The location, width, and purpose of any easements, private wells, septic systems, and driveway access to public rights-of-way, existing and proposed.
(4) The area of each property, before and after the property line adjustment.
(5) The proposed property lines and dimensions of each property.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page | 12
(6) Evidence that the existing properties are legal, buildable lots or parcels.
(7) Existing structures, all utility lines, including septic systems and wells, with dimensions and distances from new property lines.
(8) Current title reports for both parcels of land.
SECTION 3.02 PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT REVIEW CRITERIA
The tentative plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals 100 feet or multiples of ten (10) thereof. The Building and Planning Official shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request based on the criteria below.
(1) The property line adjustment is a relocation or elimination of all or a portion of the common property line between abutting properties that does not create an additional lot or parcel.
(2) All properties involved continue to have adequate access to public streets.
(3) The properties involved meet the minimum lot size and configuration requirements for the zoning district and do not otherwise violate city standards.
(4) The properties involved comply with any previous requirements or conditions imposed by a review body.
(5) There are no conflicts with existing private or public utilities and utility easements.
(6) Setbacks and lot coverage shall not be reduced below the minimum for the zone in which the property is located.
SECTION 3.03 PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT RECORDING REQUIREMENTS
Property line adjustment maps must be approved and signed by the City Building and Planning Official prior to recording. Property line adjustments must meet the recording requirements of ORS 92.060.
SECTION 3.04 REPLATS
1. Replatting. Any plat or portion thereof may be replatted upon receiving an application signed by all of the owners as appearing on a current title report.
2. Approval Criteria All applications for a replat shall be processed in accordance with the procedures and standards for a subdivision or partition (i.e., the same process used to create the plat shall be used to replat the plat). A replat application may be denied if it reduces or eliminates any public right in any of its public uses, improvements, streets or alleys; or if it fails to meet any applicable criteria, including but not limited to setbacks and conflicts with existing easements. All replats shall show compliance with ORS 92.185.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page | 13
3. Recording Requirements. All approved replats shall be recorded in accordance with Section 4.07 or 5.08 of this ordinance—Filing and Recording of Plat, and the following procedures:
A. Once recorded, a replat shall operate to eliminate the force and effect of the plat prior to replat; and
B. Replats shall also divest all public rights in the streets, alleys and public grounds, and all dedications identified or described on the plat.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page | 14
ARTICLE 4 - SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION 4.01 TENTATIVE PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Following the submission of a letter of intent and preliminary consultation as required in Article 2, the applicant shall submit fifteen (15) 18 X 24 copies of the tentative plan (map shall be folded to be 8.5 X 11 in size) together with improvement plans and other supplementary data for review and action. The applicant shall also submit one (1) electronic copy in PDF format and one (1) reproducible 11" x 17" black and white copy of the tentative plan.
All tentative plan maps shall include the following when applicable:
(1) Form and Scale. The tentative plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn or printed in ink to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals 100 feet or multiples of ten (10) thereof.
(2) General Information. The following general information must be presented as part of the application for a tentative subdivision:
(a) Name of subdivision which has been reserved by the County Surveyor. All plats must continue the block numbers of the plat of the same name last filed.
(b) Date, north arrow, scale of drawing.
(c) Appropriate identification clearly stating the plan is a tentative subdivision plan.
(d) Location of the land division by section, township and range sufficient to define the location and boundaries of the proposed subdivision and a legal description of record of the proposed site.
(e) Names and addresses of the owners and anyone who has an interest in the property, as verified by a title company, and the applicant, engineer or surveyor or other parties involved in preparation of the documents.
(f) The approximate acreage of land under single ownership or, if more than one ownership is involved, the total contiguous acreage of the owners directly involved in the subdivision.
(g) Any other information as required to comply with all provisions of State Law Chapter ORS 92.
(3) Information required on the tentative plan maps. The tentative plan shall include the following information where applicable. At the discretion of the City the information listed below may be required to be on individual maps.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
15
(a) Existing Conditions.
1. A scaled vicinity map clearly showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to surrounding developments, tax lots, streets, storm drainage(s), sewer, water and utility services. All vicinity maps shall address all applicable requirements of the Veneta Land Development Ordinance.
2. The location, widths and names of streets within or adjacent to the subdivision, together with easements, other right-of-ways and other important features such as section lines, corners, city boundary lines and monuments.
3. Existing uses on the property, including the location of all existing structures (with dimensions from the property lines) on the property and the access points of any existing public utilities, septic, sewage, wells or drainage lines or channels.
4. The location of at least one bench mark within the tract boundaries.
(b) Proposed Tentative Plan.
1. Proposed improvements required in Articles 7 and 8 such as pavement, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, grading and filling, utilities and other major improvements to develop the lot(s). This requirement may be waived if the applicant will have to file a site plan review application including all of this information in order to further improve or develop the property. These include:
a. The location, width, street name(s) and approximate grade and radii of street curves. If a significant grade change is anticipated beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision, indicate approximate street grade and anticipated vertical taper required to provide for street extension beyond the proposed subdivision. The relationship of streets to any existing or proposed streets shown on the City's Transportation System Plan maps. The relationship of the proposed land division to future streets on adjacent land.
b. The location, width, and purpose of proposed easements.
c. The approximate width and location of all existing and proposed reserve strips.
2. The approximate dimensions and area in square feet of all proposed lots.
3. Sites, if any, allocated for purposes other than single-family
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
16
dwellings.
4. The location, approximate acreage and approximate dimensions of areas proposed for public use.
5. The location and approximate dimensions of proposed lots and the proposed lot and block numbers.
6. An outline of the areas proposed for partial recording of a final plat or map if phased recording is proposed.
7. Elevation, slope for commercial, industrial and development sites with more than 4000 square feet of building space.
8. Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) Review as required by Section 5.27 of the Land Development Ordinance.
(c) Significant Natural Features.
1. Contour lines related to an established bench mark or NAU88 datum approved by the City Engineer and having contour intervals as follows:
a. For slopes of less than five (5) percent: show the direction of slope by means of arrows or other suitable symbol together with not less than four (4) spot elevations per acre, evenly distributed.
b. For slopes of five (5) percent to ten (10) percent: two (2) feet.
c. For slopes over ten (10) percent: five (5) feet
2. The location and direction of all water courses and the location of all areas subject to inundation or 100 year floodplain. Identification of the base flood elevation for development in floodplains. Evidence of contact with National Flood Insurance Program to initiate a flood plain map amendment shall be required when development is proposed to modify a designated 100-year flood plain. Elevation certificates are required for all construction in floodplains prior to occupancy;
3. Natural features such as rock outcroppings, wetlands, wooded areas and isolated preservable trees with a trunk diameter of 6 inches or greater.
4. Elevation, slope and view data for commercial, industrial and development sites with more than 4000 square feet of building space.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
17
(d) Utilities. Any proposed public and private utilities within the development, shall be shown on the tentative plan, including but not limited to:
1. The location and size of water service facilities, including fire hydrants.
2. Connection points and size of sanitary sewer facilities.
3. Street light locations, sizes, and specifications.
4. Location and preliminary design of all proposed stormwater facilities including sizing of pipes, inlet and outfall locations and elevations, and section details and planting plans for all swales or other open features.
(e) Tree Removal & Mitigation Plans. If development of the proposed plan will require removal of significant trees as defined by Veneta Municipal Code 8.10, detailed tree removal and mitigation plans are required. Plans shall be in conformance with VMC 8.10.
(4) Statements to Accompany Tentative Plan. The tentative plan shall be accompanied by a written statement from the applicant giving essential information regarding the following matters:
(a) Adequacy and source of water supply and compliance with the City of Veneta Water Master Plan.
(b) A statement detailing the storm water runoff and drainage impact the new development will have on areas beyond the subdivision and in compliance with the City’s Stormwater Master Plan and Section 5.16 of the Veneta Land Development Ordinance. The developer, city and impacted property owners shall work closely with each other so that adverse impacts of storm water runoff (in terms of both quantity and quality) from the new development are alleviated or avoided and that all necessary storm sewer and drainage facilities will be installed prior to or concurrent with the subdivision.
(c) Proposed method of sanitary sewage disposal and compliance with the City of Veneta Wastewater Master Plan.
(d) Protective covenants and deed restrictions to be recorded, if any.
(e) The time the proposed improvements are to be made or installed.
(f) A statement of how the traffic impacts to facilities as identified in the Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) and supported by the City’s Traffic Engineer, shall be mitigated by the developer as part of the
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
18
improvements for the Site Plan, Subdivision, Planned Development (PD), or Specific Development Plan (SDP).
(g) A statement of how the lot or parcel was created and proof that the parcel is a legal lot created with City approval, Recorded deeds after July 8, 1969 without proper city approval will not be accepted as proof that the lot(s) or parcel(s) were legally created.
(5) Supplementary Information. The following supplemental information may be required.
(a) If the proposed subdivision meets the 15% slope criteria defined in Section 1.06(1) of this ordinance, the applicant shall comply with Section 1.06.
(b) The applicant is required to submit any additional information as may be required by the Planning Commission to assist in evaluating the request.
SECTION 4.02 TENTATIVE PLAN REVIEW AND ACTION PROCEDURES
(1) City Staff Review and Action. Upon deeming an application complete, the Building and Planning Official shall furnish one (1) copy of the tentative plan and supplementary material to the City Engineer and Public Works Superintendent. Public agencies believed to have an interest shall be provided notice of the proposal. These officials and agencies shall be given fifteen (15) days to review the plan and to suggest revisions that appear to be in the public interest.
The Building and Planning Official shall review the tentative plan proposal and the reports of agencies and submit a Findings report to the Planning Commission.
Within 40 days from the first regular Planning Commission meeting following submission of a complete tentative plan of a land division, the Planning Commission shall review the plan and the reports of appropriate officials and agencies.
(2) Dedications and Conditions of Approval: The Planning Commission may require dedication of land and easements and may specify conditions or modifications to the tentative plan as necessary to ensure compliance with city regulations.
(3) Denial of Subdivision: If the Planning Commission finds that the application does not meet all requirements of the City, and cannot through lawful conditions of approval, the Planning Commission shall mail the applicant Final Orders stating the reason(s) for denial. The applicant may request an appeal within fifteen (15) days from the date the Final Order was signed.
(4) Tentative Plan Approval: The action of the Planning Commission shall be incorporated into a Final Order with all of the conditions of approval and a copy shall be mailed to the applicant within seven (7) days of the decision. The original copy of the Final Order shall be retained in the City planning files.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
19
(5) Failure to Complete Subdivision Requirements: Tentative Plan approval shall remain effective for three (3) years from the date of Planning Commission action. Within three (3) years, the applicant must submit a complete Final Plat application for review along with all supplementary data required to meet the conditions of approval listed in the Final Order. If the land divider is unable to proceed with the subdivision prior to the expiration of the three (3) year period following the approval of the tentative plan, the applicant must resubmit the tentative plan and make any revision(s) necessary to meet changed conditions or modifications in laws or ordinances of the State of Oregon, Lane County, or the City of Veneta.
The applicant may submit a request in writing for up to a one (1) year extension for a land use approval. Unless the City Council or the original approval provides otherwise, a maximum of two (2) extensions may be granted.
1) Requests for extensions shall:
a. Be submitted to the City in writing prior to expiration of the approval, but no earlier than 90 days prior to the expiration of the approval; and
b. Explain any special or unusual circumstances that warrant an extension.
2) The City may deny a request for an extension if any Land Use Ordinance requirements or laws have been adopted since the original approval that would clearly make the development unlawful to approve as of the date the approval would otherwise expire.
(6) Appeal: Appeals must be filed according to Section 8.03 of this land use ordinance. An appeal of a Planning Commission decision will go to the City Council.
(7) Performance Bonds and Irrevocable Agreements: At tentative plat approval, the applicant shall post a performance bond and enter into an Irrevocable Agreement between the applicant and the City, in a form as provided by the City, to assure that the subdivision improvements are completed. The performance bond shall be equal to the cost of public improvements including city water and sewer main extension and service and streets, which includes curbs, gutters and sidewalks with the City of Veneta. The cost of public improvements shall be based on an estimate by the City Engineer. Performance bonds shall be in the form of a surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, cash, or other financial instrument acceptable to the City Attorney.
SECTION 4.03 CATEGORIES FOR REVIEW OF TENTATIVE PLAN APPLICATIONS
The Planning Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a tentative plan based on the standards found in the following sections of the Land Division Ordinance,
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
20
Land Development Ordinance, and other sources specified in this section:
(1) The transportation system supports the new development and provides vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian access to each lot in conformance with the applicable City requirements, including Design Standards (Article 6) and Improvement Requirements (Article 7) of this Land Division Ordinance; the requirements of the zoning district (Land Development Ordinance); and the Veneta Transportation System Plan.
(2) Each lot will be served with sanitary sewer (or septic systems), water, and other public utilities in conformance with the applicable City requirements, including Design Standards (Article 6) and Improvement Requirements (Article 7) of this Land Division Ordinance; the requirements of the zoning district (Land Development Ordinance); and City utility plans.
(3) The surface water drainage shall be in conformance with the City’s Drainage Master Plan and other applicable City requirements, including Design Standards (Article 6) and Improvement Requirements (Article 7) of this Land Division Ordinance; and the requirements of the zoning district (Land Development Ordinance).
(4) Topography, floodplain, wetlands, and vegetation have been incorporated into the subdivision design in conformance with the applicable City requirements, including Design Standards (Article 6) and Improvement Requirements (Article 7) of this Land Division Ordinance; and the requirements of the zoning district (Land Development Ordinance).
(5) Development of any remainder of property under the same ownership can be accomplished in accordance with city requirements.
(6) Adjoining land can be developed or is provided access that will allow its development in accordance with city requirements.
(7) The proposed preliminary plat complies with all of the applicable city requirements, including Design Standards (Article 6), Improvement Requirements (Article 7), and the requirements of the zoning district in which the property is located (Land Development Ordinance)
SECTION 4.04 AMENDMENTS
(1) Minor Amendments. Minor amendments to any approved tentative subdivision plan may be approved, approved with conditions, or denied administratively by the Building and Planning Official as long as the amendments substantially comply with the tentative plan, fully complies with all City ordinances and does not:
(a) Involve any interpretation of submission requirements or require findings that would set a precedent for other tentative subdivision plan amendments,
(b) Impact utilities, the transportation system, drainage, or natural features of
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
21
the site,
(c) Require a variance,
(d) Raise questions of adequacy of services by the Public Works Superintendent, City Engineer, or any affected public or private agency, and
(e) Create more lots than the approved tentative subdivision plan.
(2) Major Amendments. Major amendments to an approved tentative subdivision plan involve changes that do not meet the criteria listed under minor amendments. Major amendments to an approved tentative plan must be reviewed and processed in the same manner as required for the original tentative subdivision plan. A new application and filing fee is required and the amendments must be approved by the Planning Commission.
SECTION 4.05 FINAL PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Within three (3) years after approval of the tentative plan, the land divider shall cause the subdivision or any part thereof to be surveyed and a plat prepared in conformance with the tentative plan as approved and shall complete all conditions listed in the Final Order for tentative plan approval.
(1) Form and Scale. The final plat and ten (10) copies shall be submitted to the City in the form prescribed by ORS 92.
(2) Information Required on Plat. In addition to that otherwise specified by law, the following information shall be shown on the final plat:
(a) The name of the land division, the date, scale, north arrow, and legend.
(b) Area and dimensions of each lot to the nearest square foot.
(c) Names and addresses of the owners and anyone who has an interest in the property, as verified by a title company, and the applicant, engineer or surveyor or other parties involved in preparation of the documents.
(d) The exact location and width of street rights-of-way and easements intercepting the boundary tract.
(e) The name and width of the portion of streets being dedicated, the width of any existing right-of-way and the width on each side of the center line. For streets or curvature, curve data shall be based on the street center line. In addition to the center-line dimensions, the radius and center angle shall be indicated.
(f) Easements denoted by fine dotted or dashed lines clearly identified and, if already of record, their recorded reference. The width of the easement, its length and bearing, and sufficient ties to locate the easement with respect to the land division, must be shown. If the easement is being dedicated by the
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
22
plat, it shall be properly referenced in the owner's certificates of dedication.
(g) Reserve strips shall have separate legal descriptions and documentation and be deeded to the City. Each reserve strip shall be identified on the Plat as a Tract identified by alphabetic symbols. Reserve strips and tracts shall be dedicated to the City on the final plat. A notation shall be included on the plat that states “Reserve strips on adjacent properties that abut streets being dedicated on the plat are hereby released for public right-of-way purposes”.
(h) Numbering of lots and blocks as follows:
1. Lot numbers beginning with the number "1" and numbered consecutively in each block. Number sequence shall generally follow the same system as sections are numbered in a township.
2. Block numbers beginning with the number "1" and continuing consecutively without omission or duplication throughout a subdivision. The numbers shall be solid, of sufficient size and thickness to stand out and so placed as not to obliterate any figure. Block and lot numbers in an addition to a subdivision of the same name shall be a continuation of the numbering in the original subdivision. Block numbering sequence shall be the same system as for lots.
3. Block numbers may be omitted where the blocks are of irregular shape. When block numbers are omitted, the lots shall be numbered consecutively throughout the subdivision and lots in an addition to the subdivision of the same name shall be a continuation of the numbering in the original subdivision.
(i) Land parcels to be dedicated for any purpose, such as parks and stormwater detention ponds, shall be distinguished from lots intended for sale with acreage and alphabetic symbols for each parcel indicated.
(j) Notations indicating any limitations on rights of access to or from streets and lots or other parcels of land.
(k) Notations indicating restrictions on use of easements as required as a condition of approval. All public utility easements shall include the following language: “No building structure, trees, shrubs or other obstructions shall be placed or located in or on the public utility easements”.
(l) Normal high water lines for any creek or other body of water including the 100-year flood plain.
(m) Any other information required as a condition of approval.
(3) Supplemental Information. The following data shall accompany the plat:
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
23
(a) A current title report issued by a title insurance company in the name of the owner of the land, showing all parties whose consent is necessary and their interest in the premises.
(b) Sheets and drawings showing the following:
1. Traverse data including the coordinates of the boundary of the land division and ties to section corners and donation land claim corners, and showing the error of closure, if any.
2. The computation of distances, angles and courses shown on the plat or map.
3. Ties to existing monuments, proposed monuments, adjacent subdivisions, street corners and state highway stationing.
(c) A copy of any deed restrictions applicable to the subdivision.
(d) A copy of any dedication or easement requiring separate documents.
(e) Proof that all taxes and assessments on the tract have been paid as provided by ORS Chapter 92.
(f) A certificate by the City Engineer that the sub-divider has complied with one (1) of the following alternatives:
1. All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of these regulations and with the action of the Planning Commission giving conditional approval of the tentative plan.
2. An agreement has been executed as provided in Sections 7.05 and 7.06 to assure completion of required improvements.
(4) Survey Requirements.
(a) A complete and accurate survey of the land to be divided shall be made by a Surveyor licensed to practice in the State of Oregon in accordance with standard practices and principles of land surveying and as required by state law.
(b) A 2 x 4 wood utility marker shall be provided for all underground water, sewer and utility stubs within the prepared land division as approved by the City Engineer. Markers shall be painted white and be maintained until all work has been accepted by the City.
(5) Dedication Requirements.
(a) All land shown on the final plat intended for public use shall be dedicated at
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
24
the time the plat is filed. Exception: Those lots which are intended for the exclusive use of lot owners, their licensees, visitors, tenants and servants; and also excepted are those lots of land reserved for public purposes under the provisions of Section 6.08 of this ordinance. Where applicable, easements or other documents shall also be prepared and filed.
(b) All rights of access to and from streets, lots of land shown on the final plat intended to be surrendered shall be offered for dedication at the time the final plat is filed.
(c) The land divider shall provide one (1) foot reserve strips across the ends of stubbed streets adjoining undivided land, along half streets adjoining undivided land, and along lots with restricted access to public streets. Reserve strips shall have separate legal descriptions and documentation and be deeded to the City, and each reserve strip shall be separately identified on the plat.
(6) Certificates on Final Plat. The following certificates, acknowledgments and other requirements established by state law shall appear on the final plat. Such certificates may be combined where appropriate.
(a) A certificate signed and acknowledged by the owners of record of the land to be subdivided, consenting to the following:
1. Dedication of all parcels of land, streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, drainage channels, easements and other right-of-way intended for public use; and
2. Dedication of rights of access to and from prescribed streets, lots, and parcels of land.
(b) A certificate together with the seal and signature of the licensed surveyor who prepared the survey and the final plat.
(c) A certificate for execution by the Building and Planning Official on behalf of the Planning Commission.
(d) If a property is to be dedicated to the City, the final plat shall include a certificate of acceptance for execution by the Mayor or the Mayor’s designee on behalf of the City.
(e) A certificate for execution by the City Engineer.
(f) A certificate for execution by the Public Works Superintendent.
(g) A certificate for execution by the County Surveyor.
(h) A certificate for execution by the County Assessor.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
25
(i) A notarized declaration that the declarant has caused the subdivision or partition plat to be prepared and the property subdivided or partitioned in accordance with the provisions of ORS Chapter 92.
(j) Other certifications now or hereafter required by law.
SECTION 4.06 REVIEW AND ACTION PROCEDURES
(1) Upon receipt, the plat and other required data shall be reviewed by the Building and Planning Official, City Engineer and Public Works Superintendent to determine that the subdivision as shown is substantially the same as it appeared on the approved tentative plan, meets any conditions of approval, and that there has been compliance with provisions of the law and of this ordinance.
(2) The City may make such checks in the field as are desirable to verify that the plat is sufficiently correct on the ground and City representatives may enter the property for this purpose.
(3) If it is determined that full conformity has not been made, the Building and Planning Official shall advise the sub divider of the changes or additions that must be made and shall afford the land divider an opportunity to make the changes or additions.
If after approval by the City Engineer and Public Works Superintendent the Building and Planning Official determines that the plat conforms to all requirements, it shall give approval, provided supplemental documents and provisions for required improvements are satisfactory. After acceptance, a recordable copy of the map shall be submitted to the City for signature. Final approval shall be indicated by the signature of the Building and Planning Official on the recordable copy of the plat. Acceptance by the public of the dedication of any street or other easements shown on the plat shall be indicated by the signature of the Mayor on behalf of the City.
SECTION 4.07 FILING & RECORDING OF PLAT
(1) Filing for Final Plat shall extend the 3 year time limit on tentative approvals established in Section 4.02(6) of this ordinance by an additional 180 days. If the Final Plat has not been recorded within 180 days of the date of expiration of the tentative plan, both the tentative plan approval and the application for Final Plat shall be void. Extensions to the 180 day timeline may be granted by the Building and Planning official provided that:
(a) The request for an extension is made in writing prior to, but within 90 days of the expiration of the 180 day Final Plat processing period.
(b) There are special or unusual circumstances that exist which warrant an extension.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
26
The City may deny a request for an extension if new land use regulations have been adopted that affect the applicant’s proposal.
(2) A sub-divider shall, at his/her own expense and without delay, submit the plat for signatures of all other public officials required by this ordinance or state law.
(3) Approval of a final plat shall be null and void if it is not recorded within 90 days after approval by the City or within 90 days after the conclusion of any appeal. Building permits shall not be issued by the City until an exact copy of the recorded final plat, and copies of all documents as recorded with the Lane County Department of Deeds and Records, including recording numbers on each document, are filed with the City of Veneta. In addition, the applicant shall at his/her own expense provide the City with one (1) laminated copy of the recorded plat at least 18 x 24 in size.
(4) The applicant is responsible for all recording costs.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
27
ARTICLE 5 - PARTITIONS
SECTION 5.01 TENTATIVE PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Following the submission of a letter of intent and preliminary consultation as required in Article 2, the applicant shall submit ten (10) 18 X 24 (map shall be folded to be 8.5 X 11 in size) copies of the tentative plan together with improvement plans and other supplementary data for review and action. The applicant shall also submit one (1) electronic copy in PDF format and one (1) reproducible 11" x 17" black and white copy of the tentative plan.
All tentative plan maps shall include the following when applicable:
(1) Form and Scale. The tentative plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn or printed in ink to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals 100 feet or multiples of ten (10) thereof.
(2) General Information. The following general information must be presented as part of the application for a tentative partition:
(a) Date, north arrow, scale of drawing.
(b) Appropriate identification clearly stating the plan is a tentative partition plan.
(c) Location of the partition by section, township and range sufficient to define the location and boundaries of the proposed subdivision and a legal description of record of the proposed site.
(d) Names and addresses of the owners and anyone who has an interest in the property, as verified by a title company, and the applicant, engineer or surveyor or other parties involved in preparation of the documents.
(e) The approximate acreage of land under single ownership or, if more than one ownership is involved, the total contiguous acreage of the owners directly involved in the partition.
(f) Any other information as required to comply with all provisions of State Law Chapter ORS 92.
(3) Information required on the tentative plan maps. The tentative plan shall include the following information where applicable. At the discretion of the City the information listed below may be required to be on individual maps.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
28
(a) Existing Conditions
1. A scaled vicinity map clearly showing the relationship of the proposed partition to surrounding developments, tax lots, streets, storm drainage(s), sewer, water and utility services. All vicinity maps shall address all applicable requirements of the Veneta Land Development Ordinance.
2. The location, widths and names of streets within or adjacent to the partition, together with easements, other right-of-way and other important features such as section lines, corners, city boundary lines and monuments.
3. Existing uses on the property, including the location of all existing structures (with dimensions from the property lines) on the property and the access points of any existing public utilities, septic, sewage, wells or drainage lines or channels.
4. The location of at least one bench mark within the tract boundaries.
(b) Proposed Tentative Plan.
1. Proposed improvements required in Articles 7 and 8 such as pavement, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, grading and filling, utilities and other major improvements to develop the parcels. This requirement may be waived if the applicant will have to file a site plan including all of this information in order to further improve or develop the property. These include:
a. The location, width, street name(s) and approximate grade and radii of street curves. If a significant grade change is anticipated beyond the limits of the proposed partition, indicate approximate street grade and anticipated vertical taper required to provide for street extension beyond the proposed land division. The relationship of streets to any existing or proposed streets as shown on the City's Transportation System Plan maps. The relationship of the proposed land division to future streets on adjacent land.
b. The location, width, and purpose of proposed easements.
c. The approximate width and location of all existing and proposed reserve strips.
2. The approximate dimensions and area in square feet of all proposed parcels.
3. Sites, if any, allocated for purposes other than single-family
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
29
dwellings.
4. The location, approximate acreage and approximate dimensions of areas proposed for public use.
5. The location and approximate dimensions of proposed parcels and the proposed parcel numbers.
6. An outline of the area proposed for partial recording of a final plat or map if phased recording is proposed.
7. Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) Review as required by Section 5.27 of the Land Development Ordinance.
(c) Significant Natural Features
1. Contour lines related to an established bench mark or other datum approved by the City Engineer and having contour intervals as follows:
a. For slopes of less than five (5) percent: show the direction of slope by means of arrows or other suitable symbol together with not less than four (4) spot elevations per acre, evenly distributed.
b. For slopes of five (5) percent to ten (10) percent: two (2) feet.
c. For slopes over ten (10) percent: five (5) feet
2. The location and direction of all water courses and the location of all areas subject to inundation or 100 year floodplain including identification of the base flood elevation for development in floodplains. Evidence of contact with National Flood Insurance Program to initiate a flood plain map amendment shall be required when development is proposed to modify a designated 100-year flood plain. Elevation certificates are required for all construction in floodplains prior to occupancy;
3. Natural features such as rock outcroppings, wetlands, wooded areas and isolated preservable trees with a trunk diameter of 6 inches or greater.
4. Elevation, slope and view data for commercial, industrial and development sites with more than 4000 square feet of building space.
(d) Utilities. Any proposed public and private utilities within the development, shall be shown on the tentative plan, including but not limited to:
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
30
1. The location and size of water service facilities, including fire hydrants.
2. Connection points and size of sanitary sewer facilities.
3. Street light locations, sizes, and specifications.
4. Location and preliminary design of all proposed stormwater facilities including sizing of pipes, inlet and outfall locations and elevations, and section details and planting plans for all swales or other open features.
(e) Tree Removal Plans: If development of the proposed plan will require tree removal permit in accordance with Veneta Municipal Code 8.10, detailed tree removal plans are required. Plans shall be drafted in conformance with the requirements of VMC 8.10.
(4) Statements to Accompany Tentative Plan. The tentative plan shall be accompanied by written statements from the applicant giving essential information regarding the following matters:
(a) Adequacy and source of water supply and compliance with the City of Veneta Water Master Plan.
(b) A statement detailing the storm water runoff and drainage impact the new development will have on areas beyond the land division and compliance with the City’s Stormwater Master Plan and Section 5.16 of the Veneta Land Development Ordinance.. The developer, city and impacted property owners shall work closely with each other so that adverse impacts of storm water runoff (in terms of both quantity and quality) from the new development are alleviated or avoided and that all necessary storm sewer and drainage facilities will be installed prior to or concurrent with the land division.
(c) Proposed method of sanitary sewage disposal and compliance with the City of Veneta Wastewater Master Plan.
(d) Protective covenants and deed restrictions to be recorded, if any.
(e) The time the proposed improvements are to be made or installed.
(f) A statement of how the traffic impacts to facilities as identified in the Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) and supported by the City’s Traffic Engineer, shall be mitigated by the developer as part of the improvements for the Site Plan, Partition, Planned Development (PD) or Specific Development Plan (SDP).
(g) A statement of how the lot or parcel was created and proof that the parcel is
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
31
a legal lot created with City approval. Recorded deeds after July 8, 1969 without proper city approval will not be accepted as proof that the lot(s) or parcel(s) were legally created.
(5) Supplementary Information. The following supplemental information may be required.
(a) If any portion of the proposed partition is located within the steep slope subzone, the applicant shall submit on-site and adjacent off-site data to insure that proposed developments are within the carrying capacity of the natural resources as required by the Land Development Ordinance.
(b) The applicant is required to submit any additional information as may be required by the Building and Planning Official or Planning Commission to assist in evaluating the request.
SECTION 5.02 EXPEDITED LAND DIVISIONS
An expedited procedure is allowed for developments meeting certain criteria. The criteria, application and notice requirements and action and appeal procedures are detailed in ORS 197.360-197.380.
SECTION 5.03 TENTATIVE PLAN REVIEW AND ACTION PROCEDURES
(1) City Staff Review and Action. Upon deeming an application complete, the Building and Planning Official shall furnish one (1) copy of the tentative plan and supplementary material to the City Engineer and Public Works Superintendent. Public agencies believed to have an interest shall be provided notice of the proposal. These officials and agencies shall be given fifteen (15) days to review the plan and to suggest revisions that appear to be in the public interest.
If it is determined that the proposed partition is consistent with the Veneta Land Division and Land Development Ordinances, Veneta Transportation System Plan, Veneta Municipal Code, and other related ordinances of the City and that adequate vehicular access and utilities can be provided, and there are no questions of adequacy of services raised by the Building and Planning Official, Public Works Superintendent, City Engineer or any affected public or private agency, the Building and Planning Official, may grant administrative approval without submitting it to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall be advised of all administrative approvals of partitions at the following regular Planning Commission meeting.
(2) Planning Commission Review. The Planning Commission shall have authority to set guidelines as to which partition requests come before the commission. If the proposed partition does not fully comply with City ordinances, requires a variance, or if unusual circumstances exist relative to the proposed partition, the Building and Planning Official shall submit the proposal to the Planning Commission for review. Any other proposal may be submitted to the Commission for review at the discretion of the Building and Planning Official.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
32
(3) Dedications and Conditions of Approval. The Building and Planning Official or the Planning Commission may require dedication of land and easements and may specify conditions or modifications to the tentative plan as necessary.
(4) Denial of Partition. If the Building & Planning Official or the Planning Commission finds that the application does not meet all requirements of the City, and cannot through lawful conditions of approval, then the Building & Planning Official or the Planning Commission shall send the applicant with findings stating the reasons for denial. The applicant may request an appeal within fifteen (15) days from the date the final order is signed.
(5) Tentative Plan Approval: The action of the Building & Planning Official or the Planning Commission shall be incorporated into a Final Order with all conditions of approval and a copy sent by mail to the applicant within seven (7) days of the decision. The original copy of the Final Order shall be retained in the City Planning files.
(6) Failure to Complete Partition Requirements: Tentative plan approval shall remain effective for only three (3) years from the date the Building & Planning Official or Planning Commission took action. Within that three (3) year, the applicant must submit a complete Final Plat for review along with all supplementary data required to meet the conditions of approval listed in the Final Order issued either by the Building & Planning Official or the Veneta Planning Commission. If the land divider is unable to proceed with the partition prior to the expiration of the three (3) year period following the approval of the tentative plan, the applicant must resubmit the tentative plan and make any revisions(s) necessary to meet changed conditions of modifications in laws or ordinances of the State of Oregon, Lane County, or the City of Veneta
.
(7) Appeal: Appeals must be filed according to Section 8.03 of this land use ordinance. Appeal of an administrative decision will be heard before the Planning Commission. An appeal of a Planning Commission decision will go to the City Council.
SECTION 5.04 CATEGORIES FOR REVIEW OF TENTATIVE PLAN APPLICATIONS
The Building and Planning Official or the Planning Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a tentative plan based on the standards found in the following sections of the Land Division Ordinance, Land Development Ordinance, and other sources specified in this section:
(1) The transportation system supports the new development and provides vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian access to each lot in conformance with the applicable City requirements, including Design Standards (Article 6) and Improvement Requirements (Article 7) of this Land Division Ordinance; the requirements of the zoning district (Land Development Ordinance); and the Veneta Transportation
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
33
System Plan.
(2) Each lot will be served with sanitary sewer (or septic systems), water, and other public utilities in conformance with the applicable City requirements, including Design Standards (Article 6) and Improvement Requirements (Article 7) of this Land Division Ordinance; the requirements of the zoning district (Land Development Ordinance); and City utility plans.
(3) The surface water drainage shall be in conformance with the City’s Drainage Master Plan and other applicable City requirements, including Design Standards (Article 6) and Improvement Requirements (Article 7) of this Land Division Ordinance; and the requirements of the zoning district (Land Development Ordinance).
(4) Topography, floodplain, wetlands, and vegetation have been incorporated into the partition design in conformance with the applicable City requirements, including Design Standards (Article 6) and Improvement Requirements (Article 7) of this Land Division Ordinance; and the requirements of the zoning district (Land Development Ordinance).
(5) Development of any remainder of property under the same ownership can be accomplished in accordance with city requirements.
(6) Adjoining land can be developed or is provided access that will allow its development in accordance with city requirements.
(7) The proposed preliminary plat complies with all of the applicable city requirements, including Design Standards (Article 6), Improvement Requirements (Article 7), and the requirements of the zoning district (Land Development Ordinance).
SECTION 5.05 AMENDMENTS
(1) Minor Amendments. Minor amendments to an approved tentative plan may be approved or approved with conditions administratively by the Building and Planning Official as long as the amendments substantially comply with the tentative plan, fully complies with all City ordinances and does not:
(a) Involve any interpretation of submission requirements or require findings that would set a precedent for other tentative plan amendments,
(b) Impact utilities, the transportation system, drainage, or natural features of the site,
(c) Require a variance,
(d) Raise questions of adequacy of services by the Public Works Superintendent, City Engineer, or any affected public or private agency, and
(e) Create more lots than the approved tentative plan.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
34
(2) Major Amendments. Major amendments to an approved tentative plan involve changes that do not meet the criteria listed under minor amendments. Major amendments to an approved tentative plan must be reviewed and processed in the same manner as required for the original partition plan. A new application and filing fee is required and the amendments must be approved by the Planning Commission.
SECTION 5.06 FINAL PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Within three (3) years after approval of the tentative plan, the land divider shall cause the partitioner or any part thereof to be surveyed and a plat prepared in conformance with the tentative plan as approved and shall complete all conditions listed in the Final Order for tentative plan approval.
(1) Form and Scale. The final plat and seven (7) copies shall be submitted to the City in the form prescribed by ORS 92.
(2) Information Required on Plat. In addition to that otherwise specified by law, the following information shall be shown on the final plat:
(a) The date, scale, north arrow, and legend.
(b) Area and dimensions of each parcel to the nearest square foot.
(c) Names and addresses of the owners and anyone who has an interest in the property, as verified by a title company, and the applicant, engineer or surveyor or other parties involved in preparation of the documents.
(d) The exact location and width of street rights-of-way and easements intercepting the boundary tract.
(e) The name and width of the portion of streets being dedicated, the width of any existing right-of-way and the width on each side of the center line. For streets or curvature, curve data shall be based on the street center line. In addition to the center-line dimensions, the radius and center angle shall be indicated.
(f) Easements denoted by fine dotted lines clearly identified and, if already of record, their recorded reference. The width of the easement, its length and bearing, and sufficient ties to locate the easement with respect to the land division, must be shown. If the easement is being dedicated by the plat, it shall be properly referenced in the owner's certificates of dedication.
(g) Reserve strips shall have separate legal descriptions and documentation and be deeded to the City. Dedication of reserve strips shall be identified on the Plat.
(h) Land to be dedicated for any purpose shall be distinguished from lots
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
35
intended for sale with acreage.
(i) Notations indicating any limitations on rights of access to or from streets and lots or other parcels of land.
(j) Notations indicating restrictions on use of easements as required as a condition of approval. All public utility easements shall include the following language: No building structure, trees, shrubs or other obstructions shall be placed or located in or on the public utility easements.
(k) Normal high water lines for any creek or other body of water including the 100-year flood plain.
(l) Any other information required as a condition of approval.
(3) Supplemental Information. The following data shall accompany the plat:
(a) A current title report issued by a title insurance company in the name of the owner of the land, showing all parties whose consent is necessary and their interest in the premises.
(b) Sheets and drawings showing the following:
1. Traverse data including the coordinates of the boundary of the land division and ties to section corners and donation land claim corners, and showing the error of closure, if any.
2. The computation of distances, angles and courses shown on the plat or map.
3. Ties to existing monuments, proposed monuments, adjacent subdivisions, street corners and state highway stationing.
(c) A copy of any deed restrictions applicable to the land division.
(d) A copy of any dedication requiring separate documents.
(e) Proof that all taxes and assessments on the tract have been paid as provided by ORS Chapter 92.
(f) A certificate by the City Engineer that the partitioner has complied with one of the following alternatives:
1. All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of these regulations and with the action of the Planning Commission giving conditional approval of the tentative plan.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
36
2. An agreement has been executed as provided in Sections 7.05 and 7.06 to assure completion of required improvements.
(4) Dedication Requirements.
(a) All land shown on the final plat intended for public use shall be dedicated at the time the plat is filed. Exception: Those parcels which are intended for the exclusive use of lot owners, their licensees, visitors, tenants and servants; and also excepted are those lots of land reserved for public purposes under the provisions of Section 6.08 of this ordinance. Where applicable, easements or other documents shall also be prepared and filed.
(b) All rights of access to and from streets, parcels of land shown on the final plat intended to be surrendered shall be offered for dedication at the time the final plat is filed.
(c) The land divider shall provide one (1) foot reserve strips as directed by the city. The reserve strip shall have separate legal descriptions and documentation and be deeded to the City. Dedication of reserve strips shall be identified on the plat.
(5) Certificates on Final Plat. The following certificates, acknowledgments and other requirements established by state law shall appear on the final plat. Such certificates may be combined where appropriate.
(a) A certificate signed and acknowledged by the owners of record of the land to be subdivided consenting to the following:
1. Dedication of all parcels of land, streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, drainage channels, easements and other right-of-way intended for public use; and
2. Dedication of rights of access to and from prescribed streets, lots, and parcels of land.
(b) A certificate together with the seal and signature of the licensed surveyor who prepared the survey and the final plat.
(c) A certificate for execution by the Building and Planning Official.
(d) If property is to be dedicated to the City, the final plat shall include a certificate of acceptance for execution by the Mayor or the Mayor’s designee on Behalf of the City.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
37
(e) A certificate for execution by the City Engineer.
(f) A certificate for execution by the Public Works Superintendent.
(g) A certificate for execution by the County Surveyor.
(h) A certificate for execution by the County Assessor.
(i) A notarized declaration that the declarant has caused the partition plat to be prepared and the property partitioned in accordance with the provisions of ORS Chapter 92.
(j) Other certifications now or hereafter required by law.
SECTION 5.07 REVIEW AND ACTION PROCEDURES
(1) Upon receipt, the plat and other required data shall be reviewed by the Building and Planning Official, City Engineer and Public Works Superintendent to determine that the land division as shown is substantially the same as it appeared on the approved tentative plan, meets any conditions of approval, and that there has been compliance with provisions of the law and of this ordinance.
(2) The City may make such checks in the field as are desirable to verify that the plat is sufficiently correct on the ground and City representatives may enter the property for this purpose.
(3) If it is determined that full conformity has not been made, the Building and Planning Official shall advise the land divider of the changes or additions that must be made and shall afford the land divider an opportunity to make the changes or additions. If the Building and Planning Official determines that the plat conforms to all requirements, it shall give approval, provided supplemental documents and provisions for required improvements are satisfactory. Approval shall be indicated by the signature of the Building and Planning Official on a recordable copy of the plat. The approval of the plat by the Building and Planning Official does not constitute or affect an acceptance by the public of the dedication of any street or other easements shown on the plat. If property is to be dedicated to the public, the final plat must be accompanied by copies of all documents to be recorded with the plat and the plat. Acceptance by the public of the dedication of any street or other easements on the plat shall be indicated by the signature of the Mayor on behalf of the City.
SECTION 5.08 FILING & RECORDING OF PLAT
(1) Filing for Final Plat shall extend the 3 year time limit on tentative approvals established in Section 5.03(6) of this ordinance by an additional 180 days. If the Final Plat has not been recorded within 180 days of the date of expiration of the tentative plan, both the tentative plan approval and the application for Final Plat
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
38
shall be void. Extensions to the 180 day timeline may be granted by the building and planning official provided that:
(a) The request for an extension is made in writing prior to but no earlier than 90 days from the date of the 180 day Final Plat processing period.
(b) There are special or unusual circumstances that exist which warrant an extension.
The City may deny a request for an extension if new Land Use Ordinance requirements applicable to the development changed since the original approval.
(2) A partitioner shall, at his/her own expense and without delay, submit the plat for signatures of all other public officials required by this ordinance or state law.
(3) Approval of a final plat shall be null and void if it is not recorded within 90 days after approval by the City or within 90 days after the conclusion of any appeal. An exact copy of the final plat, and copies of all documents as recorded with the Lane County Department of Deeds and Records, including recording numbers on each document, shall be filed with the City of Veneta. In addition, the applicant shall at his/her own expense provide the City with one (1) laminated copy of the recorded plat at least 18 x 24 in size.
(4) The applicant is responsible for all recording costs.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
39
ARTICLE 6 - DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION 6.01 PRINCIPLES OF ACCEPTABILITY
A land division whether by a subdivision, creation of a street, or a partitioning, shall conform to any development plans, shall take into consideration any preliminary plans made in anticipation thereof, and shall conform to the design standards established by this ordinance.
SECTION 6.02 STREET DESIGN STANDARDS
(1) General. The function, location, width, and grade of streets shall be considered in relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and to the proposed use of land to be served by the streets. The street system shall assure an adequate and safe traffic circulation system with intersection angles, grades, tangents and curves appropriate for the traffic to be carried, considering the terrain. Where location is not shown on the street plan or in a development plan, the arrangement of streets shall either:
(a) Streets shall be interconnected and provide for continuation or appropriate extension to surrounding properties. Cul-de-sacs shall be allowed only when one or more of the following conditions exist:
1. Physical or topographic conditions make a street connection impracticable. Such conditions include but are not limited to freeways, railroads, steep slopes, wetlands or other bodies of water where a connection could not reasonably be provided.
2. Buildings or other existing development on adjacent lands physically preclude a connection now or in the future considering the potential for redevelopment; or
3. Where streets would violate provisions of leases, easements, covenants, restrictions or other agreements existing as of October 1, 1998 which preclude a required street connection.
Where cul-de-sacs are planned, multi-use paths connecting the end of the cul-de-sac to other streets or neighborhood activity centers shall be provided if feasible.”
(b) Conform to a plan for the development area approved or adopted by the Planning Commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
40
(2) Standard right-of-way and street widths.
The width of streets shall be adequate to fulfill city specifications as provided for in SECTION 7.02 of this Ordinance, and, unless otherwise indicated on a development plan or approved by the Planning Commission, streets shall have:
Standard
Type of Street Right-of-Way Standard Paved Width Sidewalks
Major Collector 60’ * 34’ (11’ travel lanes, yes
6’ bike lanes, no parking)
Minor Collector 60’ 38’ (10’ travel lanes, 5’ bike yes
lanes, 8’ parking on one side)
Local Street 60’ 36’ (10’ travel lanes, 8’ yes
parking on both sides)
Cul-de-Sac 50’ 36’ (10’ travel lanes, 8’ yes
parking on both sides)
Radius for turn-around 50' 40’ yes
at end of cul-de-sac (No parking in cul-de-sac bulb)
Alley 16’ 12’ no
* Bolton Hill Road requires 70’ right-of-way to meet Lane County standards.
(3) Alternatives to standard street design.
The Planning Commission, in consultation with Lane County Fire District #1 and Lane Transit District may approve alternate street right-of-ways and paving widths when the benefits of standard right-of-way or paving width are outweighed by the benefits of feasible alternatives. Alternatives to street design may include things like narrower or varying street widths, medians, and bulb-outs at intersections. Considerations include:
(a) Emergency vehicle access
(b) Self-protection of structures using sprinkler systems or other fire prevention means
(c) Curb and sidewalk design that accommodates emergency vehicles and storm drainage (such as rolled curbs)
(d) Provision for generous parking on site that would eliminate need for on-street parking
(e) Location of proposed street relative to other streets (block length and
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
41
connectivity)
(f) Provision of transit service through special agreements and facilities
(g) Pedestrian safety, particularly at intersections
(h) Adequate rights-of-way or easements for public utilities
(i) Existing development that limits paving and right-of-way widths
(j) Topography
(k) Environmental impacts
(4) Reserve Strips. The control and disposal of the land comprising such strips shall be placed within the jurisdiction of the City under conditions approved by the Planning Commission or Building and Planning Official. One foot reserve strips are used across the ends of stubbed streets adjoining undivided land or along half streets adjoining undivided land, and they shall be designated as such. Reserve strips may also be parallel to the right-of-way as a means of access control (prohibiting driveway access). Reserve strips shall have separate legal descriptions and documentation, and dedication shall be identified on the plat.
(5) Alignment. As far as is practical, streets other than minor streets shall be in alignment with existing streets by continuation of the center lines thereof. Staggered street alignment resulting in "T" intersections shall, wherever practical, leave a minimum distance of 200 feet between the center lines of streets having approximately the same direction.
(6) Future extensions of streets. Where necessary to give access to or permit a satisfactory future division of adjoining land, streets shall be extended to the boundary of the subdivisions or partition and the resulting dead-end streets must have a turn-around. Reserve strips may be required to preserve the objectives of street extensions.
(7) Division of property. Property with frontage onto two or more streets shall not be divided in a manner that would preclude access to a portion of the property from the road(s) with the lesser functional class. Access could be provided via an access easement.
(8) Intersection angles. Streets shall be laid out to intersect at right angles, and all other conditions shall require a variance. An arterial or collector street intersecting with another street shall have at least 100 feet of tangent adjacent to the intersection.
(9) Existing Streets. Whenever existing streets adjacent to or within a tract are of inadequate width, additional right-of-way shall be provided in accordance with the Veneta Transportation System Plan at the time of the land division.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
42
(10) Half Streets. Half streets, while generally not acceptable, may be approved where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision or partition when in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations and when the Planning Commission finds it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is developed. Whenever a half street is adjacent to the tract to be divided, the other half of the street shall be provided within such tract. Reserve strips may be required to preserve the objectives of half streets.
(11) Cul-de-sac. A cul-de-sac shall have a maximum length of 400 feet. A cul-de-sac shall terminate with a circular turn-around.
(12) Street names. Except for extensions of existing streets, no street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the name of an existing street. Street names and numbers shall conform to the established pattern in the City and shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission and Lane County
(13) Grades and curves. Grades shall not exceed six (6) percent on arterial, ten (10) per cent on collector streets or fifteen per cent on other streets. Center line radii of curves shall not be less than 300 feet on major arterial, 200 feet on secondary arterial or 100 feet on other streets. Where existing conditions, particularly the topography, make it otherwise impractical to provide buildable sites, the Planning Commission may accept steeper grades and sharper curves. In flat areas, allowance shall be made for finished street grades having a minimum slope, preferably, of at least 0.3 per cent.
(14) Streets adjacent to railroad rights-of-way. Wherever the proposed land division contains or is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way, provision may be required for a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the land between the streets and the railroad. The distance shall be determined with due consideration at cross streets of the minimum distance required for approach grades to a future grade separation and to provide sufficient depth to allow screen planting along the railroad right-of-way.
(15) Marginal access streets. Where a land division abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the Planning Commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage lots with suitable depth, screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear or side property line, or other treatment necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
(16) Alleys. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, unless other permanent provisions for access to off-street parking and loading facilities are approved by the Planning Commission. The corners of alley intersections shall have a visual clearance of not less than 45 degrees with fifteen (15) foot leg lengths.
(17) Access Management
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
43
(a) New streets shall meet or exceed the minimum spacing requirements listed in the adopted Transportation System Plan (TSP). However, where no reasonable alternatives exist or where strict application of the standards would create a safety hazard, the City may allow a variance per section 2.05 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 6.03 BLOCKS
(1) General. The length, width and shape of blocks shall take into account the need for adequate building site size and street width and shall recognize the limitations of the topography.
(2) Size. In residential zones, block lengths shall not exceed 600 feet and block perimeters shall not exceed 1800 feet except where topography, natural features, or existing development creates conditions requiring longer blocks.
(3) Easements.
(a) Utility lines. Easements for sewers, water mains, electric lines or other public utilities shall be dedicated wherever necessary. The easements shall be at least fourteen (14) feet wide and located adjacent to lot or parcel lines, except for easements adjacent to the right-of-way which may be reduced to six (6) feet in width.
(b) Water courses. If a tract is traversed by a water course, such as a drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of the water course, and such further width as will be adequate for the purpose in accordance with the adopted drainage plan. Streets or parkways parallel to the major water courses may be required.
(c) Pedestrian and bicycle ways. When desirable for public convenience a pedestrian or bicycle way may be required to connect to a cul-de-sac or to pass through an unusually long or oddly-shaped block or otherwise provide appropriate circulation.
SECTION 6.04 BUILDING SITES
(1) Size and shape. The size, width, shape and orientation of building sites shall be appropriate for the location of the land division and for the type of development and use contemplated, and shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Width. Minimum lots widths shall be as specified in the Land Development Ordinance.
(b) Depth. Each lot or parcel shall have an average depth between the front line and lot or parcel rear line of not less than 80 feet and not more than 2-1/2 times the average width between the side lines. Exceptions are allowed for
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
44
lots designed for single-family attached dwellings and for lots that are currently non-conforming and will be brought closer to conformity.
(c) Area. Each lot or parcel shall comprise a minimum area as specified in the Land Development Ordinance.
(d) In areas that will not be served by a public sewer, minimum lot and parcel sizes shall permit compliance with the requirements of the Department of Environmental Quality and shall take into consideration problems of sewage disposal, particularly problems of soil structure and water table as related to sewage disposal by septic tank.
(e) Where property is zoned and planned for business or industrial use, other widths and areas may be permitted at the discretion of the Planning Commission. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated.
(f) The minimum lot size for flag lots shall be calculated for the area exclusive of the portion of the lot that provides access.
(2) Access. Each lot and parcel (except those in the GR and RC zones intended for single-family attached housing) shall abut upon a street other than an alley for a width of at least 50 feet and 35 feet for a cul-de-sac. Flag lots shall be allowed in accordance with Section 6.04 (5) below. A shared access and maintenance agreement between all lots within a flag lot partition is required prior to the application for Final Plat.
(3) Through lots and parcels. Through lots and parcels shall be avoided except where they are essential to provide separation of residential development from major traffic arteries or adjacent non-residential activities or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement at least ten (10) feet wide and across, to which there shall be no right of access, may be required along the line of building sites abutting such a traffic artery or other incompatible use.
(4) Lot and parcel side lines. The lines of lots and parcels, as far as is practicable, shall run at right angles to the street upon which they face, except that on curved streets and cul-de-sacs they shall be radial to the curve.
(5) Flag Lots.
(a) The Building and Planning Official may approve a flag lot that creates three (3) lots or less in conformance with the subdivision or partition requirements in this ordinance. Partition or subdivision requirements apply unless a more specific flag lot provision conflicts. Flag lot development of a unit of land possessing any one of the following characteristics shall be referred to the Planning Commission:
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
45
1. The unit of land has sufficient area to create more than 3 lots.
2. Site is traversed by a natural drainageways or has demonstrated drainage limitations as shown on the utility plans required in Section 6.03 (1) 4 of this ordinance. Demonstrated drainage limitations are site or development conditions that prevent the unrestricted flow of water from areas draining through the site or that do not allow the extension of the system to serve such area as per the City’s Drainage Master Plan, or that prevent stormwater from being directed to storm sewers or to natural drainageways in accordance with the Land Division and Land Development Ordinances.
3. Site includes Open Space and/or Greenway Areas designated on the Veneta Zoning Map as a Greenway subzone.
4. Site has slopes of or greater than fifteen percent (see Section 5.25 of this Ordinance).
5. Site is located in a Flood Hazard subzone.
6. Site includes significant wetland resources, or is located within 50 feet of a wetland resource identified as locally significant in the Veneta Local Wetlands Inventory.
(b) A flag lot is allowed only when the following requirements are met:
1. A unit of land cannot otherwise be divided in accordance with the provisions of the Land Development Ordinance and this ordinance.
2. Only one flag pole is proposed.
3. Minimum lot size and maximum lot coverage requirements of the zone can be met.
(c) Flag lot access pole. The pole portion of the lot must meet the following standards:
1. The pole providing access to:
a. A unit of land creating three (3) or less lots shall connect to a street and must be at least 20 feet wide for its entire length and have a paved surface of 12 feet, or 25 feet if the length from the centerline of the street right-of-way to the flag portion is more than 150 feet.
b. A parent parcel with the potential area to create more than three (3) lots shall connect to a street and must be at least 25
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
46
feet wide for its entire length with a paved surface of at least 18 feet.
2. The access pole shall be shared by all lots, including existing dwellings, unless the Planning Commission or Building and Planning Official find shared access impractical.
3. A shared access and maintenance agreement between all lots shall be in a form approved by the City Engineer and City Attorney and that protects interests of property owners and the city. The agreement shall be recorded prior to final plat.
(d) Minimum lot dimensions. No dimension of a flag lot may be less than the requirements of the zone, excepting the pole portion. All other lot dimension standards shall be met.
(e) Flag lot development standards. The following standards apply to development on flag lots:
1. Setbacks for panhandle lots shall be a minimum of 10 feet from all lot lines. Garages shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the front lot line abutting the pole.
SECTION 6.05 GRADING OF BUILDING SITES
Grading of building sites shall conform to the following standards unless physical conditions demonstrate the propriety of other standards.
(1) Cut slopes shall not exceed one and one-half (1-1/2) feet horizontally to one foot vertically.
(2) Fill slopes shall not exceed two feet horizontally to one foot vertically.
(3) The character of soil for fill and the characteristics of lots and parcels made usable by fill shall be suitable for the purpose intended.
(4) All sites shall be graded to maintain the existing drainage pattern and to mitigate increased runoff in conformance with section 6.09 of this ordinance.
SECTION 6.06 BUILDING LINES
If special building setback lines are to be established in a land division, they shall be shown on the subdivision plat or partition map or, if temporary in nature, they shall be included in the deed restrictions.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
47
SECTION 6.07 LARGE BUILDING SITES
In dividing tracts into large lots or parcels which at some future time are likely to be re-divided into smaller parcels approaching the minimum standards of the Land Development Ordinance, the land divider shall show the small parcel division by means of dash lines indicating future parcel divisions and streets. Buildings or structures shall be located within the small parcel areas with minimum yards or setbacks as specified within the Land Development Ordinance as though the development were occurring on the smaller parcel. This will facilitate future land divisions and guarantee that existing buildings or structures will meet the locational requirements of the Land Development Ordinance.
SECTION 6.08 LAND FOR PUBLIC PURPOSES.
Land for parks and open space shall be dedicated for all land divisions according to Section 5.26 of the Land Development Ordinance.
If the City has an interest in acquiring a portion of a proposed land division in excess of that required for dedication by Section 5.26 of the Land Development Ordinance for a public purpose, or if the City has been advised of such interest by a school district or other public agency, and there is reasonable assurance that steps will be taken to acquire the land, then the Planning Commission may require that those portions of the land division be reserved for public acquisition, for a period not to exceed one year, at a cost not to exceed the value of the land prior to subdivision.
SECTION 6.09 STORMWATER FACILITIES
For all projects that create greater than or equal to 1000 square feet of new impervious surface, stormwater detention and treatment facilities shall be provided. Detention and treatment facilities shall be designed and sized according to the City of Portland Stormwater Management Manual, Revision #4, August 1, 2008 which is adopted as the City’s Stormwater Management Manual. Where the manual and this section conflict, this section shall prevail.
The intent of these requirements is as follows:
(1) To maintain runoff peak flows at predevelopment levels
(2) To provide treatment of runoff to limit the transport of pollutants to area waterways.
(3) To limit accumulation of ponded water by discouraging the use of detention ponds and other centralized stormwater facilities through the dispersal of small detention and treatment facilities throughout a development. Preference shall be given to detention and treatment systems designed to drain completely within 24 hours to limit standing water.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
48
(4) To encourage the use of vegetated treatment systems over structural pollution control devices
Exceptions or alternatives to the requirements and standards of the Stormwater Management Manual may be allowed by the City Engineer based on specific site conditions provided that detention and treatment requirements are met in conformance with the intent as stated above. Applicants are encouraged to use either the Simplified Approach or Presumptive Approach to size facilities.
The following storm data (Eugene Airport) shall be used in sizing facilities.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
49
ARTICLE 7 - IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 7.01 IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES
In addition to other requirements, improvements installed by a land divider either as a requirement of these regulations or at his/her own option shall conform to the requirements of this ordinance and all improvement standards and specifications of the City, and shall be installed in accordance with the following procedure:
(1) Improvement work shall not be commenced until plans have been checked for adequacy and approved by the City. To the extent necessary for evaluation of the proposal, the plans shall be required before approval of the tentative plan of a subdivision or partition.
(2) Improvement work shall not commence until five (5) days after the City is notified or one (1) day if a change is made during the course of construction. If work is discontinued for any reason, it shall not be resumed until after the City is notified.
(3) Improvements shall be constructed under the inspection and to the satisfaction of the City. The City may require changes in typical sections and details in the public interest if unusual conditions arise during construction to warrant the change.
(4) Underground utilities, sanitary sewers, water lines and storm drains installed in streets shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of the streets. Stubs for service connections for underground utilities and sanitary sewers shall be placed to a length obviating the necessity for disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made.
(5) A map showing public improvements as built shall be filed with the City upon completion of the improvements within 60 days.
SECTION 7.02 SPECIFICATIONS FOR IMPROVEMENTS
All improvements shall comply with the Public Improvement Specifications of Veneta Municipal Code Chapter 13.30 in addition to the standards of this ordinance. If the City does not have adopted design standards or specifications, the developer shall submit proposed improvement standards and specifications to the City for approval.
SECTION 7.03 IMPROVEMENTS IN SUBDIVISIONS
The following improvements shall be installed at the expense of the sub-divider at the time of subdivision or as agreed upon as provided in Section 7.05. All improvements shall comply with the construction permit requirements of Veneta Municipal Code Chapter 12.05
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
50
(1) Streets. Public Streets, including alleys, within the subdivisions and public streets adjacent but only partially within the subdivision shall be improved. Catch basins shall be installed and connected to drainage tile leading to storm sewers or drainage ways. Upon completion of the street improvement, monuments shall be re-established and protected as provided in ORS Chapter 92. Traffic impacts to facilities as identified in the TIA and supported by the City’s consulting engineer, shall be mitigated by the developer as part of the public improvements of the Site Plan, Subdivision or PUD.
(2) Surface drainage and storm sewer system. Drainage facilities shall be provided within the subdivision and to connect the subdivision drainage to drainage ways or storm sewers outside the subdivision. Detention and treatment within the subdivision shall be designed and sized according to the adopted City of Portland Stormwater Management Manual, Revision #4, August 1, 2008 and shall take into account the capacity and grade necessary to maintain unrestricted flow from areas draining through the subdivision and to allow extension of the system to serve such area as per adopted Drainage Plan. This plan shall be approved by the City Engineer,
(3) Sanitary Sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve the subdivision and to connect the subdivision to existing mains and shall take into account the capacity and grade to allow for desirable extension beyond the subdivision. In the event it is impractical to connect the subdivision to the City sewer system, the Planning Commission may authorize the use of septic tanks if lot areas are adequate considering the physical characteristics of the area.
If sewer facilities will, without further sewer construction, directly serve property outside the subdivision, and the area outside the subdivision to be directly served by the sewer line has reached a state of development to justify sewer installation at the time, the City Council may construct as an assessment project with such arrangements as are desirable with the sub-divider to assure financing his share of the construction. If the City Council chooses not to construct the project as an assessment project the sub-divider shall be solely responsible for the cost of improvements in accordance with City approved plans.
(4) Water system. Water lines and fire hydrants serving each building site in the subdivision and connecting the subdivision to existing mains shall be installed to the standards of the City, taking into account provisions for extension beyond the subdivision.
(5) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of a public street and in any special pedestrian way within the subdivision at the time a building permit is issued, except that in the case of arterials, or special type industrial districts, the Planning Commission may approve a subdivision without sidewalks if alternative pedestrian routes are available; and provided further, that in the case of streets serving residential areas having single-family dwellings located on lots equivalent to two and one-half or less dwellings per gross acres, the requirement of sidewalks shall not
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
51
apply, provided there is no evidence of special pedestrian activity along the streets.
(6) Bicycle routes. If appropriate to the extension of a system of bicycle routes, existing or planned, the Planning Commission may require the installation of separate bicycle lanes within streets or separate bicycle paths.
(7) Street name signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections to approved City standards.
(8) Street lights. Street lights shall be installed in conformance with Veneta Municipal Chapter 15.15 and shall be served from an underground source of supply.
(9) Other. The developer shall make necessary arrangements with utility companies or other persons or corporations affected for the installation of underground lines and facilities. Electrical lines and other wires, including but not limited to communication, street lighting and cable television, shall be placed underground.
SECTION 7.04 IMPROVEMENTS IN PARTITIONS
The same improvements required to serve a subdivision shall be required to serve each building site of a partition. However, if the Planning Commission or Building and Planning Official finds that the nature of development in the vicinity of the partition makes installation of some improvements, such as street width expansions, sidewalks or storm drainage unreasonable, the Planning Commission or Building and Planning Official may except those improvements. Exceptions to these improvements may be made only if a street grade has not been established or if installing such improvements could make traveling or walking dangerous due to the intermittence of the improvements. A recorded irrevocable petition will be required for excepted improvements. In conjunction with the irrevocable petition, the developer may be required to deposit with the City a cash payment, surety bond, or letter of credit in an amount not to exceed the cost of improvement construction, as based upon an estimate approved by the City Engineer. The irrevocable petition shall reference the deposit and cover future improvement installation to the extent actual installation costs exceed the deposit amount. In lieu of excepting an improvement, the Planning Commission may recommend the installation of the improvements to the City Council under special assessment financing or other facility extension policies of the City.
SECTION 7.05 AGREEMENT FOR IMPROVEMENTS
Before final approval of a subdivision plat or, unless excepted under Section 7.04, a partition map, the land divider shall either install required improvements and repair existing streets and other public facilities damaged in the development of the property or execute and file with the City an agreement between himself and the City, specifying the period within which required improvements and repairs shall be completed and providing that, if the work is not completed within the period specified, the City may complete the work and recover the full cost and expense, together with court costs and attorney fees necessary to collect said amounts from the land divider. The agreement shall also provide for reimbursement of the City for the cost of inspection by the City in accordance with Section 7.06.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
52
SECTION 7.06 BOND
(1) If required by the Planning Commission or Building and Planning Official, the land divider shall provide one of the following to assure full and faithful performance of all required improvements:
(a) A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the State of Oregon in a form approved by the City Attorney.
(b) Cash.
(2) Such assurance of full and faithful performance shall be for a sum detailed in a cost estimate approved by the City Engineer as sufficient to cover the cost of the improvements and repairs, including related engineering and incidental expenses, and to cover the cost of City inspection.
(3) If the land divider fails to carry out provisions of the agreement and the City has un-reimbursed costs or expenses resulting from such failure, the City shall call on the bond or cash deposit for reimbursement. If the amount of the bond or cash deposit is less than the cost and expense incurred by the City, the land divider shall be liable to the City for the difference.
SECTION 7.07 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FINANCING OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
(1) Public improvement within a subdivision may be installed under special assessment financing, in accordance with Veneta Municipal Code Chapter 3.10, if the Planning Commission and Council find:
(a) The public improvements necessary to serve the land division will specially benefit other properties in addition to the land division; or
(b) The City is able to obtain necessary financing to guarantee the completion of the public improvements within (1) year from the date of the approval of the final plat and the City has adequate bonding capacity within its debt limit, as allowed under ORS 223.295 and ORS 287.004.
(c) The City shall review the planned financial pay-back of any bonds and find that the developer has adequate financial resources to assure repayment of the bonds in accordance with the schedules to be set forth in any ordinance approving the sale of such bonds.
(2) The land divider shall file the following items, on forms approved by the City Attorney, prior to Council passage of a resolution authorizing the special assessment project:
(a) Petition for Local Improvement Project including approval by all underlying
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
53
finance holders;
(b) Waiver authorizing the City to waive the Engineer's Report, public hearings and notices of assessment normally required.
(c) An agreement for public improvements and a security, approved by the Council, in a sufficient amount to insure full and faithful performance and completion of the public improvements in a specified time period, or a petition including the following items:
1. A petition that the City obtain interim financing for the improvement or sell Bancroft bonds prior to construction of the improvements; and
2. An agreement authorizing the City to assess property within the land division for all administrative, legal, engineering and interest expenses incurred by the City, in the event the City is unable to secure financing for the public improvements and abandons the project.
(3) If the City is unable to obtain interim financing for the improvements or sell Bancroft bonds prior to construction, then the land divider will be required to submit a security as required by Sections 7.05 and 7.06.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
54
ARTICLE 8 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 8.01 INTERPRETATION
Where the conditions imposed by a provision of this ordinance are less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by other provisions of this ordinance or another ordinance, the provisions which are more restrictive shall govern.
SECTION 8.02 SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If a section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
SECTION 8.03 ENFORCEMENT AND APPEAL PROVISIONS
(1) The Building and Planning Official shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. In case a structure is located, constructed, maintained, repaired, altered or used, or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the structure of land thus in violation shall constitute a nuisance. The City may, as an alternative or in addition to other remedies or penalties set forth herein or above, institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or other appropriate proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the unlawful location, construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or use.
(a) Within a reasonable time after notification of a violation of this ordinance, the Building and Planning Official shall notify the property owner that such a violation exists.
(b) Where the violation does not involve a structure, action to rectify such shall be made within 30 days. Where the violation involves a structure, action to rectify such shall be made within 60 days.
(c) If no action has been taken to rectify the violation within the specified time, the Building and Planning Official shall refer it to the City Attorney.
(2) An action or ruling of the Building and Planning Official pursuant to this ordinance may be appealed to the Veneta Planning Commission within fifteen (15) days after the Building and Planning Official has rendered its decision. An action or ruling of the Planning Commission pursuant to this ordinance may be appealed to the City Council within fifteen (15) days after the Planning Commission has rendered its decision and the final order has been signed. Written notice of appeal from a decision of either the Building and Planning Official or the Planning Commission shall be filed with the City within fifteen (15) days of the date the final order has been signed.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
55
(3) The written notice of appeal shall: (a) be made on the appeal form provided by the City and include applicant’s valid signature’ (b) be filed with the appropriate fee; and (c) include all matters specifically appealed, including a brief summary of the material presented to the Building and Planning Official or the Planning Commission upon which the decision which is being appealed was based. Specific statutory citations supporting the appeal shall also be included. Failure to comply with one or more of these appeal requirements constitutes a jurisdiction defect which precludes the Planning Commission or City Council from considering the appeal. Any issue not specifically raised in the written appeal shall be deemed waived and will not be heard by the Planning Commission or the City Council as part of the appeal. If the appeal is filed, the Planning Commission or City Council shall receive a report and recommendation thereon from the Building and Planning Official or the Planning Commission and shall hold a public hearing on the appeal. Review is de novo by both the Planning Commission and City Council. The Planning Commission or City Council may continue the hearing for good cause. Following the hearing, the Planning Commission or City Council may sustain, reject, or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the Building and Planning Official or Planning Commission, provided such action complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
(4) Appeal fees shall be paid to the City Recorder upon filing as authorized by the Veneta Municipal Code chapter 3.30. A separate application and fee is required for each decision being appealed.
SECTION 8.04 PENALTIES
Violation of any provision of this ordinance or any amendment thereto is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not less than fifty ($50) dollars nor more than five hundred ($500) dollars.
A violation of this ordinance shall be considered a separate offense for each day the violation continues.
SECTION 8.05 AMENDMENTS
(1) An amendment to the text of this ordinance may be initiated by the City Council, the City Planning Commission or by application of a property owner. The request by a property owner for an amendment shall be accomplished by filing an application with the Building and Planning Official using forms provided by the City.
(2) The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed amendment after notifying Lane County and publishing notice of the hearing once a week for two (2) successive weeks prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. The notice shall specify the time, place and purpose of the hearing. The Division of State Lands shall be notified of the amendment 45 days prior to the final hearing.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
56
(3) Within ten (10) days after such hearing, the Planning Commission shall recommend to the City Council approval, disapproval, or modified approval of the proposed amendment.
Upon receiving a recommendation of approval from the Planning Commission, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment following the same procedures as prescribed for the Planning Commission.
(4) No application of a property owner for an amendment to the text of this ordinance shall be considered by the Planning Commission within the one (1) year period immediately following a previous denial of such request, except the Planning Commission may permit a new application if, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, new evidence or a change of circumstances warrants it.
(5) Any such amendments are subject to any required reviews or approvals, including notifications to DLCD.
SECTION 8.06 DEFINITIONS
As used in this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall mean:
Definitions
ABUT
Contiguous to or immediately join. For example, two (2) lots with a common property line are considered to be abutting.
ACCESS
The way or means by which pedestrians and vehicles enter and leave property.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES OR ACCESSORY USE
A structure or use incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the main use of property and located on the same lot as the main use. Accessory structures are not permitted on vacant parcels of land. Accessory structures (including those originally designed for human habitation such as mobile homes) shall not be used for human habitation.
ACTIVITY CENTER
Uses or buildings that are open to the public, have a civic or community function, and/or attract visitors. Uses include public parks, public buildings (e.g., post office, library, city offices, schools), elder care facilities, and shopping centers.
ALLEY
A street that is more than ten (10) feet and less than sixteen (16) feet in width which affords primarily a secondary means of access to property.
ALTER
Any change, addition or modification in construction or occupancy.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
57
APPLICANT
The person making application to the City for any action as the owner or representative of the owner of the property that is subject of the action. The applicant shall provide proof of permission for the requested action from all owners or other persons having an interest in the property subject to the action.
BARN
A farm building for housing livestock or animals
BASEMENT
A story partly or wholly underground. A basement shall be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement where more than one-half of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground.
BLOCK
An area bounded on 4 sides by streets not including cul-de sacs. In residential zones, block lengths do not exceed 600 feet and block perimeters do not exceed 1800 feet except where topography, natural features, or existing development creates conditions requiring longer blocks.
BUILDING
Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
BUILDING HEIGHT
The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof. The average maximum vertical height of a building or structure measured at a minimum of three points from finished grade along each building elevation. Architectural elements that do not add floor area to a building or structure, such as chimneys, vents, antennae and towers are not considered part of the height of a building or structure.
BUILDING INSPECTOR
The Division Director of the Lane County Department of Environmental Management, Construction Permits Division, his authorized representative or any other authorized building inspector appointed by the Veneta City Council.
BUILDING LINE
A line on a plat or map indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be erected. Buildings shall not overhang over an easement or dedicated right-of-way.
BUILDING & PLANNING OFFICIAL
An employee of the City appointed by the City Council with duties and authority as designated by the Council, including the duties and authority as designated by the Council, including the enforcement of the provisions
CITY
The City of Veneta, Oregon.
CITY COUNCIL
The Council of the City of Veneta, Oregon, which is the governing body of said City.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
58
CO-HOUSING
Co-housing includes private dwelling units and shared spaces such as community dining, cooking, and recreation rooms for adults and children. It can be rented or owner-occupied housing. Due to the shared facilities, the lot configuration may deviate from standard requirements such as street frontage and parking spaces.
COMMERCIAL DOG KENNEL
A place of business for the care of dogs, including but not limited to the boarding, grooming, breeding, training, or selling of dogs, but not including an animal hospital.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
A city plan for the guidance of growth and improvement of the City, including modifications or refinements which may be made from time to time.
CONGREGATE HOUSING
A structure containing two or more dwelling units or rooming units limited in occupancy to persons 55 years or older or handicapped persons, their spouses, except for rooms or units occupied by resident staff personnel, providing indoor, conveniently located, shared food preparation service, dining areas, and common recreation, social and service facilities for the exclusive use of all residents.
CLINIC
Single or multiple offices for physicians, surgeons, dentists, chiropractors, osteopaths and other members of the healing arts, including a dispensary in each such building to handle only merchandise of a nature customarily prescribed by occupants in connection with their practices.
DAY CARE FACILITY
Any facility that provides child care to children, including a day nursery, nursery school, child care center, certified or registered family child care home or similar unit operating under any name serving sixteen (16) or more children.
DAY CARE, FAMILY, REGISTERED OR CERTIFIED
A day care that is a certified under ORS 657A.280, serving sixteen (16) or fewer children or registered under ORS 657A.330 serving ten (10) or fewer children.
DECLARANT
A person who files a declaration under ORS 92.075.
DECLARATION
The instrument described in ORS 92.075 by which the subdivision or partition plat was created.
DENSITY, GROSS
The number of dwelling units per acre of land, including areas devoted to dedicated streets, sidewalks, other public rights-of-way, parks, and non-residential uses allowed in residential areas.
DENSITY, NET
The number of dwelling units per acre of land in planned or actual use -- excluding from the acreage dedicated streets, sidewalks, other public rights-of-way, parks, and non-residential uses allowed in residential areas.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
59
DESIGNATED ARTERIALS AND COLLECTORS
Streets identified in the Veneta Comprehensive Plan Functional Class map as Principal or Minor Arterials or Major or Minor Collectors.
DEVELOPMENT
A building or mining operation, making a material change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, dividing land into two or more parcels, including partitions and subdivisions as provided in ORS 92.010 to 92.285, and creating or terminating a right of access.
DRIVEWAY
An area on private property where automobiles and other vehicles are operated or allowed to stand.
DRIVEWAY APPROACH
An area within the Right-of-Way, between the roadway of a public street and private property line, intended to provide access for vehicles from the roadway to a definite area of the private property, such as a driveway or parking area intended and used for the ingress and egress of vehicles. The component parts of the driveway approach are termed the apron, the end slopes or curb return, and the sidewalk section.
DWELLING, ACCESSORY
A second subordinate dwelling unit on the same lot and under the same ownership as the primary residence, with independent cooking, living, sanitation, and sleeping facilities.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY
Attached housing where each dwelling unit is not located on a separate lot
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
60
DWELLING,
SINGLE FAMILY
A single-family dwelling is a building (detached or attached)
used exclusively as a unit and built to the specifications of the State Building Code (CABO) as adopted by the City of Veneta or a manufactured home as defined within the statutes of the State of Oregon, on a permanent foundation.
(1) Shall meet current energy standards as adopted by the State of Oregon.
(2) Shall be occupied only for residential purposes.
(3) Shall conform to all residential use development standards for one-family dwellings.
(4) Shall be constructed or installed in accordance with the State Building Code (CABO), as adopted by the City or as defined within the statutes of the State of Oregon.
(5) Foundations:
(a) Stick-built homes shall have foundation systems in accordance with the State Building Code (CABO);
(b) Manufactured dwellings shall be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation, enclosed at the perimeter with no more than sixteen (16) inches of the enclosing material exposed above grade. Where the building site has a sloped grade, no more than sixteen (16) inches of the enclosing material shall be exposed on the uphill side of the home. If the manufactured home is placed on a basement, the sixteen (16) inch limitation will not apply.
(6) Shall have a minimum width of eighteen (18) feet as measured by the narrowest elevation.
(7) Shall have an exterior finish and roof materials commonly found on residential structures in the area and City of Veneta.
(8) Shall have a roof with eaves and gable overhangs of not less than six (6) inches measured from the vertical side of the structure and shall include gutters.
(9) Shall have an enclosed garage or carport whichever is commonly found in the surrounding area and its exterior covering and roof materials shall be the same as the main structure. The maximum size of the garage shall be three stalls, with a maximum floor area of 900 square feet. Garage may be attached to house or detached.
(10) Shall have electrical meter base attached either to the garage or dwelling unit.
(11) Shall have a roof with a nominal pitch of 3 feet in height for each twelve (12) feet in width.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED
Common-wall dwellings (townhomes and rowhouses) where each dwelling unit occupies a separate lot
(1) Shall be occupied only for residential purposes
(2) Shall have an enclosed garage or carport, whichever is commonly found in the surrounding area and its exterior covering and roof materials shall be the same as the main structure.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
61
DWELLING UNIT
A single unit providing complete independent living facilities, designed for occupancy by one (1) family and including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
FACILITIES
For the purposes of this Code, facilities are water, sewer, stormwater, telephone, cable, natural gas, electric, telecommunication facilities and broadband fiber conduit.
FAMILY
An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, legal adoption or legal guardianship living together in one dwelling unit using one kitchen and providing meals or lodging to not more than two (2) additional persons excluding servants; or a group of not more than five (5) unrelated persons living together in one dwelling unit using one kitchen.
FENCE, SIGHT OBSCURING
A continuous fence, wall, evergreen planting or combination thereof, constructed and/or planted so as to provide a specified percentage of view-obscuring screens.
FINAL ACTION, FINAL DECISION, OR FINAL APPROVAL, (DATE OF)
Means any legislative, administrative, or quasi-judicial action that establishes the final determination of the City on any land use action by reducing said decision in writing.
FLOOR AREA
The area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of vent shafts and courts. The floor area of a building or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls, shall be the usable area under the vertical projection of the roof or floor above.
GRADE (GROUND) LEVEL
The average elevation of the finished ground level at the exterior of all walls of a building, except that if a wall is parallel to and within five (5) feet of a sidewalk, the sidewalk elevation nearest the wall shall constitute ground level.
HARDSCAPE
Permanent improvements to a site other than a building, including but not limited to, plazas, concrete planters, decks, sitting areas and other similar architectural features that include small unit pavers or concrete.
HIGH IMPACT RECREATION FACILITIES
Facilities which have the potential for creating significant impacts through traffic generation, noise, dust, chemical use, lighting, or other nuisance characteristics. High impact recreation facilities include, but are not limited to, sport complexes, stadiums, equestrian arenas, golf course and driving ranges, and swimming pools.
HOME OCCUPATION
A lawful business carried on by a resident of a dwelling where the business is secondary to the residential use of the property. See Veneta Municipal Code 5.05 for definitions and licensing requirements for businesses.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
62
HORTICULTURE
The cultivation of crops, orchards, or gardens. Domestic horticulture involves plants grown for the people living on the property. Commercial horticulture involves plants that will be sold; either on-site or delivered to a buyer off-site. Farm stands and u-pick sales are temporary uses that may require a permit.
JUNKYARD
Any property used by a business that deals in buying, selling, trading, and storing, old motor vehicles, old motor vehicle parts, abandoned autos, or machinery or parts thereof, or appliances or parts thereof.
KENNELS
Any lot or premises on which three (3) or more adult dogs are kept, whether by owners of the dogs or by persons providing facilities and care, whether or not for compensation. An adult dog is one that has reached the age of six (6) months.
LEGAL LOT
A lot or parcel created pursuant to ORS 92.010 to 92.190, a unit of land created in compliance with all applicable city land division regulations, or a unit of land created by deed or land sales contract, if there were no applicable planning, zoning or subdivision or partition ordinance or regulations in effect at the time of the deed or land sales contract.
LIMITED LAND USE DECISION
Means a final decision or determination made by the City of Veneta pertaining to a site within an urban growth boundary that concerns:
(A) The approval or denial of a tentative subdivision or partition plan, as described in ORS 92.040
(B) The approval or denial of an application based on discretionary standards designed to regulate the physical characteristics of a use permitted outright, including but not limited to site review and design review.
A Limited Land Use Decision does not mean a final decision made by the City of Veneta pertaining to a site within an urban growth boundary that concerns approval or denial of a final subdivision or partition plat or that determines whether a final subdivision or partition plat substantially conforms to the tentative subdivision or partition plan.
LOADING SPACE
An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials and which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access
LOT
A single unit of land that is created by a subdivision of land
LOT AREA
The total land area, commonly measured in square feet, within the boundaries of a legal lot, exclusive of any street or alley rights-of-way.
LOT, CORNER
A lot at least two adjacent sides of which abut streets other than alleys, provided the angle of intersection of the adjacent streets does not exceed 135 degrees.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
63
LOT, THROUGH
A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets other than alleys.
LINE, PROPERTY
The division line between two units of land
LOT LINE, FRONT
The lot line separating the lot from a street other than an alley and, in the case of a corner lot, the shortest lot line along a street other than an alley. For flag lots, the lot line abutting the pole portion of the lot. See also YARD, Front
LOT LINE, REAR
The lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE
Any lot line not a front or rear lot line. See also YARD, Side
LOT, FLAG
A lot or parcel that has the bulk of its area set back some distance from a road or street and that is connected to the road or street via a thin strip of land (i.e., the flagpole).
LOT WIDTH
The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, ordinarily measured parallel to the front lot line. For irregular shaped lot, lot width shall be determined by measuring the maximum diameter of a circle that fits entirely within the property lines as shown below:
MANUFACTURED DWELLING
Residential trailers constructed before January 1, 1962; mobile homes constructed between January 1, 1962 and June 15, 1976, which met Oregon construction standards then in effect; and manufactured homes constructed to federal standards. (Refer to definition of “dwelling, single-family” for siting and construction requirements.)
MANUFACTURED DWELLING PARK
Any place where two (2) or more manufactured dwellings are parked within 500 feet of one another on a lot, tract, or parcel of land under the same ownership, the primary purpose of which is to rent space or keep space for rent to any person for a charge or fee paid or to be paid for the rental or use of facilities or to offer space free in connection with securing the trade or patronage of such person. A manufactured dwelling park has the same definition as a mobile home park. Manufactured dwelling parks within Veneta are required to register as a business each year.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
64
MAP
A final diagram, drawing or other writing concerning a partition.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR
A stand, van, cart, or other mobile unit intended for retail sale of food.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE, LOT OR USE
A lawful existing structure, lot or use at the time this ordinance or any amendment thereto becomes effective which does not conform to the dimensional or similar standards of the zone in which it is located.
OPEN SPACE
Land area to be used for scenic or open recreational purposes within the development. Open space does not include street right-of-way, driveways, parking areas, required setbacks or public service easements unless these areas have some special recreational design or purpose.
OWNER
An individual, association, partnership, or corporation having legal or equitable title to land, other than legal title held for purpose of security only.
PARCEL
A unit of land that is created by a partitioning of land.
PARKING SPACE
An off-street enclosed or unenclosed surfaced area with minimum dimensions of eighteen (18) feet by nine (9) feet, exclusive of maneuvering and access area, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one automobile and connected with a street by a surfaced driveway which affords ingress and egress for automobiles.
PARTITION
Either an act of partitioning land or an area or tract of land partitioned as defined in this section.
PARTITION LAND
To divide an area or tract of land into two or three parcels within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such year. "Partition land" does not include divisions of land resulting from lien foreclosures; divisions of land resulting from the creation of cemetery lots; and divisions of land made pursuant to a court order, including but not limited to court orders in proceedings involving testate or intestate succession; and "partition land" does not include any adjustment of a lot line by the relocation of a common boundary where an additional parcel is not created and where the existing parcel reduced in size by the adjustment is not reduced below the minimum lot standards of the zoning ordinance.
PERSON
A natural person, firm, partnership, association, social or fraternal organization, corporation, trust, estate, receiver, syndicate, branch of government, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
PLANNING COMMISSION
The Planning Commission of the City of Veneta, Oregon.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
65
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE
An office occupied by doctors, dentists, accountants, attorneys, optometrists, architects, professional engineers or surveyors or persons engaged in similar occupations.
PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT
The Property line adjustment is a relocation or elimination of all or a portion of the common property line between abutting properties that does not create an additional lot or parcel. An adjusted property line shall be surveyed and monumented in accordance with ORS 92.065(3); a survey, complying with ORS 209.250, shall be filed with the county surveyor; and the property line adjustment shall be recorded with the Lane County Department of Deeds and Records.
PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC BUILDINGS OR USES
A building or use owned or operated by a religious, charitable or other non-profit organization; a public utility or any social agency such as a church, school, auditorium, meeting hall, hospital, club, nursing or care home, stadium, library, art gallery, museum, fire station, utility substation, cemetery, park, playground, sports field, bicycle or pedestrian way or community center.
QUASI-JUDICIAL
An action or decision that requires substantial discretion or judgment in applying the standards or criteria of this Code. Quasi-judicial land use decisions involve a public hearing.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vacation trailer or other unit, with or without motive power, which is designed for human occupancy and to be used temporarily for recreational or emergency purposes. It shall also include a camper placed on a pickup truck.
REDUCTION
A lessening in value, quantity, size, or the like.
REMODEL
The addition to, removal of or from, or physical modification or repair of an exterior part or portion of a building.
REPLAT
The act of plating the lots, parcels and easements in a recorded subdivision or partition plat to achieve a re-configuration of the existing subdivision or partition plat or to increase or decrease the number of lots in the subdivision.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY
Residential Facility with six (6) or more persons as defined by ORS 197.660.
RESIDENTIAL HOME
A residential treatment or training or adult foster home that provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training or a combination thereof as defined by ORS 197.660 for five or fewer individuals who need not be related. Staff persons required to meet licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of facility residents, and need not be related to each other or to any resident of the residential home.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
66
RIGHT-OF-WAY
The right of passage or of way, which is a servitude imposed by law or convention, and by virtue of which one has the right to pass over or through the property of another as is set forth by its terms.
SERVICE STATION, AUTOMOBILE
A place or station designed and used primarily for the supplying of motor fuel, oil, lubrication and accessories to motor vehicles but excluding major repair and overhauling.
SHADOW PLAT
A future subdivision or partition concept plan approved by the city in conjunction with a request for interim development (often a single-family residence or partition). The shadow plat is not binding on either the property owner of the city; that is, the property owner would have to apply for tentative plat approval for future development proposals. Shadow plats are designed to ensure that an urban level of development will be possible when urban services become available.
SIGN
Any medium including its structure and component parts, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention to the subject matter for advertising purposes.
SIGHT OBSCURING
To impede the visibility of an area by more than 75 percent through the use of fences, vegetation or other means.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
67
STREET
A public or private way that is created to provide ingress or egress for persons to one or more lots, parcels, areas or tracts of land and including the term, "road," "highway," "lane," "avenue," "alley" or similar designations.
(a) Alley a narrow street through a block primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on another street.
(b) Arterial (Principal) Roadways that provide a high degree of mobility between major centers of metropolitan areas, as well as rural areas.
• Serve high volumes of traffic (>10,000 daily vehicles) over long distances.
• Typically maintain higher posted speeds (45 mph to 55 mph).
• Minimize direct access to adjacent land to support the safe and efficient movement of people and goods.
• Require facilities for people walking and biking that are designed to provide a greater degree of separation from the higher volumes and speeds of auto traffic.
(c) Arterial (Minor) Roadways that provide service for trips of moderate length and serve geographic areas that are smaller than their higher-volume principal arterial counterparts.
• Primarily serve longer trips within the city.
• Often used as a transition between principal arterials and collectors.
• Typically serve higher volumes of traffic (>5,000 daily vehicles).
• Maintain moderate to high speeds, with posted speeds generally no lower than 30 mph, unless they are passing through a downtown area.
• Require facilities for people walking and biking that are designed to provide a greater degree of separation from the higher volumes and speeds of auto traffic.
(d) Collector Roadways that connect traffic from local streets with the arterial network. The city has two types of collectors: major and minor. Major collector routes are generally distinguished from minor collector routes by longer length; lower connecting driveway densities; higher speed limits; greater spacing intervals; higher traffic volumes; and may have more travel lanes.
• General traffic volume on a major collector ranges from 1,200 to
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
68
5,000 daily vehicles and speeds are often managed between 25 mph and 35 mph.
• Typical traffic volume on a minor collector ranges from 1,200 to 3,000 daily vehicles and speeds are managed to no more than 25 mph.
• More comfortable for people walking and biking than arterials, but still require separate biking facilities are still needed.
(e) Cul-de-Sac (dead end Street) A local street, usually only a few hundred feet in length and closed at one end, designed to serve the interior of a subdivision or large tract of land.
(f) Half Street A portion of the width of a street, usually along the edge of a subdivision, where the remaining portion of the street could be provided in another subdivision.
(g) Local Street that prioritize provision of immediate access to adjacent land. Local streets are not intended to support long distance travel and are often designed to discourage through traffic.
 Generally, accommodate less than 2,000 vehicles per day.
 Speeds are not normally posted, with a statutory 25 mph speed limit in effect.
Provide low-stress travel routes for people walking and biking.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION
Any change to the supporting members of a structure including foundations, bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, girders or structural change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE USE
That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied and maintained.
SUBDIVISION
Either an act of subdividing land or an area or tract of land subdivided as defined in this section.
SUBDIVIDE LAND
To divide land to create four or more lots within a calendar year.
TENTATIVE PLAN
A tentative plan is the plan of a subdivision or partition submitted to the City for approval under the provision of ORS 92 and Article 3 and Article 5 of the Land Division Ordinance.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY, HIGH IMPACT
Transportation facility with significant external impacts, such as heliports, helistops, bus terminals, and train terminals.
Land Division Ordinance No. 494 Page |
69
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY, MINOR
Transportation facility with minor external impacts, such as a multi-use pathway.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL
A building, together with animal runs, in which veterinary services, clipping, bathing, boarding and other services are rendered to dogs, cats and other small animals and domestic pets.
WETLAND
Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted to life in saturated soil conditions.
YARD, BACK
A yard adjacent to a property line. See also LOT LINE, REAR
YARD, FRONT
A yard adjacent to a street and to the front entrance of a building. See also LOT LINE, FRONT.
YARD, SIDE
A yard adjacent to a property line. For a corner lot, the Side Yard (located at the side of a residence or structure) can also be adjacent to a street. See also LOT LINE, SIDE.